                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR15783
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                                    Project ID:           P105680
                            Project Name:      Matanza-Riachuelo Basin (MRB) Sustainable Development Adaptable Lending
                                               Program (P105680)
                            Task Team          Christophe Prevost
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       02-Feb-2009                                     Estimated   09-Jun-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN04                                            Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (84%), Public administration- Water,
                                               sanitation and flood protection (12%), Flood protection (2%), General water,
                                               sanitation and flood protection sector (1%), Water supply (1%)
                            Theme:             Pollution management and environmental health (46%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                               and Service Delivery (45%), Environmental policies and institutions (6%),
                                               Natural disaster management (2%), Water resource management (1%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1487.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      840.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                           647.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              840.00
                              Total                                                                                             1487.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives

                                                                                Page 1 of 19
                         The objective of the project (APL-1) is to (i) improve sewerage services in the M-R Basin and other
                         parts of the Province and City of Buenos Aires by expanding
                         capacity; (ii) support the reduction of industrial discharges to the M-R River,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the provision of industrial conversion grants to small and medium enterp
                         rises;(iii) promote a participative approach to environmentally-sustainable land
                         use and drainage planning and to pilot urban drainage and land use investments
                         in the M-R Basin; and (iv) strengthen ACUMAR➢❨ s institutional framework for ongoi
                         ng and sustainable cleanup of the M-R Basin.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The objective of the project (APL-1) is to (i) improve sewerage services in the M-R Basin and other
                         parts of the Province and City of Buenos Aires by expanding
                         capacity; (ii) support the reduction of industrial discharges to the M-R River,
                         through the provision of industrial conversion grants to small and medium enterp
                         rises;(iii) promote a participative approach to environmentally-sustainable land
                         use and drainage planning and to pilot urban drainage and land use investments
                         in the M-R Basin; and (iv) strengthen ACUMAR➢❨ s institutional framework for ongoi
                         ng and sustainable cleanup of the M-R Basin.
                         3. Project Description
                         The GoA and the Bank have been working to restructure the Project, in this context the ISDS is
                         being updated. The main changes being (i) extension of one year of the loan closing date (ii) change
                         the description of Component 2, (iii) reallocation of proceeds across disbursement categories, and
                         (iv) adjustment of the project’s monitoring framework.

                         The main drivers for said changes are: (i) Project has experienced extraordinary delays justifying an
                         extension, (ii) reallocation of funds among disbursement categories is necessary to finance the
                         proposed activities, (iii) there is a need to better monitor and manage the progress of the Project
                         using the experience gained from implementation. Finally, as part of the Industrial Pollution
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Abatement Component, it is proposed to include the construction of an industrial wastewater
                         treatment plant that will treat the liquid discharges from Tannery Industrial Park in the Municipality
                         of Lanús, Province of Buenos Aires, under the responsibility of ACUMAR. The description of the
                         Component in the Loan Agreement will be updated to reflect said change.

                         The government’s medium to long term objective under the PISA is the progressive elimination of
                         point source discharges to the M-R River, which would result in water quality improvements in a 15
                         to 20 year time frame. The Bank’s financed project is a building block towards this goal; according
                         to the original proposal, it would support the following integrated activities: (i) the construction of
                         the “Riachuelo System”, which comprises a collector along the left bank of the M-R River (Colector
                         Margen Izquierdo or CMI, Lot 1), diversion of the wastewater collected by this collector to the
                         Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant (Lot 2) and discharging its effluent to the La Plata River via an
                         effective sub-aquatic outfall (Lot 3), (ii) the construction of a collector from the upper M-R Basin
                         along the right bank of the M-R River (Colector Margen Derecha or CMD) which will convey the
                         wastewater collected by this collector and that collected in the southern part of the city (the right
                         bank of the M-R River) to the Third Trunk Sewage Pipe (Tercera Cloaca Troncal Maxima), (iii)
                         technical assistance for designing an industrial control program reducing industrial (both organic and
                         toxic) discharges to the M-R River by connecting these industries to the AySA sewerage network
                         after pre-treatment of toxic effluents, i.e. by means of an industrial collector, and (iv) design and
                         implementation of a comprehensive inter-jurisdictional land use plan including the provision of basic

                                                                      Page 2 of 19
                         infrastructure services.

                         However, during the negotiations of the loan between the Government and the World Bank, it was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agreed that prior to the construction of the right bank collector, the Government would carry out a
                         prefeasibility study of alternatives through the water and sanitation utility of the Metropolitan Area
                         of Buenos Aires (AySA). The prefeasibility study was carried out in 2010 and, instead of the
                         construction of the CMD, it favored the alternative of advanced secondary treatment in four
                         wastewater treatment plants from which effluents will be discharged into the M-R River to meet the
                         water quality standards set by ACUMAR (“Decentralized Alternative”). This alternative also
                         proposed the construction of aeration systems (Sidestream Elevated Pool Aeration, SEPAs) along the
                         banks of the river.

                         The Expert Panel convened by the Bank finalized the review of the Prefeasibility Study of the
                         Alternative to the Right Bank Collector and issued its Final Report in October 2011. The panel
                         concluded that the decentralized alternative was a well thought proposal that could be supported by
                         the Bank. In the technical opinion of the panel: a) the selection of the alternative should consider the
                         experience of AySA, and the consistency with its master plan; b) AySA is technically capable for
                         managing a distributed wastewater management system for the M-R River basin; c) the water quality
                         objectives set for the M-R River by ACUMAR can be achieved under both alternatives; d) the
                         decentralized alternative has more operational and investment flexibility for adapting to an uncertain
                         development in the M-R River Basin over the next 50 years; e) the decentralized alternative allows a
                         gradual-faster connection of 1.3 million inhabitants of the M-R Basin to the new sewage system,
                         according to AySA’s master plan.

                          Phase 1 (APL-1): Phase 1 of the program includes four components under two macro-components
                         which finance a subset of activities set out under the PISA
                          Macro-component 1:
                          (i)     Investments in sanitation infrastructure and technical assistance for the supervision of works
                         prioritized by the GoA, including the Industrial collector, the “Riachuelo System” (Left Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collector, Baja Costanera bypass collector, Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant, inflow and
                         effluent pumping stations at the Riachuelo preliminary treatment plant, and Riachuelo outfall) as well
                         as a sludge treatment plant in the Sudoeste wastewater treatment plant and two Sidestream Elevated
                         Aeration Pools, as part of the selected alternative for the Right Bank collector.

                          Macro-component 2:
                          (ii)    Technical assistance to improve environmental monitoring and enforcement of
                         environmental targets for selected industrial activities, as well as financing of cleaner production
                         investments to enhance and support environmental compliance among polluting small and medium
                         size enterprises, including investments in industrial effluents treatment plant for tanneries.
                          (iii)   Technical assistance for land use and urban planning and financing for pilot urban and
                         drainage works; and
                          (iv)    Financing for technical studies to support project implementation (components 1, 2 and 3); a
                         communication strategy to inform key stakeholders; project management activities; and support for
                         the institutional strengthening of ACUMAR.

                         Macro-component 1: Sanitation
                         Component 1: Sanitation (US$ 1,309 million total, US$694 million in loan proceeds)

                         This component aims to progressively collect, convey, treat, and dispose of wastewater from the M-

                                                                      Page 3 of 19
                         R Basin along with wastewater from the AySA concession area. Sewage works included in this
                         component are essential to improving the coverage and quality of sanitation services in the M-R
                         Basin and the entire AySA service area, to enhancing water quality, and to expanding the potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         uses of the water bodies in the M-R Basin and southern coastal strip of La Plata River. The
                         infrastructure system selected is based on the principle of intercepting most of the domestic and
                         industrial wastewater in the AySA concession area (except wastewater that is diverted to the North
                         treatment plant, which discharges its effluent to the Reconquista River), as well as the wastewater of
                         the municipalities in the upper-middle M-R Basin. This entire wastewater flow will be diverted to La
                         Plata River through two new sub-aquatic outfalls, (the Riachuelo and Berazategui outfalls) after
                         preliminary treatment. Specific sub components financed under this project are detailed further
                         below.

                         The new wastewater collection system and its conveyance to the two preliminary treatment plants
                         will consist of (i) the Left Bank collector, with a total length of approximately 12 km, in the lower
                         part of the basin (the diameter varies between 0.8 m and 2.9 m); (ii) the Baja Costanera bypass
                         collector with a length of 5 km and a diameter of 4.5 m; (iii) the Baja Costanera expansion collector
                         (Radio Antiguo section); (iv) the Baja Costanera expansion collector (Capital Federal-Vicente Lopez
                         section); (v) the SEPAs infrastructure to improve the disolved oxigen on the M-R river and the
                         sludge treatment plant at the Sudoeste wastewater treatment pland (part of the selected alternative to
                         the right Bank collector); and (vi) an industrial waste conveyance pipe and pumping station on the
                         right bank of the M-R River to collect the treated industrial effluents from the tanneries industrial
                         park and discharge them to the existing Wilde pumping station and from there to Berazategui. The
                         project is supporting the first phase of said system.

                         Treatment plants and pumping stations. Prior to its discharge through each outfall to the La Plata
                         River, the wastewater will be subjected to preliminary treatment in two plants namely the Riachuelo
                         preliminary treatment plant located on the right bank of the M-R River at its confluence with La
                         Plata River at Dock Sud, and the Berazategui preliminary treatment plant at Berazategui on the banks
                         of La Plata River near the location of the current Berazategui outfall, the latter was constructed with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         GoAs own funds and is in operation. The Berazategui preliminary treatment plant was financed by
                         the government using its own funds complemented by a loan from Brazil's BNDES.

                         Construction of new sub-aquatic outfalls. This project will also finance the construction of two new
                         sub-aquatic outfalls over the two APL phases. The Riachuelo outfall, financed during APL-1, will be
                         located in the Dock Sud area. This outfall will measure about 3.8 meters in internal diameter, and is
                         expected to be 11.5 km long, of which the final 2.3 km are the diffuser section. The Berazategui
                         outfall, expected to be financed under a second stage, will be located near the existing short outfall,
                         measuring 3.8 meters in internal diameter and 7.5 km in length, of which the final 3.5 km will be the
                         diffuser section (The dimensions presented are indicative. AySA is in the process of finalizing
                         bidding-stage designs. Final designs will be prepared by construction contractors).

                         These infrastructure works, as well as other sewerage expansion investments executed by AySA
                         under its master plan, will directly benefit approximately 2.4 million people in the 14 municipalities
                         of the M-R Basin, and about 1.2 million who live along the banks of La Plata River. Indirect
                         beneficiaries include about 10 million people who will benefit from an improved and secure
                         collection, conveyance and wastewater disposal system.

                         Macro-Component 2: Industrial Pollution Abatement, Territorial Management and Institutional
                         Strengthening

                                                                      Page 4 of 19
                         Component 2: Industrial Pollution Abatement (US$ 75.4 million total, US$ 60.3 million in loan
                         proceeds)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities under Component 2 will complement those under Component 1, thereby contributing to
                         the cleanup of the M-R River. Technical assistance activities will be front-loaded in APL-1 to
                         support ACUMAR in developing and signing PRIs, and in improving overall monitoring, control,
                         and enforcement. These include (i) supporting pollution diagnostics and policy analysis; (ii)
                         improving the monitoring system for industrial wastes by supporting pollution control institutional
                         infrastructure; (iii) support for adjustments to the strategy for industrial discharges; (iv) designing
                         and implementing a program for encouraging corporate environmental responsibility; and (v)
                         investments for industrial pollution treatment, particularly the Industrial Wastewater treatment Plant
                         for Tanneries in the municipality of Lanus.

                         Component 3: Territorial Management (US$81.9 million total, US$65.5 million loan)

                         This component's main objective is to improve public policies on territorial management within the
                         M-R Basin. Towards this end, the component seeks to improve territorial planning and develop pilots
                         of integrated investments in basic infrastructure services and flood control to improve urban living
                         conditions in selected low-income areas of the basin.

                         The component includes the following four sub-components: (i) Institutional development for
                         territorial planning, supporting technical assistance for ACUMAR to promote territorial planning
                         with a comprehensive development perspective for the M-R Basin and to incorporate social and
                         environmental dimensions of planning efforts; (ii) Institutional development for flood control,
                         supporting technical assistance to improve and update hydrological studies and management tools to
                         control flooding events; (iii) Investments in basic infrastructure for territorial development, financing
                         pilot interventions to improve infrastructure in low-income urban areas in both the lower and middle
                         sections of the basin and additionally to manage sustainable urban expansion in the middle and upper
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sections of the basin. Basic infrastructure includes (a) secondary networks for water and sanitation
                         and the connection of those networks to the main existing water and sanitation systems, (b) micro
                         drainage and the section of macro drainage required to operate the micro drainage system, (c)
                         secondary streets, and (d) recreational areas); (iv) Investments in infrastructure for flood control and
                         management, financing: a) micro-drainage systems and specific macro-drainage works associated
                         with the selected micro system. Areas that will receive investments in drainage systems will be
                         selected through a comprehensive socio-economic cost-benefit analysis in consultation with
                         provincial and municipal governments. It is anticipated that at least two low-income neighborhoods
                         and one low-income settlement encompassing approximately 5,000 people will benefit from this sub-
                         component. After construction, these systems will be operated by the respective municipal
                         governments; b) flood control systems, comprising some other infrastructure such as temporal
                         retention areas, green infrastructure, and porous pavement, among others.

                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$18.2 million total, US$18.2
                         million loan)

                          In line with the development objectives, a separate TA component has been prepared to support the
                         design and implementation of measures required in both the short and long term to establish the
                         necessary institutional capacity for the new basin authority.



                                                                       Page 5 of 19
                         The component has been divided into five sub-components: (i) Institutional Strengthening of
                         ACUMAR to adapt its current organizational structure to better respond to its institutional
                         responsibilities. A new structure will be designed through a participatory process and using proved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         methodologies and strategies. This subcomponent will support the necessary activities such as
                         workshops, consultants, and infrastructure investments to support the new institutional structure; (ii)
                         Communication Strategy to inform key actors and stakeholder groups in the basin about the project
                         in a transparent manner; to strengthen the credibility of and support for the project; and to contribute
                         to the overall consultation and participation framework of the project; (iii) Establishment of a public
                         information office in ACUMAR supporting the necessary investments for the proper functioning of a
                         public information office such as human resources, office equipment, infrastructure and logistic
                         tools; (iv) Technical and monitoring studies financing for additional studies required during the
                         course of project implementation, providing expert support (including a panel of experts recognized
                         in such fields as environment, engineering, biodiversity, modeling etc.), supporting impact and water
                         quality monitoring, implementing a groundwater study to gain knowledge on the control of the high
                         level of the groundwater table in the basin area, identifying additional and complementary
                         infrastructure works, auditing for monitoring indicators and updating engineering designs. Finally,
                         (v) Project management, supporting human resources, physical space and equipment within SAyDS/
                         UCOFI to strengthen purchasing, contracting and procurement processes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project's area of influence is quite large, with most of the proposed investments and programs to
                         be located within the M-R basin, the AySA concession area and the La Plata River, all within the
                         City and Province of Buenos Aires. The project's area of influence involves the following (often
                         overlapping) areas: (i) the entire Matanza-Riachuelo Basin; (ii) the entire AySA concession area; (iii)
                         the reaches of the Lujan River, from the mouth of the Reconquista River to its confluence with the
                         La Plata River; (iv) the reaches of the La Plata River between the coast and the outer limit of the so-
                         called "Parana de las Palmas Flow Corridor"; and (v) the coastal section between the coast of the La
                         Plata River, the neighborhood access road to the river at approximately 14,000 m southeast of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         boundary of the General Belgrano plant site, the Boca railroad, and the boundary between the
                         districts of Quilmes and Berazategui.

                          Key considerations relating to the physical location and characteristics of the project area include the
                         large number of poor and vulnerable communities that live in close proximity to the M-R Basin and
                         who are most exposed to the uncontrolled and untreated discharges; the specific water quality
                         characteristics of the M-R Basin and the La Plata River; and the international riparian issues relating
                         to the La Plata River.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
                         Elba Lydia Gaggero (GENDR)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The proposed project is classified as Category A
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      according to World Bank Environmental Assessment OP/
                                                                     BP 4.01 based upon the large-scale sanitation civil works
                                                                     investments under component 1, for which long-term


                                                                       Page 6 of 19
                         effects as well as some potential significant socio-
                         environmental adverse impacts are expected, although
                         they are not considered irreversible or non-mitigable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Works to be carried out under components 2 and 3 are
                         expected to have impacts that are mostly positive and
                         where adverse impacts may occur they are expected to be
                         small scale, temporary, local in nature, and can be
                         addressed with known mitigation measures.
                         (Note 1: details on potential impacts associated with the
                         project are presented below, in Section II - Key Safeguard
                         Policy Issues and Their Management).
                         Activities under component 4 such as institutional
                         development and capacity building are not likely to
                         generate adverse impacts. In fact, they are designed to
                         enhance the positive outcomes, long-term benefits and
                         sustainability of the project.
                         Environmental assessments have been prepared for the
                         project at two levels of analysis. At the overall project and
                         river basin level, an Integrated Environmental Assessment
                         has been prepared which describes the regional
                         environmental issues facing the M-R River Basin, the
                         baseline environmental situation, the applicable legal and
                         institutional framework guiding the management of the
                         basin, the principal management strategies considered,
                         and alternatives evaluated for different basin management
                         approaches. In addition, the Integrated Environmental
                         Assessment (IEA) provides a comprehensive description
                         of the overall project components, their main
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental risks and benefits, and the measures to be
                         employed during project implementation to ensure
                         management of adverse environmental risks.
                         Complementarily to the IEA, and given that different
                         works and interventions, with different levels of
                         definition, in different areas of the Basin are envisioned
                         under the project, specific Environmental Assessment
                         instruments have been developed for each one of them in
                         accordance with the World Bank's Environmental and
                         Social Safeguards Policies.

                         a)      Component 1 (Sanitation): A seven-volume
                         Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) describes
                         AySA’s strategic corporate vision, the Integrated Plan
                         developed for its concession area, baseline environmental
                         conditions in the project’s area of influence, and the
                         applicable legal and institutional framework guiding
                         AySA’S sanitation works. The EIA report from AySA
                         considers realistic alternatives to each proposed work and



                          Page 7 of 19
                         evaluates the proposed works in the context of AySA’s
                         five year investment plan (“Plan Director”). A
                         comprehensive EMP has been developed, spelling out
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional responsibilities for implementation of
                         mitigation actions as well as supervision and monitoring
                         of compliance with agreed mitigation measures. For
                         example, all construction contractors will be required to
                         follow site-specific management plans agreed on and
                         incorporated into all construction contracts.
                         At the site-specific level, a detailed EIA report was
                         prepared for each of the major civil works -agreed at
                         appraisal- that will be constructed under the APL 1.
                         After the alternative to the CMD was approved by the
                         Bank in 2011 (“Descentralized Alternative”) AySA
                         prepared an EIA for each of the investments in sanitation
                         infrastructure prioritized by the GoA as part of such
                         alternative: i) sludge treatment plant in the Sudoeste
                         Wastewater treatment plant site; ii) SEPA 4: and iii)
                         SEPA 7. This included a previous screen of the works at
                         each site that demonstrated that no potential land
                         acquisition or resettlement was associated with the
                         proposed works.
                         AySA also prepared an EIA of the Industrial Collector;
                         although it will be implemented under Component 1, it
                         formally will complement the activities to be carried out
                         under Component 2.
                         The EIAs establish detailed environmental and social
                         baseline conditions; identify and assess potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social adverse impacts and risks based
                         on the type and scope of physical interventions and site
                         characteristics, as well as expected benefits; design
                         appropriate mitigation, management, and monitoring
                         measures; and present an Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP) for the proper management of
                         works during construction and operation stages.
                         b)        Component 2 (Industrial Pollution Abatement)
                         and Component 3 (Territorial Management): Because
                         most of the specific works investments to be made under
                         these components were not identified by the time of the
                         project’s appraisal, it was not possible to ascertain with
                         absolute certainty the nature or extent of the associated
                         risks. Thus, for each one of these components an
                         Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been
                         developed. The EMFs describe, among other issues (i) the
                         eligibility criteria for works to be funded under the
                         project; and, (ii) procedures for screening and scoping
                         potential issues for all proposed investments and, where



                          Page 8 of 19
                                                        appropriate, developing management instruments and /or
                                                        mitigation measures.
                                                        At present, in the frame of the project’s restructuring, both
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        EMFs have been reviewed, updated and improved
                                                        according to the definitions reached for these components.

                                                        As part of the project preparation process, extensive
                                                        stakeholder consultation has been undertaken using
                                                        formal as well as informal methodologies. The project
                                                        EIAs have been made available through the ACUMAR
                                                        and AySA websites as well as through the Bank’s
                                                        Infoshop. Information on the project has been made
                                                        publically available through public disclosure events and
                                                        workshops. Informal focus group discussions have been
                                                        conducted with NGOs, local governments, affected
                                                        people and beneficiaries at various points during
                                                        preparation and appraisal.
                                                        The consultation process continued during project
                                                        implementation.
                                                        (Note 2: details on the consultation process as well as
                                                        social assessments associated with the Project are
                                                        presented below, in Section II - Key Safeguard Policy
                                                        Issues and Their Management).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Within the project’s area of influence there are five
                         4.04                           known terrestrial ecological reserves and no existing
                                                        aquatic reserves. Based on studies conducted by the GEF
                                                        funded project “Proyecto de Protección Ambiental del Rio
                                                        de la Plata y su Frente Maritimo” commonly known as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        FREPLATA), priority areas for protection of aquatic
                                                        biodiversity have been identified but these areas are far
                                                        from the immediate impact zone and not likely to be
                                                        affected by the project.
                                                        Due to the project aims to contribute to the significant
                                                        improvement of water quality conditions in the M-R
                                                        River Basin and in the coastal areas of the Rio de la Plata,
                                                        it is expected to have significant positive impacts on the
                                                        natural riverine habitats found in the project area. An area
                                                        of the receiving waters in La Plata River will be degraded
                                                        as a result of the pollution discharge from the wastewater
                                                        treatment plant via the outfall. Models developed for the
                                                        outfalls indicate, however, that the discharge plume is
                                                        expected to be fully contained within a relatively small
                                                        area of the receiving waters. The pollution is not expected
                                                        to affect downstream coastal areas designated as
                                                        conservation areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    This policy is not triggered since the Project will affect




                                                         Page 9 of 19
                                                        neither forests nor forest-dependent communities, nor will
                                                        it involve changes in the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not procure nor will it lead to increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        use of pesticides. Therefore no action is required under
                                                        this policy.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Preliminary site evaluations for proposed civil works
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           construction do not show any evidence of cultural
                                                        property that will require mitigation or management
                                                        measures. However, since many of the proposed works
                                                        entail excavations and soil movement, a potential exists
                                                        for the accidental discovery of physical cultural resources.
                                                        Thus the policy is triggered. The necessary mitigation
                                                        measures have been considered within OP/BP 4.01 and
                                                        the specific EA instruments (e.g., ESMPs with “chance
                                                        finds” procedures; all construction contracts will include a
                                                        chance finds clause that will require contractors to halt
                                                        construction if any underground cultural property sites are
                                                        encountered during construction. Site specific
                                                        management plans for any cultural property identified by
                                                        chance finds procedures will be developed before
                                                        construction can start up again.).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    In the project area, they have not been identified
                         BP 4.10                        indigenous territories, therefore, this policy is not
                                                        triggered since Project activities will not affect indigenous
                                                        peoples as defined in the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Resettlement is not expected for the project. However: a)
                         OP/BP 4.12                     works under component 1 are of high complexity
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        (technical and location issues); and, b) civil works
                                                        involved in certain possible sub-projects under component
                                                        2 and 3 (sanitation and flood risk management) may
                                                        affect, respectively, a small number of houses in informal
                                                        settlements, or potentially restrict the use of private land;
                                                        the exact potential resettlement related impacts (if any)
                                                        and zone of influence of such impacts are not confirmed/
                                                        identify yet. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                        (RPF) has been prepared for the project. Among other
                                                        things, the RPF spells out eligibility criteria, forms of
                                                        compensation, and dispute resolution mechanisms that
                                                        will be available to potentially affected people. If any
                                                        civil works causes resettlement, a Resettlement Action
                                                        Plan will be prepared prior to the start of the works.
                                                        At present, in the frame of the project’s restructuring, the
                                                        RPF have been reviewed by the Bank team and
                                                        considered still appropriate; no modification was
                                                        incorporated into the original document.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     No    The project will not support the construction or



                                                        Page 10 of 19
                            4.37                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                        investments which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                                                        Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   Yes             Since both proposed sub-aquatic outfalls (the Riachuelo
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        outfall at Dock-Sud during APL-1 and the Berazategui
                                                                        outfall in APL-2), will discharge to the Rio de la Plata, a
                                                                        bi-national waterway shared with Uruguay, OP 7.50 is
                                                                        triggered. Notification to Uruguay has been made through
                                                                        the bi-national “Comision Administradora del Rio de la
                                                                        Plata” (CARP). On 13 Aug, 2001, Argentina’s then
                                                                        Ministry of
                                                                        Infrastructure and Housing submitted a request to CARP
                                                                        to authorize construction of an outfall at Dock Sud. CARP
                                                                        replied on 23 May, 2002, that it had “no objections” to the
                                                                        works, as long as
                                                                        several conditions were met (analysis of possible algae
                                                                        blooms in the diffuser area, establishment
                                                                        of an environmental monitoring & control program,
                                                                        determination of the types of wastewater that would be
                                                                        discharged and definition of pre-treatment standards for
                                                                        industries, etc.). On Sept 11, 2008, AySA (through the
                                                                        Sub-secretariat of Water Resources in the Ministry of
                                                                        Planning, Public Works and Services) presented an
                                                                        updated submission to CARP. Subsequently, on 28
                                                                        January, 2009, Argentine representatives gave a
                                                                        presentation of the project before CARP and answered
                                                                        questions from Uruguayan representatives. After that, the
                                                                        Argentine government received a reply from CARP that it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        did not express an objection to the proposed project.
                            Projects in Disputed        No              The policy is not triggered because the project will not be
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            implemented in areas known to involve disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Overall, the environmental benefits of the project are expected to outweigh the environmental
                              costs of the project. The expected benefits include : (i) improved quality of life for the 3.5 million
                              inhabitants of the M-R Basin; (ii) improved sewerage and drainage services in the M-R Basin and
                              other parts of Buenos Aires by expanding the coverage of the sewerage network to 1.7 million
                              people in the basin (from 35 percent to about 75 percent), especially in poor marginal areas; (iii)
                              improved environmental quality for rivers and tributaries crossing the urban area and the Rio de
                              La Plata through investments in industrial pollution control and management; and (iv) improved
                              urban living conditions associated with territorial development and reduced flooding in the M-R
                              Basin.

                              The project poses potential environmental risks during both the construction and the operational

                                                                         Page 11 of 19
                         phases. During the construction phase, the main environmental risks are associated with the
                         management and control of temporary risks of the construction of the various large scale civil
                         works to be carried out under component 1 (Sanitation). These risks include the usual potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts associated with large scale construction such as dust and noise emission; handling and
                         disposal of hazardous materials at construction sites; potential of erosion and sedimentation near
                         sensitive water bodies; handling and disposal of tunnels’ excavation materials; large soil
                         movement; local disruption of traffic flows; and occupational health and safety issues. During
                         construction there will also be risks associated with the re -suspension of river sediments during
                         potential dredging operations.

                         Works under component 1 do not anticipate any significant negative impact on physical cultural
                         resources; however, the ESMPs includes (and, accordingly, related future contract will include)
                         procedures and requirements associated to chance find management.

                          During the operational phase, potential environmental risks will include those associated with the
                         increased contamination of the Rio de la Plata due to the operation of the sub-aquatic outfalls;
                         nuisance noise and odor associated with the wastewater treatment plant operations; and disposal of
                         the solid wastes generated by the treatment plant. A summary of all potential environmental
                         impacts, risks, mitigation and management measures is presented in Annex 10 of the PAD.

                          Environmental risks associated with components 2 (Industrial Pollution Abatement) and 3
                         (Territorial Management) are, by their nature, much less significant. Any adverse impacts will
                         mostly be associated with small-to medium-scale construction of civil works. The main anticipated
                         potential adverse impacts related to activities of these components they include noise; vibration;
                         exhaust emissions from machinery; dust emission and dispersion from excavation activities;
                         disruptions in normal urban movement (traffic and pedestrian); and safety issues. None of these
                         potential impacts is anticipated to be significant. In addition, civil works involved in certain sub-
                         projects (sanitation and flood risk management) may affect, respectively, a small number of
                         houses in informal settlements, or potentially restrict the use of private land. The exact potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resettlement related impacts (if any) and zone of influence of such impacts are not identify yet.
                         Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared. If any of the civil works causes
                         resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared prior to the start of the works.

                         Foreseen works and complementary interventions in components 2 and 3 do not anticipate any
                         significant negative impact on physical cultural resources; however, any environmental analyses,
                         as part of the ESMF, will specifically include consideration of physical cultural resources. As part
                         of the restructuring, the Industrial Waste Water Treatment Plant for tanneries is being included in
                         the Project. After the screening criteria, the proposed IWWTP part of Component 2 resulted in an
                         Environmental and Social Impact Evaluation and its corresponding Environmental Management
                         Plan that was given the Bank’s No Objection on September 2015 and was published in country on
                         October 21st 2015. All sub-project’s ESMP and related construction contracts will include
                         procedures and requirements related to chance find management.

                         Some of the identified potential impacts associated with the various components of the projects are
                         of a social nature. For the sanitation component, some temporary social impacts are expected
                         during the construction phase. These include restriction of access to some public areas, increased
                         transit of trucks to the trenches and collector sites etc. However, t he construction methods
                         proposed (pipe jacking and tunneling) to be used for pipe installation have been explicitly



                                                                   Page 12 of 19
                           designed to minimize impacts, including any resettlement. Pipe routes have been selected to be
                           located in public areas and will not impact private property.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             As mentioned above, the long term environmental impacts of the project are expected to be
                           positive. There will be some adverse impacts associated with the operation of the treatment plant
                           and subsequent discharges into the Rio de la Plata. The pollution loads are expected to affect a
                           relatively small area of the Rio d e la Plata, especially given the very high dilution factors of the
                           river. As the project's area of influence is one of intense urbanization and industrial development,
                           the overall success of the project will be determined, to a certain extent, by how successful
                           governments are at encouraging the closure or relocation of highly polluting industries and the
                           long term ability to control future growth and industrialization in the highest risk areas.

                            On the basis of these potential risks the project is being processed as an environmental risk
                           category A project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            A variety of technical alternatives were considered for the sanitation component (Component 1).
                           These included the level of wastewater treatment, the length of outfalls, and the number and
                           location of the wastewater treatment plants. A summary of the description of the alternatives and
                           the reasons for rejection of those that were not selected is presented in Annex 12 of the PAD.

                           In addition, during the negotiations of the loan between the Government and the World Bank, it
                           was agreed that prior to the construction of the right bank collector, the Government would carry
                           out a prefeasibility study of alternatives through the water and sanitation utility of the
                           Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires (AySA). The prefeasibility study was carried out in 2010 and,
                           instead of the construction of the CMD, it favored the alternative of advanced secondary treatment
                           in four wastewater treatment plants from which effluents will be discharged into the M-R River to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           meet the water quality standards set by ACUMAR (“Decentralized Alternative”). This alternative
                           also proposed the construction of aeration systems (Sidestream Elevated Pool Aeration, SEPAs)
                           along the banks of the river. An Expert Panel convened by the Bank reviewed the Prefeasibility
                           Study of the Alternative to the Right Bank Collector and concluded that the decentralized
                           alternative was a well thought proposal that could be supported by the Bank.

                           An issue of major importance for the project is the choice of preliminary treatment of the
                           wastewater coupled with discharge of the effluent into the La Plata River through a long, effective
                           outfall. The decision to choose a lower level of treatment over a higher level has been questioned
                           in some stakeholder meetings. However, the choice of preliminary treatment is considered a
                           meaningful strategy. Discharges from the preliminary treatment plants will be further processed by
                           the oxygenation capacity of the La Plata River into which it drains. Choosing a higher level of
                           treatment (secondary) and a shorter outfall would not be fully justifiable (or sustainable) as it
                           would be significantly more expensive and probably unaffordable both in terms of capital
                           investment as well as operation and maintenance costs. Furthermore, the alternative with
                           secondary treatment and an effective outfall is equivalent, in terms of risks to humans and to the
                           environment, to the selected alternative (preliminary treatment and a long, effective outfall).

                            These conclusions are partially based on the findings of mathematical modeling of the
                           implications of the various alternatives on the water quality of the La Plata River. They are also

                                                                     Page 13 of 19
                           consistent with the recommendation from the World Health Organization (WHO) that, from the
                           public health standpoint of human exposure to wastewater, additional treatment higher than
                           preliminary prior to the discharge does not reduce health risks. That is to say, the health risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated with a system comprised of preliminary treatment followed by an effective outfall is
                           identical to that from a system comprised of secondary treatment followed by an effective outfall.
                           The WHO report refers to risk related to human exposure through bathing, which is not exactly the
                           risk in the case of discharge to the La Plata River; but as the main risk of effluent discharge is
                           imposed by pathogenic organisms, the WHO exposure risk measure serves as a reasonable proxy.

                            For the industrial pollution component (Component 2), two alternatives were considered: (i) a
                           high level of treatment of all industrial wastes and discharge of the effluents, except those which
                           contain toxic matter, to the M-R river, and (ii) a lower level of treatment of all industrial wastes
                           and discharge of the effluents, except those which contain toxic matter, to the municipal sewerage
                           network for further processing with domestic wastewater. Alternative (i) was rejected since it was
                           found, through mathematical modeling that even after a high level of treatment, the discharge of
                           industrial effluents to the M-R River will still render it anaerobic. So that the only way to induce
                           aerobic conditions in the river and recover its water quality is through Alternative (ii).

                           Following that strategy and in the frame of the restructuring of the project, the GoA prioritized the
                           construction of an Industrial Effluents Treatment Plant in the Lanus Municipality (as part of
                           component 2) that will enable treatment of 70 percent of tannery effluent in the basin. This plant
                           will be complemented by the Industrial Collector to be built by AySA to conduct the treated
                           industrial effluents to the Wilde Pump Station and from there to the Berazategui preliminary
                           treatment plant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The environmental risks, impacts, and benefits of the project have been analyzed at two different
                           levels using two closely related environmental assessment approaches. The environmental impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (both positive and negative) have been assessed through: i) a detailed 7 volume EIA conducted for
                           specific works proposed under Component 1; and, ii) separate Environmental Management
                           Frameworks (EMF) prepared for activities to be carried out under Components 2 Industrial
                           Pollution Abatement (Note: The Industrial Wastewater Treatment Plant for tanneries has been
                           screened applying the EMF resulting in a EIA and its corresponding EMP, the subproject is being
                           tendered) and 3 Territorial Management. In addition to the site-specific EIA and the EMFs, an
                           Integrated Environmental Assessment (IEA) has been prepared which serves two purposes: first, it
                           summarizes the main findings of the more detailed EIA reports; second, the IEA presents the
                           overall regional context and strategic goals for the long term recovery and management of the
                           Matanza-Riachuelo basin in its entirety.

                            At the site-specific level, a detailed EIA report was prepared for each of the major civil works that
                           will be constructed under Component 1 (Sanitation) during the APL1, including those
                           corresponding to the decentralized alternative prioritized by the GoA.

                           The seven-volume EIA of component 1 was prepared under the general direction of the AySA
                           Environmental Management Unit using independent environmental engineering consultants for
                           key aspects of the analysis. These assessments, which were coordinated with associated modeling
                           and other technical evaluations, indicate the overall environmental viability of the proposed
                           project activities. The EIA provides a thorough assessment of the project’s environment impact


                                                                     Page 14 of 19
                         during the construction and operational stages for the project's main civil works. The EIA for
                         Component 1 includes specific volumes on the general conditions and background of the project; a
                         description of AySA’s corporate Master Plan (Plan Director); the proposed Riachuelo preliminary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         treatment plant; the pumping stations; the Riachuelo sub-aquatic outfall; as well as the colector
                         margen izquierda and colector baja costenera. In addition, the site- specific EIA includes baseline
                         data, legal and institutional capacity assessments, an environmental management plan and site
                         specific management measures.

                         Furthermore, the government advanced the construction of the Berazategui preliminary treatment
                         plant (BPTP): In the 1970’s, Obras Sanitarias de la Nacion, the public water and sewerage
                         authority for the Buenos Aires Metropolitan area that preceded Aguas Argentinas, constructed a
                         2.5 km sub-aquatic outfall in the municipality of Berazategui to discharge sewage from its service
                         area to La Plata River. In 2004, the municipality of Berazategui and local residents initiated
                         judicial proceedings against Aguas Argentinas for discharging sewage to the La Plata River
                         without adequate treatment. In 2006, the case was elevated to Argentina’s Supreme Court, which
                         ruled in favor of the municipality and local residents and ordered the construction of a preliminary
                         treatment plant. After Aguas Argentinas’s concession was rescinded in March of 2006, AySA
                         assumed responsibility for complying with the Supreme Court ruling and, in 2008, awarded a
                         contract for construction of the Berazategui sewage preliminary treatment plant. While work on
                         the BPTP is expected to be carried out in parallel with APL-1, from a technical standpoint, the
                         plant complements a Bank-financed civil work under APL-2 (i.e. the Berazategui sub-aquatic
                         outfall) and has therefore been included as a counterpart wo rk under APL-2, an EIA was prepared
                         in July 2007 and has been disclosed in-country by AySA (The executive summary of the EIA is on
                         AySA’s website; the complete report is available at AySA’s library in Buenos Aires). The Bank
                         team has assessed the EIA and found itto be broadly acceptable.

                          The Integrated Environmental Assessment was prepared under the overall guidance of ACUMAR
                         and corresponds to a regional, basin-wide assessment of environmental risks and benefits. The
                         IEA describes the baseline conditions of the Matanza-Riachuelo Basin, the legal and institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         setting and the strategic challenges and options that underpin the choice of the specific project
                         components and investment activities. This IEA was used to evaluate the regional strategic
                         objectives of the project (including infrastructure works that belong to the PISA but that will not
                         be financed through the proposed Bank loans such as the Berazategui preliminary treatment plant)
                         and to provide a clear rationale for the project components that respond to these objectives. The
                         IEA also describes the structure of the project as a whole, including a detailed description of the
                         environmental risks and benefits of the three project components and the institutional
                         arrangements for implementing the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project.

                         Social assessment process: Given the complexity of the Project, two complementary social
                         assessments were prepared for ACUMAR and AySA during project preparation. ACUMAR’s
                         social assessment was a basin-wide study, describing the social base line conditions which exists
                         in the M-R Basin, identifying stakeholder perceptions, positions, and influence on the project,
                         highlighting the existing communication channels, pinpointing the overall social impacts of the
                         project, and assessing its various risks. AySA’s social assessment, on the other hand, explored the
                         opinion of stakeholders about the proposed infrastructure works to be carried out by the company.

                          Both SAs were developed based on available project information and consultations with relevant
                         stakeholders. The teams that conducted the SA carried out 45 meetings with stakeholders
                         including representatives of community organizations, NGO s, the industrial sector, provincial and

                                                                  Page 15 of 19
                          municipal officials, professional associations and members of academia. Stakeholders also
                          participated in workshops, including those for the presentation of the TOR’s for the EIAs and the
                          draft EIAs themselves.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          At present (October 2015), AySA is reviewing, updating and improving the Social Assessment
                          carried out by the time of the project preparation. AySA is actually preparing a Social
                          Management Plan that comprises four components: i) Social participation; ii) Stakeholder
                          Analysis; iii) Communication; and, iv) (Independent) Monitoring. The first two components are
                          finalized; AySA is now completing the Communication Plan and the Terms of Reference for the
                          contracting and independent entity to monitor the implementation of the new AySA’s Social
                          Management Plan.

                           Assessment of Borrower Capacity to Implement EMP. Borrower capacity to implement and
                          achieve a fully successful EMP will be considerably improved during project implementation.
                          While ACUMAR has some staff with very strong environmental and water resource management
                          credentials, they currently have no stand-alone environment unit responsible for the tasks expected
                          under the EMP. A subcomponent under Component 4 has been specifically designed to support
                          any key activities that emerge from ACUMAR’s institutional strengthening plan, and will be vital
                          in the creation of needed capacities.

                            Within AySA, there currently exists a standalone environmental unit with staff appointed to carry
                           out a variety of corporate environmental functions. So far, their work has been quite strong with
                           respect to preparation aspects of the project. AySA will complete its team with a full range of
                           skills necessary to carry out all the tasks related to project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             As part of the project preparation process, stakeholder consultation and information disclosure
                           has been carried out using formal as well as informal methodologies. Information on the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and its components has been made publically available through stakeholder consultation and
                           workshops. Informal focus groups discussions have been conducted with NGOs, local
                           government, affected people and beneficiaries at various points during preparation and appraisal.
                           In addition, household and individual surveys done by the economic evaluation team have been
                           used to disseminate information and gather stakeholder perceptions.

                           ACUMAR and AySA are also establishing social expertise within their organizational structure.
                          These teams have been established to lead efforts at stakeholder in constant contact with the local
                          communities. ACUMAR, for example, has established a network of approximately 300
                          community and environmental NGOs that are part of its broader communications strategy relating
                          to issues facing the M-R Basin. This network provides an opportunity for information disclosure
                          not just on the project but on a wide array of development issues facing the basin. In addition to
                          general public disclosure, several experts in the sanitation, engineering, environmental area have
                          given advice and assessment to the project team.

                          As it was aforementioned, two social assessments have been also conducted for the project (details
                          above).

                           The most important finding from the social assessments was that the project (as well as the
                          sanitation component alone) will have a positive social impact on the population in the M-R Basin


                                                                    Page 16 of 19
                           as well as in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area. The investments will contribute to improving
                           the quality of life of the basin population by improvements in the environmental conditions, as
                           well as by increasing the capacity of the sewerage systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During the project preparation stage, a first major consultation event was held in Buenos Aires on
                           July 10th 2008, for the scoping of the terms of reference for the EIA. A second round of formal
                           public disclosure of the advanced draft EIA report was conducted on November 7, 2008. The draft
                           EIA reports are already available to the public through the AySA an d ACUMAR websites, by
                           posting of hard copies in ACUMAR as well as through the World Bank's InfoShop. Most of the
                           identified stakeholders have taken part of these events.

                           During project implementation, the EIA reports that were prepared by AySA for each of the
                           different civil works of component 1 prioritized by the GoA that correspond to the decentralized
                           alternative, had a consultation meeting convened by AySA and targeted to relevant stakeholders.
                           Also, as it was mentioned above, AySA is preparing a comprehensive Communication Plan, as
                           part of a broader Social Management Plan, implementation of which will be monitoring by an
                           independent entity.
                           AySA is working together with ACUMAR to ensure articulation with the communication strategy
                           that is being preparing the Basin Authorithy, in order to foster participation and to bring more
                           information to stakeholders (one of the main finding of the social assessments),

                           In addition, ACUMAR and the relevant involved agencies are preparing, or even already
                           implementing, the communication plans developed as part of the Environmental Assessment of
                           other prioritized works under components 2 and 3, such us (i) the construction of an Industrial
                           Treatment Plant in the Lanus Municipality; ii) the improvement of the water & sanitation and
                           drainage infrastructure in a low income settlement in the City of Buenos Aires, according to the
                           provisions of the corresponding (and revised / updated) EMFs.

                           Other important event to highlight, is the presentation of the Final Report prepared by the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Expert Panel on the Prefeasibility Study of the Alternative to the Right Bank Collector to the
                           Cuerpo Colegiado, which took place in October 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        13-Aug-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     18-Aug-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        18-Aug-2008
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                          18-Aug-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Aug-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     18-Aug-2008


                                                                    Page 17 of 19
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                        18-Aug-2008
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]



                                                                     Page 18 of 19
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christophe Prevost
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                         Date: 03-Dec-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)                 Date: 04-Dec-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 19 of 19
