                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
               Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSR13797
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                            Congo, Democratic             Project ID:                 P125509
                                        Republic of
    Project Name:                       DRC Catalytic Project to Strengthen the INS (P125509)
    Task Team Leader(s):                Franck M. Adoho
    Estimated Appraisal                 16-Jul-2012                   Estimated Board             18-Mar-2014
    Date:                                                             Date:
    Managing Unit:                      GPV01                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                          Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           11.80                             Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                          Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                        0.00
    Statistics for Results Trust Fund                                                                              11.80
    Total                                                                                                          11.80
    Environmental Category:             B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?         No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
The project will be financed by a Statistics for Results-Catalytic Fund grant of $11.8 million and will consist
of three components, including contingency ($0.68m), with:

Component A for Increasing INS technical capacity for $1.25m: the objective of this component is to
increase the proportion of the professional staff with formal degrees or on-the-job training in areas related to

                                                       Page 1 of 6
statistics, demography, economics, and information technology (particularly programming). Two approaches
will be used to support this objective: study abroad in degree-granting institutions that are supported by
international quality assurance standards and on-the-job training for existing staff whose training is not in
core fields.

Component B to Improve the non-technical environment for $6.79m: the component will support
management and fiduciary training, office furnishings, computer hardware, and software for INS staff. The
objective is for INS to develop and implement annual work plans relying upon a strengthened fiduciary team
with appropriate technology and with a staff skill mix that is, in conjunction with the outputs of Component
A, evolving towards what is needed for a statistical office.
The buildings used by INS technical departments in the Limete neighborhood of Kinshasa are dilapidated,
unsafe, and inadequate for computer-based work. To address this, the project will demolish and reconstruct
one building on the site. This will be done through two project-financed activities. In its first year, the
project will finance an architectural site evaluation to explore rehabilitation options. Once a choice is made,
the project will finance the demolition and reconstruction of the selected building. This complements the
focus by UNFPA and AFDB on provincial INS offices and does not overlap with UNFPA's work on office
space for the Census Bureau. The site is officially assigned to INS and the documentation is in the project
file. In order to provide locals for the BCR and the INS departments affected by the reconstruction, the
project will support rental and operation costing for a building where these units will temporarily move for
three years. This component also covers project management costs including USD 0.1 million for potential
costs related to safeguard activities.

Component C to support the statistical production and dissemination for $3.76m: this component will support
the development of critical statistical data that meet the following criteria: broad impact, currently severely
outdated, and infrequent in nature. It will also provide for the development and implementation of archiving
and dissemination policies for statistical information in order to increase access, use, and quality of the
information produced. It will focus on the Mapping phase of the Population and Housing Census; the
Enterprise census and cover activities to Improving access to statistical information.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will primarily be undertaken in Kinshasa. Data collection financed under the project will affect
the entire country. Training financed under the project will affect primarily Kinshasa-based staff, although
provincial staff will also benefit from training.
Safeguards aspects are limited to the INS compound in Limete, a neighborhood of Kinshasa. More details are
in Section II.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Aurelie Marie Simone Monique Rossignol( GEN07 )

 Lucienne M. M'Baipor( GSU01 )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Y               The project will finance demolition and
                                                              reconstruction INS facilities in subcomponent
                                                              B. The implementation of these activities will
                                                              occur in Limete which is an urban zone, may
                                                              have adverse environmental and social impacts.
                                                              A specific Environmental and Social


                                                  Page 2 of 6
                                                                Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared for
                                                                this purpose.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     N
Forests OP/BP 4.36                              N
Pest Management OP 4.09                         N
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Y               In anticipation of the potential impacts on any
                                                                cultural Resources due to the demolition and
                                                                reconstruction of the INS facilities, the project
                                                                will prepare and develop, as an integral part of
                                                                the Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, a
                                                                physical cultural resources management plan
                                                                that includes provisions for managing chance
                                                                findings. The plan will highlight how to
                                                                manage the issue during the activities
                                                                implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   N               This policy will not be triggered as the
                                                                Project’s activities will be implemented in
                                                                Kinshasa, in an urban area where there is no
                                                                Indigenous People.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             N               The OP 4.12 will not be triggered as the
                                                                reconstruction of the building will be in a
                                                                walled property owned by the Government and
                                                                there will not be a need for land acquisition for
                                                                other activities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       N
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP N
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           N

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Project impacts are not expected to be large scale, significant or irreversible; potentially adverse impacts will
be minor and site specific. Impacts will be limited to the demolition and reconstruction of one single-story
building inside a walled property (estimated at 125m x 100m), a compound owned and used by INS as
offices. An architectural evaluation was undertaken with project funds to define the scope of work, which is
expected to cost about USD 4.560,000. The environmental screening has been disclosed in-country (20 June
2012) and at the InfoShop (3 July 2012).
The project will not finance (i) land acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement, or (iii) restriction of access to
resources or livelihoods and will provide no financing for any activity that would result in (i) land
acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement, or (iii) restriction of access to resources or livelihoods. The planned
works will be done within an enclosed site that is owned by government with no claims or encroachments on
the land.


                                                    Page 3 of 6
The social safeguards risks of the project are generic and not location specific. The risks are related to the
potential exclusion of some segments of the population during the census mapping operation; that preclusion
could potentially induce social disturbances. To mitigate potential exclusion risks, the methodology of the
census is designed to be all inclusive with a mechanism for addressing attrition; to ensure the statistical
representation of the entire population of DRC; irrespective of gender, age, ethnicity, religion or civil status.
Indigenous people as well as vulnerable groups will be incorporated into the census roster, and the project
includes a communication plan to inform the entire population including IPs and other vulnerable groups to
ensure they understand and participate in the census.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
No major impacts are anticipated. The project is rehabilitating office space for the INS, which should not
lead to significantly increased future activities in the area or long term impact. However, an increase of small
business is expected due the presence of employee for the construction. After rehabilitation, INS will go
about its normal business which is collecting, processing and analyzing statistical data.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An environmental screening of the project has been carried out, including an environmental management
plan with a snag list. The snag list will be part of the contract document. Potential needs for supervision, if
any, will be ensured by the supervision consultant. The Ministry of Environment, through the Agence
Congolaise pour l’Environnement (ACE) has the capacity to address potential safeguards issues encountered
by the project. The ACE ensures safeguards compliance for all investments in DRC. The project is not
expected to induce any major environmental impacts that would trigger a full environmental impact
assessment (EIA), beyond a screening. The project has also hired a consultant to update the Environmental
and Social Management Plan.
To mitigate potential exclusion risks during census mapping, the methodology of the census is designed to be
all inclusive, and it will establish a mechanism for addressing attrition; to ensure the statistical representation
of the entire population of DRC; irrespective of gender, age, ethnicity, religion or civil status. Indigenous
people as well as vulnerable groups will be incorporated into the census roster. Cartography agents will be
specifically trained to locate and interview small population groups in sensitive areas and in the forest. For
this, the Government will receive assistance from UNFPA and its experts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will not negatively affect other properties or people. The environmental impacts are expected to
be limited by the compound wall, which is unbroken (aside from the entrance doors) and rises to some 10
feet. However, small businesses surrounding the compound may be affected with noises and dust as a result
of activities implementation. The environmental screening, including the environmental management plan
and the snag list, will be disclosed in country and at the Bank prior to Appraisal.
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Jun-2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      03-Jul-2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                   Page 4 of 6
     "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




     Congo, Democratic Republic of                                        20-Jun-2012
 Comments: PHENVCOMM
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes    [X]     No []         NA        []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes     [X]     No []         NA        []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes   [X]     No []         NA        []
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):         Name: Franck M. Adoho
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:          Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)             Date: 28-Apr-2017


                                                Page 5 of 6
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name:                 Date:




                                    Page 6 of 6
