                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1087
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                               Project ID:    P145610
                            Project Name:      Peru Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)
                            Task Team          Georges Bianco Darido
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          23-Feb-2015                        Estimated   16-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%), Municipal
                                              governance and institution building (10%), City-wide Infrast ructure and Service
                                              Delivery (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    5836.00           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                2285.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    300.00
                              Andean Development Corporation                                                           150.00
                              Inter-American Development Bank                                                          300.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                       2801.00
                              Total                                                                                   5836.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         The PDO is to provide a major east-west axis (Ate-Lima-Callao) of the Lima-Callao Metropolitan
                         Region with a modern and integrated mass transit system that will improve accessibility to jobs and
                         services in the area of influence of Metro Line 2 and the Gambetta branch of Line 4.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         The project includes 35-km of new underground rail system (subway) with 35 stations in the
                         Metropolitan Area of Lima. A 35-year concession contract was signed in April 2014 comprising the
                         design, finance, construction, rolling stock provision, operation and maintenance of the 35-km
                         project. Government expects to carry about 660 thousand passengers per day once the 35-km are
                         operational (expected by 2020). Specifically, the Project involves the implementation of 35-km of
                         new rail infrastructure for Metro Line 2 and the Gambetta branch of the Metro Line 4.
                         Implementation includes: (i) the construction of 35 stations with, at a minimum, physical integration
                         to the existing Metro Line 1 and Metropolitano BRT, (ii) approximately 27.3-km of tunnel along the
                         Line 2 corridor with one rail yard, (ii) approximately 7.7 km segment of the future Line 4 with one
                         rail yard, and (iii) the provision and installation of the necessary rolling stock, electrical, control,
                         telecommunications, and fare systems for operation. The Project will be implemented (constructed)
                         in five phases (segments). The initial segment to be implemented (Phase 1A) will include about 4.9
                         km of line, 5 stations, a rail yard and test tracks in the area of the future Santa Anita station. The
                         start of construction for each phase depends on providing the necessary land for implementation and
                         resolution of interferences with utilities. Land acquisition and expropriation led by AATE are fairly
                         advanced for Phase 1A and the start of Phase 1A construction is schedule for end of 1st quarter 2015.
                         The Project’s overall schedule estimates completion of Phase 1A within two years of the start of
                         construction and the completion of the remaining 30 stations in about five years after the start of
                         construction.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in the Lima metropolitan area which is an urban and a highly altered
                         environment. The Project encompasses (1) a 27.3-km expansion of the proposed Line 2 (East-West
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corridor connecting the eastern district of Ate with the western municipality and Port of Callao
                         through various central districts of Lima), (2) physical connections with the existing Metro Line 1
                         (Tren Electrico) and the Bus Rapid Transit line (Metropolitano), and (3) a 7.7 km segment of the
                         future Line 4 connecting Line 2 with the international airport and northern districts. The first phase
                         to be constructed is the 5-km ‘Etapa 1A’ which includes 5 stations. The project area is geologically
                         located in a coastal plain, with an essentially flat relief, and an area of high seismic activity. Land use
                         is urban and there are no reported species of importance to be affected. Along the Lima Metro Line 2
                         alignment there are five pre-Hispanic sites (Huacas) and historical buildings and monuments from
                         the new republican period. A segment of the proposed metro-line alignment passes directly
                         underneath a portion of the buffer zone of the Historic Center of Lima, considered a UNESCO World
                         Heritage Site since 1988.The first phase to be constructed is the 5-km ‘Etapa 1A’ which includes 5
                         stations. Along the Lima Metro Line 2 alignment there several pre-Hispanic sites (Huacas) and
                         historical buildings and monuments from the new republican period. A segment of the proposed
                         metro-line alignment passes directly underneath a portion of the buffer zone of the Historic Center of
                         Lima, considered a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1988.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
                         Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)

                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental           Yes        The Project is classified as Environmental Category A as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01              per Bank Operational Policy on Environmental
                                                            Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) due to the potential impacts
                                                            associated with the large scale construction and the
                                                            relatively large geographic footprint in an urban
                                                            environment. The project should have significant long-
                                                            term positive environmental benefits, in particular related
                                                            to greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs), air quality and other
                                                            improvements in the health and quality of life of the
                                                            residents of Lima. An Environmental and Social Impact
                                                            Assessment (ESIA), including an Environmental and
                                                            Social Management Plan (ESMP), has been developed for
                                                            the Project. The ESIA was developed by a consortium of
                                                            consultant firms based upon Terms of Reference approved
                                                            by MTC’s Directorate General on Socio-Environmental
                                                            Matters (DGASA). The ESIA and the Project
                                                            environmental license was issued by DGASA in
                                                            November 2013 after various public consultation events.
                                                            Potential key negative environmental impacts and risks
                                                            include: increased traffic, noise and vibration during
                                                            construction and operation, construction worker health
                                                            safety risks, transport and disposal of soil/excavated
                                                            material from the tunnel and station excavations, potential
                                                            increased subsidence or impacts on ground water due to
                                                            tunneling and excavations, operation phase risks
                                                            associated with metro accidents/emergencies and waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            management at rail car maintenance facilities. The ESMP
                                                            consists of numerous specific environmental and social
                                                            mitigation and monitoring programs, including: programs/
                                                            measures for: solid and liquid waste management, air
                                                            emissions, noise, vibrations, green areas, community
                                                            health, environmental liabilities, worker health and safety,
                                                            traffic management, infrastructure services, training, spill
                                                            and contingencies, emergencies, environmental
                                                            monitoring, compensation and resettlement for properties
                                                            affected, community participation, community relations,
                                                            local contracting, purchase of local services, and closure.
                                                            A supplement to the ESIA was developed to address
                                                            requirements from the IFIs (primarily IADB and World
                                                            Bank) including information on alternatives evaluation,
                                                            select identified environmental impacts and management
                                                            measures; and was publically disclosed in November
                                                            2014. Evaluation of project alternatives were considered
                                                            as part of the ESIA and supplement to ESIA, and also in
                                                            prior studies such as the Metro Network Plan for Greater
                                                            Lima and Callao and the Metro Line 2 Feasibility Study,


                                                             Page 3 of 12
                         and included alternatives for transportation, alignment
                         location, and construction methods. Various public
                         consultation meetings/events were performed in August
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and September 2013 associated with the ESIA
                         finalization. The draft ESIA was publically disclosed and
                         an information center was opened to provide information
                         and respond to stakeholders. Stakeholder input was also
                         received as part of the development of the Metro Network
                         Plan for Greater Lima and Callao and the Metro Line 2
                         Feasibility Study, which provided input related to overall
                         transport alternatives in the metro Lima area, potential
                         impact of the Line 2 Project, proposed mitigation
                         measures, and monitoring programs. Additional
                         stakeholder engagement will be performed during project
                         construction and operation. The concessionaire is
                         responsible for Project construction and operation and
                         maintenance environmental health and safety
                         requirements as established under the concession contact.
                         The concession agreement has extensive environmental,
                         health and safety (EHS) requirements including
                         compliance with all applicable Peruvian regulatory
                         requirements, Project ESIA (and ESMP) and
                         environmental permit issued by DGASA, development
                         and implementation of EHS Management Systems, IFI
                         environmental requirements established for the project,
                         present EHS performance reports on a routing basis,
                         present in each final design document (EDI) specific EHS
                         requirements to address final design, provide EHS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training to workers, responsible to obtain any required
                         archeological or cultural resource permits and implement
                         measures to mitigate project impacts on such resources as
                         required by law, and maintain insurance in relation to
                         project EHS risks. The concessionaire is also required to
                         undertake specific engineering studies (vibrations, ground
                         water, soil subsidence), and the results from these studies
                         will be used to update, as needed, ESHS systems/plans.
                         Other related components of these management systems
                         are: social communication and grievance mechanism,
                         human resources which will include relevant labor
                         (worker) aspects; and procurement/legal which will
                         include procedure for incorporating EHS aspects into
                         subcontracting and purchase of goods/services. Part of the
                         final design document (EDIs in Spanish) for each project
                         segment/part, includes environmental, health and safety
                         measures which will be established based upon the
                         concessionaire overall EMS and HSMS (includes the
                         ESMP in Project EIA) and then modified, if needed to



                          Page 4 of 12
                                                       reflect specific characteristics of a given component (e.g.,
                                                       station). The development of the EHS management
                                                       system components and other applicable concessionaire
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       and Government requirements will be documented and
                                                       incorporated as part of the Project Operation Manual,
                                                       which is being developed in conjunction with other IFIs
                                                       investing in the Project. There are no associated facilities
                                                       at this time.

                                                       Per the Concession Agreement, the Line 2 stations will be
                                                       constructed according to international standards of
                                                       universal accessibility (elevators, escalators, signage) and
                                                       a minimum level of pedestrian facilities and bicycle
                                                       parking. Beyond the concession area, it is the
                                                       responsibility of the local districts to provide access to the
                                                       stations and there are discussions with the Municipality of
                                                       Lima and AATE to implement a design methodology that
                                                       also ensures engagement with local and vulnerable
                                                       groups, including persons with disabilities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                         4.04                          involve significant impacts on natural habitats. The
                                                       project is located in the Lima urban environment, will not
                                                       involve the removal of significant number of important
                                                       trees, and will not significantly impactcoastal habitats.
                                                       There are no environmental protected natural areas in
                                                       project area of influence. No spoil disposal sites will be
                                                       located in Metropolitan Lima’s coastal areas. . The ESMP
                                                       identified various potential sites for disposal of soil from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       tunnel and station construction (approximately 10.3
                                                       million m3), and recently the concessionaire has received
                                                       authorization from DGASA for use of an existing
                                                       authorized site (San Martin de Porres, approximately 17
                                                       km from Tramo 1A) for disposal of the approximately 3.5
                                                       million m3 from the initial tramo of construction. The site
                                                       is already an existing impacted area and authorized by the
                                                       government. There are no natural habitats to be affected.
                                                       The ESIA ESMP includes measures for relatively limited
                                                       vegetation removal required.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                                                       affect forests, forest dependent communities not will it
                                                       involve changes in the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   While the project does not involve the purchase or use of
                                                       significant quantities of pesticides, the policy is triggered
                                                       since the project will during the operation phase require
                                                       the limited use of regularly available pesticides for pest
                                                       control (e.g. rodents, etc.) in the tunnels. Applicable
                                                       mitigation and monitoring measures and appropriate pest


                                                        Page 5 of 12
                                                        management procedures are established in the Project’s
                                                        Environmental Management Plan (ESMP), concessionaire
                                                        environmental requirements, and managed under OP 4.01.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural       Yes    While the project does not anticipate significant impacts
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           on physical cultural resources based upon the project
                                                        ESIA and supplemental information, this policy is
                                                        triggered given the potential for chance finds of pre-
                                                        Hispanic artifacts during Project construction. There are
                                                        five historical resources identified with the area of project
                                                        influence, but none are presently anticipated to be directly
                                                        affected by project construction. The concessionaire is
                                                        required under the concession contract to comply with all
                                                        applicable archaeological and historical resource
                                                        requirements established under Peruvian law and will
                                                        implement an Archaeological Assessment Program to
                                                        obtain an Archaeological Remains Inexistence Certificate
                                                        (CIRA) from the Ministry of Culture before the start of
                                                        construction works and implement an Archaeological
                                                        Monitoring Plan to identify archaeological findings, and
                                                        as needed, implement a chance finds procedure. The
                                                        ESIA ESMP includes a management program for
                                                        archeological resources and is being expanded as part of
                                                        the concessionaries environmental management system.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    This policy is not triggered since the project activities will
                         BP 4.10                        not affect indigenous peoples as defined in the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The resettlement policy is triggered, given the project
                         OP/BP 4.12                     require the purchase of land and involuntary resettlement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        In addition, there areas where formal and informal
                                                        commercial activities will need to be resettled, requiring
                                                        the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans.

                                                        The 35-km mostly underground alignment will only
                                                        require land acquisition in the areas needed to build
                                                        stations and ventilation shafts. According to estimates
                                                        based on preliminary designs, Line 2 will affect 338 lots
                                                        and Line 4 Branch will affect 38 lots, for a total of 376
                                                        lots. Of these, 279 are privately owned and 98 belong to
                                                        public entities. Detailed designs are only available for
                                                        Section 1A, which will affect 41 properties, 21 owned by
                                                        public entities (gratuitous transfer) and 20 privately
                                                        owned (lots that do not represent social impacts and 12
                                                        informal businesses). AATE has reached agreements with
                                                        all of the landowners and delivered compensation
                                                        payments. The acquisition of the 20 privately owned lots
                                                        is completed and will not cause physical displacement,
                                                        except for the acquisition of a privately-owned lot
                                                        required for a ventilation shaft. In this case, 12 informal


                                                         Page 6 of 12
                                                                       businesses that occupy a section of this lot have to be
                                                                       displaced. The owners of 9 of these 12 informal
                                                                       businesses that operate in some of the expropriated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       properties initially rejected AATE’s compensation offers.
                                                                       For this reason, legal actions were initiated to evict these
                                                                       occupants through the Procuraduría General de la Nación
                                                                       (Attorney General’s Office) and eviction occurred on
                                                                       February 19, 2015 after all other options where exhausted
                                                                       and without use of force. All of the informal businesses
                                                                       were offered compensation payments consistent with the
                                                                       requirements of OP 4.12 for informal or illegal occupants.
                                                                       The legal action was resolved and the compensation to all
                                                                       informal businesses was paid.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             This policy is not triggered as the project will neither
                            4.37                                       support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
                                                                       it support other investments which rely on services of
                                                                       existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No             This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       activities involving the use or potential pollution of
                                                                       international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           activities in disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              There are no anticipated large scale or significant irreversible environmental or social impacts due
                              to the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project has various positive benefits, including improvement in the quality of life of the
                              residents of Lima; promotion of urban integration and organization and consequent land
                              development; provision of increased comfort, reliability and decreased commute times; increased
                              urban accessibility and mobility; less superficial vehicular traffic on main roads, allowing for the
                              decrease of traffic congestion, combustion gas contamination and sound, as well as commute
                              times; air quality improvement of Lima, contributing to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
                              and the mitigation of climate change; improved public health due to the reduced number of
                              accidents and less environmental contamination; job creation; and increased commercial and
                              economic activity.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Evaluation of project alternatives were considered as part of the ESIA and supplement to ESIA,
                              and also in prior studies. In December 2010, with the aim of expanding mass transit provision, the
                              GoP approved a Metro Network Plan for Greater Lima and Callao by Supreme Decree which
                              evaluated a range of transportation alternatives including various metro options. The 2012 Project

                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                           Pre-feasibility study, supported by international consultant firms, also evaluated alternatives and
                           recommended and the GoP approve a new 27-km subway line (known as the Metro Line 2
                           ‘Project’ and including an 8-km branch of the future Metro Line 4) as the top urban transport
Public Disclosure Copy




                           priority. Five principal layout options were assessed based upon economical and technical
                           viability, including demand, costs and environmental benefits, and social aspects. A multi-criteria
                           analysis was used considering functionality, use of the territory, cost, profitability, social impacts,
                           and environment. The Project profile and preliminary environmental assessment analyzed
                           alternative alignments and also construction methods for the sections between stations, including
                           open excavation (e.g., cut and fill), excavation in tunnels using mechanized excavations with TBM
                           and non-TBM . As part the project design finalization, measures were taken to help prevent
                           negative environmental and social impacts, such as the optimization of the layout of the
                           underground line (e.g., diversion to avoid affecting the archaeological site of Huaca San Marcos)
                           and relocation of ventilation shafts and stations (e.g., relocation of the July 28 station, adjustment
                           of ventilation well to avoid reserved zone of the archaeological site of Puruchuco).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental Impact Assessment (ESIA), including an Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP), has been developed for the Project. The ESIA was developed by a
                           consortium of consultant firms based upon Terms of Reference approved by MTC’s Directorate
                           General on Socio-Environmental Matters (DGASA) and the ESIA and the Project environmental
                           license was issued by DGASA in November 2013. The ESMP consists of numerous specific
                           environmental and social mitigation and monitoring programs. A supplement to ESIA was
                           developed to address requirements from the IFIs (primarily IADB and World Bank) including
                           information on alternatives evaluation, select identified environmental impacts and management
                           measures. The concession agreement has extensive environmental, health and safety (EHS)
                           requirements including: (i) compliance with all applicable Peruvian regulatory requirements,
                           Project ESIA (and ESMP) and environmental permit issued by DGASA, (ii) development and
                           implementation of EHS Management Systems, (iii) compliance with IFIs environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           requirements established for the project, (iv) prepare EHS performance reports on a routing basis,
                           (v) present in each final design document (EDI) specific EHS requirements to address final design,
                           (vi) provide EHS training to workers, (vii) obtain any required archeological or cultural resource
                           permits and implement measures to mitigate project impacts on such resources as required by law,
                           and (viii) maintain insurance policies in relation to project EHS risks. Part of the final design
                           documents (EDIs in Spanish) for each project segment/part, includes environmental, health and
                           safety measures which will be established based upon the concessionaire overall EMS and HSMS
                           (includes the ESMP in Project EIA) and then modified, if needed to reflect specific characteristics
                           of a given component (e.g., station). A common Operational Manual is being developed by both
                           the IDB and World Bank, eventually to be adopted by Government. This Operations Manual will
                           establish the division of responsibilities in terms of monitoring and supervision for all financiers
                           involved in the project.

                           A resettlement policy framework called the PACRI (Plan de Compensación y Reasentamiento
                           Involuntario) was prepared with the ESIA according to Peruvian regulations. The PACRI
                           including a compensation framework (Plan de Emprendimiento Económico) and social
                           management plan was reviewed by the World Bank. The PACRI is in accordance with World
                           Bank safeguard policies and was published by the Infoshop on November 24, 2014 together with
                           the ESIA, and supplement to ESIA on February 11, 2015. Detailed resettlement action plans
                           consistent with the PACRI are being developed and implemented by AATE in phases as project


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                           designs are finalized. A detailed resettlement action plan for Phase 1A (PACRI 1A) to document
                           land acquisition to date and to address the displacement of informal businesses has been prepared
                           and disclosed by the Bank and the Borrower.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PACRI for the next phase 1B is expected to be completed by the end of May 2015 according
                           to current project schedule. AATE is responsible for resettlement plan implementation and has
                           also developed land acquisition and resettlement experience during the construction of Lima
                           Metro Line 1.

                           Responsibilities for project’s environmental management are with the government and the
                           concessionaire. AATE is the responsible governmental entity under the Project loan for
                           environment matters, including project supervision, coordinating environmental management of
                           works to clear infrastructure interferences along the alignment and traffic management during
                           construction environmental management. OSITRAN is responsible for supervision of
                           environmental health and safety aspects under the concession contract, and is hiring an
                           international consultant firm to support project supervision including environmental health and
                           safety aspects. DGASA was responsible for review and approval of the Project ESIA (issuance of
                           environmental permit) and for subsequent supervision of the project environmental permit. The
                           Ministry of Culture is responsible for approving activities involving archeologic resources and
                           associated permitting if required. AATE has some existing capacity related to environmental
                           aspects (e.g., with Metro Line 1), which are being supplemented as part of AATE overall plans for
                           project management support. Initial institutional strengthening and coordination activities for
                           AATE have been developed by the Bank and all such measures will be formulized in the Project
                           Operation Manual in conjunction with the other IFIs (see below). OSITRAN has experience in
                           supervision of large construction works and will hire an international consulting firm to assist in
                           the supervision of this Project concession agreement, and the Terms of Reference include
                           reference to environmental aspects. The Bank has provided OSITRAN ideas to improve the level
                           of effort and technical capacity related to supervision of environmental health and safety aspects in
                           the concession contract. AATE and OSITRAN responsibilities and capacity building activities will
                           be established in the Project Operation Manual, developed in conjunction among the IFIs (in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           particular IADB and World Bank). The concessionaire is responsible for Project construction and
                           operation and maintenance environmental health and safety requirements as established under the
                           concession contact. The concessionaire has been developing and establishing their environmental
                           health and safety team as part of their pre-construction planning and design work. Principal
                           members of the concessionaire consortium have strong experience with environmental health and
                           safety management in metro and large construction projects. The concessionaire is currently well
                           advanced in developing their Environmental Management System and Health and Safety
                           Management System consistent with international standards as required in the concession
                           agreement. The development of the EHS management system components and other applicable
                           concessionaire requirements will be documented and incorporated as part of the Project Operation
                           Manual.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Various public consultation meetings/events were performed in August and September 2013
                           associated with the ESIA finalization. The environmental licensing process involved stakeholders
                           from district and provincial municipalities in the Project area the regional Governments of Lima
                           and Callao. Eight (8) public consultations on the Project and ESIA were held in August and
                           September 2013. Participation ranged from approximately 35 to 110 persons, and the consultation
                           consisted of presentation of project description and ESIA (potential impacts, proposed mitigation


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           measures and monitoring programs), stakeholder comments and questions, and responses to
                           comments. Additionally, AATE undertook information events and established an Information
                           Center to provide information and collect stakeholder comments. Stakeholder input was also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           received as part of the development of the Metro Network Plan for Greater Lima and Callao and
                           the Metro Line 2 Feasibility Study. Additional stakeholder engagement will be performed during
                           project construction and operation as established in the Project ESMP and concessionaire
                           stakeholder engagement plans. The Bank is also working with AATE to undertake routine
                           proactive information disclosure on project status to local stakeholders, and will be established as
                           part of the Project Operation Manual.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     24-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  24-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     16-Apr-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                            01-Nov-2013
                           Comments: ESIA was first disclosed in November 2013 and subsequently published with the
                                         signed Concession Contract on April 28, 2014. A supplemental ESIA was disclosed
                                         as a draft in March 2015.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     24-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  24-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         //
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      //
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?

                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Georges Bianco Darido


                                                                       Page 11 of 12
                         Approved By
                         Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (SA)   Date: 21-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/     Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)        Date: 21-Apr-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 12 of 12
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
