                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC19763

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Georgia                        Project ID:      P161435
                            Project Name:   Improving Preschool Education in Georgia through Social Accountability
                                            Processes
                            Team Leader(s): Josef S. Trommer,Nino Kutateladze
                            Estimated Date 15-Dec-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGOOS                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.68                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Global Partnership for Social Accountability                                                0.68
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's Development Objective is to improve the delivery of (and resource allocation to) pre-
                           school education services through collaborative monitoring and feedback (benchmarking) activities
                           between civic, educational and municipal partners.
                           C. Project Description


                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The seven municipalities that have been previously seleceted are: Lanchkhuti, Ozurgeti, Gori,
                           Khashuri, Marneuli, Akhaltsikhe, and Rustavi. The 20 municipalieties left will be selected based on
                           the following criteria: i) mix of small and large municipalities, ii)municipalities with mix of urban
                           and rural populations, iii) municipalities with large ethnic minority populations, and iv)
                           municipalities where the applicant organizations have already established strong professional ties and
                           have gained substantial trust among local stakeholders.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Beneficiary has experience working with indenegous peoples in Gergia.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No             Municipalities imapcted by the project will be
                                                                             selected based on the following criteria: i) mix
                                                                             of small and large municipalities, ii)
                                                                             municipalities with mix of urban and rural
                                                                             populations, iii) municipalities with large ethnic
                                                                             minority populations, and iv) municipalities
                                                                             where the applicant organizations have already
                                                                             established strong professional ties and have
                                                                             gained substantial trust among local
                                                                             stakeholders.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):          Name: Josef S. Trommer,Nino Kutateladze
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                 Date: 02-Nov-2016
                           Practice Manager/        Name: Asmeen M. Khan (PMGR)                          Date: 07-Nov-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
