                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSA17649
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  09-May-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                14-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           OECS Countries               Project ID:              P152117
    Project Name:                      OECS Regional Tourism Competitiveness (P152117)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Raha Shahidsaless
    Estimated Appraisal                19-May-2016                  Estimated Board          06-Apr-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GTC04                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                        Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           26.00                          Total Bank Financing: 26.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                             0.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                          6.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  20.00
    Total                                                                                                        26.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objectives are to (i) facilitate the movement of tourists within the OECS region using
    ferries; (ii) improve selected touristic sites; and (iii) strengthen implementation capacity for regional tourism
    market development.
    3. Project Description
    1. Description

    A. Concept
    The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Regional Tourism Competitiveness Project will include
    Grenada, St. Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) and St. Lucia. As such, as much as possible, the information


                                                    Page 1 of 10
presented in this document will provide data relevant to these countries. There is an ongoing dialogue with
Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and St. Kitts and Nevis who may wish similar support from the WBG. The
total cost of the project is estimated at US$26 million.

The approach proposed under this project is innovative, as it encourages a regional approach to tackle regional
constraints in a coordinated manner while, at the same time, respecting and promoting the national tourism
vision and unique positioning of each island. This approach would increase the likelihood of the project’s
success. On the one hand, it allows the countries in the region to come together to tackle the challenges to
tourism at a regional level and to carry-out joint tourism marketing and attraction of new markets; and, on the
other hand it provides them with the space to invest in unique assets and rehabilitate identified main tourism
attractions products that will highlight the uniqueness of each islands).

B. Description

The project will have the following components common to all participating countries:

Component 1: Facilitation of the Movement of People (US$ 2,520,000)

Sub-Component 1.1. At national level, this sub-component will provide: (i) infrastructure investment (works) to
turn domestic port terminals into international ones in Grenada (in Carriacou) and St. Vincent and the
Grenadines (in mainland St. Vincent and Union Island) and; (ii) provision of goods, including scanners and
other IT needs for immigration and customs clearance for St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines for the
mentioned ports. At regional level, this sub-component will provide: (i) TA to support: the review of the
existing regional immigration system (CARISEC); the review of existing OECS Treaty for the creation of a
single economic space and identification of potential regulatory and institutional gaps on the free movement of
people and goods, including port charges; develop a plan for the implementation of a Schengen Style single
space; and (ii) TA to support the transition of the region to a common customs and immigration clearance
platform for persons, by supporting the region in identifying and agreeing on a common platform, and IT
support for implementing Sail Clear for ferries .

Sub-Component 1.2. This regional sub-component will provide: (i) gap financing for the operation of the ferries;
(ii) IT support for information technology software and hardware required for a centralized ferry scheduling
system; (iii) TA to review technical standards and enforcement for water transport, including safety standards;
and (iv) TA to support dialogue between the governments and the ferry operators.

Component 2: Pilot Tourism Investments (US$ 18,540,000)

As a first step, this country-specific component will finance a number of TA interventions to support the anchor
tourism products, including feasibility studies, technical, engineering, any social and environmental assessments
needed, as well as rehabilitation designs; and marketing, business, commercialization and management plans for
investments identified.

As a second step, this component will finance works and TA for the following selected pilot tourism products in
each country: (i) the rehabilitation of Fort George historic site; (ii) reinforcement of the marine-based tourism
product offering in St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and limited rehabilitation of Fort Charlotte on the mainland;
and (iii) Enhancement and Beautification of strategic sites and attractions, improved logistics, and development
of a tour for downtown Castries in St. Lucia.

Component 3: Market Development and Promotion Capacity-Building (US$2,790,000).



                                                Page 2 of 10
Sub-Component 3.1. This country-specific sub-component will provide TA and goods to support preparing and
refining of sustainable tourism development plans and policies, and their implementation, including: (i) TA to
build capacity at a country level to carry out market segmentation; prepare projections of financial and
economic impact; carry out environmental planning and management of the tourism sector; and prepare
monitoring and evaluation framework; and (ii) The provision of goods including IT support to strengthen the
website design, outreach, and social media presence of each country

Sub-Component 3.2. This regional sub-component will support the implementation of a regional market
development program to attract new markets, including: (i) TA to identify new markets; develop a common
marketing strategy, including a common digital/social e-tourism communication strategy; negotiate with airlines
from a new destination; receive training and collaborate with the private sector to prepare promotional material
for representation in trade fairs; (ii) operating support for participation in four joint trade fairs as one destination;
and (iii) goods for the implementation of an IT platform to drive the countries’ joint travel marketing.

Component 4: Project Implementation Support (US$2,150,000):

This country-specific component supports the overall implementation of the project. It will provide: (i) capacity-
building/staffing of the existing Project Coordination Units (PCUs) on project management, procurement,
financial management, safeguards, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and technical expertise; (ii) consulting
services for project audit in each country, if needed; (iii) technical assistance support to the participating
countries to carry out a robust impact evaluation, to measure the impact of the project on jobs in a gender
disaggregated way; and (iv) other operating costs to be defined prior to Appraisal.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Cristina Elizabeth Coirolo( GSU04 )
 M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong( GSU04 )
 Michael J. Darr( GEN04 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             The proposed activities under Component 1 and 2
                                                                 will involve the rehabilitation of sites and facilities.
                                                                 Given the potential impact of these activities, the
                                                                 Environmental Assessment Policy has been
                                                                 triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes             Works may be executed in ecologically sensitive
                                                                 areas, or in protected areas; therefore this Policy is
                                                                 triggered as a precaution.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                 potential access roads rehabilitation will be carried-
                                                                 out within the existing right of way. No extension
                                                                 of roads is foreseen, and they are not located in
                                                                 forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                          Yes             This policy has been triggered as a precaution to

                                                   Page 3 of 10
                                                     allow for incidental pesticide use (e.g. termite
                                                     treatment for building foundations or extermination
                                                     prior to building rehabilitation), as needed, by
                                                     licensed registered professional contractors only.
                                                     The use or purchase of significant amounts of
                                                     pesticide will be excluded in the screening process
                                                     described in the Environmental and Social
                                                     Management Framework (ESMF). Accordingly no
                                                     separate Pest Management Plan is needed, rather
                                                     the ESMF will include appropriate procedures in
                                                     the form of a generic standardized EMP for
                                                     incorporation into contract clauses.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         This policy is triggered because the program is
                                                     likely to finance the rehabilitation of existing
                                                     cultural heritage sites (historic forts) which are in a
                                                     dilapidated stage. During preparation the team will
                                                     work with the ministries of culture of the respective
                                                     countries, as well as with local cultural heritage
                                                     experts in the region - as recommended by the
                                                     regional safeguards adviser - to define the
                                                     procedures for restoration, in accordance with the
                                                     Bank's policies and national legislation. The ESMF
                                                     will include the procedures applicable for reviewing
                                                     the sub-projects related to physical cultural
                                                     resources aspects, including additional assessment
                                                     as needed and substantial public participation in
                                                     final project design, and an EA will be prepared to
                                                     include a Physical Cultural Resources Management
                                                     Plan (PCRMP).
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          Policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is not
                                                     triggered. In the context of preparation of other
                                                     regional OECS projects in Saint Lucia, Saint
                                                     Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada,
                                                     screening, background research, and consultations
                                                     were conducted by the World Bank to determine
                                                     whether Indigenous Populations were present.
                                                     These screening activities confirmed that while
                                                     populations who claim historical indigenous
                                                     heritage do exist in the OECS (in the area of Sandy
                                                     Bay, Saint Vincent as well as in the area of
                                                     Choiseul in Saint Lucia), these groups do not have
                                                     distinctive customary cultural, economic, social or
                                                     political institutions that are separate from the
                                                     dominant society and culture. Nor do they have an
                                                     indigenous language different from the official
                                                     language of Saint Vincent and Saint Lucia
                                                     (English). Therefore, it was concluded that these
                                                     communities do not retain the minimum
                                                     characteristics necessary to claim indigenous group


                                          Page 4 of 10
                                                                affiliation under Bank Policy OP/BP 4.10.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes           Works under Components 1 and 2 will involve
                                                                small scale restoration efforts and upgrading of
                                                                existing tourism sites (e.g. (i) Fort George historic
                                                                site and access in Grenada; (ii) Fort Charlotte site
                                                                and upgrades to anchorage site infrastructure to
                                                                enhance competitiveness of a flagship Marine-
                                                                based Tourism sector in St Vincent and the
                                                                Grenadines; and (iii) Infrastructure for improved
                                                                urban mobility and tourism development in Castries
                                                                in St Lucia). While private land acquisition is not
                                                                anticipated, final designs have not yet been
                                                                developed, and rehabilitation works may lead to
                                                                permanent or temporary land acquisition,
                                                                resettlement, and/or economic displacement.
                                                                Therefore, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy is
                                                                triggered, and a single, regional Resettlement
                                                                Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed for the
                                                                project and disclosed prior to project appraisal. The
                                                                RPF will provide guidelines for the development of
                                                                social safeguards instruments as needed (e.g.
                                                                Resettlement Action Plans, Temporary
                                                                Resettlement Plans, Compensation Plans) to
                                                                mitigate land acquisition and/or other social issues
                                                                that may arise from works undertaken during the
                                                                course of project implementation. The RPF will
                                                                include country specific chapters reflecting country-
                                                                specific legal legislation and the organization of the
                                                                respective implementation units.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No            This policy should not be triggered, as the program
                                                                will not finance any rehabilitation or construction of
                                                                dams, nor will it support investments which rely on
                                                                services of dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                TBD - this policy may or may not be triggered.
    7.50                                                        Currently under consideration.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No            This policy should not be triggered as the program
                                                                will not finance activities in disputed areas as
                                                                defined by the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Works under Components 1 and 2 will involve small scale restoration efforts and upgrading of existing tourism
    sites (e.g. historic fort rehabilitation, ferry pilot and terminal upgrades, and downtown redevelopment) rather
    than large scale green-field investments.In accordance with Bank environmental safeguards requirements, the
    project is classified as Category B, and the policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered.


                                                   Page 5 of 10
On the social safeguards side, private land acquisition is unlikely in the case of rehabilitation efforts on existing
footprints, but final designs have not yet been developed. The works may lead to discrete land acquisition and,
therefore, the WB’s Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) is triggered and a regional Resettlement
Policy Framework will be developed to guide the development of any social safeguards instruments that may
become necessary to mitigate social impacts during the course of project implementation. The nature and extent
of impacts will only become apparent once the final designs have been developed and associated social
assessments conducted. In the absence of final designs, a preliminary screening of proposed works has been
conducted at all sub-project sites to assess potential social risks and impacts associated with these works. These
potential social impacts include: discrete amounts of land acquisition, resettlement, and economic displacement.
In the event that any of these issues arise, they are likely to be primarily temporary in nature, and can be readily
mitigated using standard measures (e.g. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Compensation Plan, Relocation Plan,
etc.). Additional social issues that may become relevant include: ensuring adequate access to bathroom facilities
in the event that works block access to public bathroom facilities; ensuring adequate safety measures for
pedestrian/automobile traffic management during any road works and/or sidewalk improvement; and ensuring
accessibility for physically disabled individuals via the installation of ramps and other measures as necessary, at
sub-project sites undergoing infrastructure construction and upgrading.

On the environmental safeguards side, given the potential impact of these small scale restoration activities, the
Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered. The Natural Habitats Policy (OP 4.04) has
been triggered as some of the proposed works will be carried out in ecologically sensitive areas or protected
areas, such as, the Tobago Cays Marine Park in the Grenadines. The Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) has
been triggered to allow for incidental pesticide use (e.g. termite treatment for building foundations, or
extermination prior to building rehabilitation), if needed. Any significant use or purchase of pesticides will be
excluded by screening in the ESMF, therefore a separate Pest Management Plan will not be required and instead
the EMF will include appropriate procedures in the form of a generic standardized EMP for incorporation into
contract clauses. Finally, The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) has been triggered, given that the
project aims to rehabilitate sites of historic importance, and a separate Environmental Assessment will be
prepared during implementation to include a PCRMP.

Overall, there are no negative large scale, significant, or irreversible impacts identified; rather, the project
restoration works and any associated conservation measures should result in positive impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Regional stimulation of tourism activities will result in benefits and positive impacts, both from increased job
creation and increased visibility and exposure of eco-tourism, historical tourism, and other activities that
highlight and showcase the natural habitat and physical cultural resources of the OECS region.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Designs for civil works, TA for pilot ferry, and EAs for rehabilitation works will include alternative evaluations
as part of the evaluation and design efforts, to avoid or minimize potentially adverse social and environmental
impacts. Efforts to maximize the positive benefits of the works will be sought during design and
implementation.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
IIn the absence of final designs and a full understanding of the potential impacts, a single, regional Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) and ESMF will be developed for the project and disclosed prior to appraisal with the
collaboration and participation of the PCUs in each country.


                                                  Page 6 of 10
The RPF will provide guidelines for the development of social safeguards instruments as needed (e.g.
Resettlement Action Plans, Temporary Resettlement Plans, Compensation Plans) to mitigate land acquisition
and/or other social issues that may arise from works undertaken during the course of project implementation.
The RPF will clarify the resettlement principles, organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be applied
to RAPs (and/or other social safeguards instruments as needed) and will include country specific chapters
reflecting country-specific legal legislation and the organization of the respective implementation units. The
RPF will also provide a preliminary assessment of likely social risks and impacts in the absence of finalized
designs.

Similarly, the ESMF will provide a preliminary assessment of impacts and mitigation measures through
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for relatively simple situations (e.g. small civil works) and to define
criteria for more detailed Environmental Assessments (EAs) as needed (e.g. for historic rehabilitation works).
The ESMF will account for natural habitats when screening for future sub-projects to determine if additional
assessment and specialized mitigation measures would be required, once detailed designs are known during
implementation. Finally, the ESMF will include the procedures applicable for reviewing the sub-projects related
to physical cultural resources aspects, including additional assessment as needed and substantial public
participation in final project design. TORs for future work will specify coordination with the Cultural Ministries
and with regional and local expert advice and assistance to develop the EMPs and renovation plans for key
projects. Since there are also road works and other activities which may involve excavation, a “chance-find”
procedure will also be included in the ESMF.

The PCU will serve as overall project coordinator for the Project undertaking the tasks of evaluation,
supervision and implementation. Grenada, St Lucia, and St Vincent and the Grenadines have designated staff
who have attended WBG training sessions and are currently involved with other Bank projects. Pre-appraisal
missions by the Safeguards Specialists have engaged these local staff and discussed the need for their support in
preparing the ESMF and RPF. Meetings with these staff as well as key regional experts has laid the groundwork
for technical and administrative support to the Bank if any additional assessment visits or coordination meetings
are needed prior to appraisal. If desired a separate environmental consultant (EC) or cultural heritage specialist
(CHS) may also be contracted by the PCU to support field or desktop assessments, screening, contracting,
supervision, and reporting. The EC would support the PCU in ensuring the implementation of the mitigation
measures and the coordination of environmental management activities (monitoring, enforcement, audits and
inspection) of the Project.

With respect to borrower capacity to manage social risks and impacts and implement social safeguards
measures, the PCU in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is staffed with three dedicated social development
specialists who have experience in the implementation of OP4.12 in the context of other Bank financed projects,
and who have received capacity building training on social safeguards by the World Bank. The PCU in Saint
Lucia has experience with the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP4.12), also through the implementation of
other Bank financed projects, and core members of the PCU have received capacity building in the
implementation of OP4.12. While the Saint Lucia PCU does not currently have a dedicated social development
specialist, they are in the process of hiring an individual to fill this role. The Bank will work closely with the
PCU to build the capacity of the social development specialist as needed. For Grenada, the existing capacity to
manage social safeguards in the PCU is weak, and the Bank recommends that a social specialist is hired on a
part time, retainer basis to manage the social safeguards aspects of this project, which are not anticipated to be
intensive/complicated. The World Bank will work closely with the PCU to build capacity of the social
development specialist as needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key individuals and agencies will be consulted during preparation of the draft RPF and ESMF. The respective


                                                Page 7 of 10
   drafts will be disclosed to the public on the government’s website and delivered to community groups, agencies
   and ministries for comment. The final draft of the RPF and ESMF will be revised to include record of these
   consultations. Additional extensive public consultations will be specified in the TOR for EAs and PCRMPs of
   rehabilitation works involving physical cultural resources.

   The ESMF and RPF will contain guidance on the process and mechanisms for consultation with project
   stakeholders and Project Affected Peoples (PAPs), as well as guidance on the establishment and implementation
   of Grievance Redress Mechanisms. The majority of works contemplated involve the restoration and upgrading
   of existing tourism sites, and impacts to stakeholders will relate to temporary inconveniences, and potential land
   acquisition and/or resettlement associated with construction activities, and will be managed to minimize impacts
   to the greatest extent possible. Advanced public notifications will inform potentially affected persons, who, if
   necessary, will be compensated prior to works. Relevant line ministries will assist the respective PCUs in these
   efforts.

   When subproject-specific safeguards instruments, (Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), or Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAPs)) are required, specific stakeholders will be identified and public meetings will be
   conducted to enable the reflection of stakeholder concerns in project design. These requirements will be
   incorporated into the TORs for EIAs and SIAs. In the case of land acquisition, PAPs will be consulted in the
   identification, development, and implementation of the mitigation measures.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             13-May-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          13-May-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Grenada                                                                        13-May-2016
   Comments:
PHENVCTRY




   St. Lucia                                                                      13-May-2016
   Comments:
PHENVCTRY




   St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                                 13-May-2016
   Comments:
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-May-2016
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                       13-May-2016
   "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




   Grenada                                                                         13-May-2016
   Comments:
PHRESCTRY




   St. Lucia                                                                       13-May-2016
   Comments:
PHRESCTRY




   St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                                  13-May-2016
   Comments:
   Pest Management Plan
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       A
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-May-2016

                                                   Page 8 of 10
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-May-2016
 "In country" Disclosure
PHPESTCTRY




 Grenada                                                                    13-May-2016
 Comments:
PHPESTCTRY




 St. Lucia                                                                  13-May-2016
 Comments:
PHPESTCTRY




 St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                             13-May-2016
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]      NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []       NA          [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management               Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes []    No [X]      NA          []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes []    No []       NA          [X]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No []       TBD         [X]


                                                Page 9 of 10
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No []       TBD   [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes []      No [X]      NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes []      No [X]      NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Raha Shahidsaless
         Approved By:
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Thomas A. Vis (PMGR)           Date: 14-Mar-2017




                                                        Page 10 of 10
