                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16908

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Nepal                          Project ID:       P159085
                            Project Name:        Public Procurement Improvement Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Zafrul Islam
                            Estimated Date       31-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO06                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%), Managing
                                                 for development results (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.8                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                     0.8
                              Nepal Public Financial Mgmt Support                                                            4
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve project implementation and service delivery
                           to the citizens progressively with enhanced public procurement performance, largely focusing on the
                           five key sector agencies.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is a part of the public procurement improvement initiative planned for an
                           intervention of about five years. Nevertheless, recognizing the availability of funds from the Multi-
                           Donor Trust Fund (MDTF), at this stage, only part of the intervention with a duration of about 30
                           months is being processed. Addressing the priority issues of PPMO and five key sector agencies
                           (KSAs7), the project will concentrate on three major areas: (i) public procurement governance and
                           oversight; (ii) procurement capacity development and institutionalization; and (iii) procurement
                           performance monitoring and open contracting with e-GP platform. In consultation with the PPMO,
                           these KSAs have been chosen on the basis of their large share of annual capital expenditures and the
                           numbers of contract these agencies let out in a year. In due course of time, with the availability of
                         additional fund from the MDTF, the remaining activities under the above three components will be
                         further undertaken for other sector agencies as well.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The details of components are as follows:

                         Component 1 ? Public Procurement Governance and Oversight: This component would aim to
                         improve governance and accountability of the public procurement system with necessary oversights.
                         This would help reinforce the policy reform processes and practices of PPMO including its own
                         strengthening so that it can more effectively fulfill the mandated oversight functions. Key areas
                         would cover PPMO; public integrity; policy reform actions; grievance redress mechanism;
                         procurement audits; information disclosure; right to information functions; etc. Major sub-
                         components are described below.

                         i.      Strengthening PPMO: This subcomponent would strengthen PPMO. In order to play its role
                         more effectively, PPMO needs substantial enhancement in its structure and operational model
                         including its set up, type of staffing, capacity, skills mix, and inputs of consultants as and when
                         necessary. This will be done in a way to be compatible with the future needs taking cognizance of the
                         rapidly changing technology in the sector, with specific reference to advanced procurement
                         technologies, like e-GP.

                         ii.      Reinforcing public integrity and governance: The subcomponent would strengthen public
                         integrity, governance, and accountability of the public procurement system, and would be achieved
                         by implementing a number of accountability actions. Key areas of activities would include:
                         implementing grievance redress mechanism; post procurement audits by Auditor General?s Office;
                         public disclosure of invitation of bids and bidding outcomes with brief reasons for the rejection of
                         bids; disclosure of procurement processes and plans; validity of contract data; red flags in
                         procurement; and implementing demand side of good governance including civic engagement,
                         possible third party monitoring, and citizen oversight.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii.     Advancing policy reforms: This would help update the policy reform actions with secondary
                         legislations. Activities include: updating the secondary legislations; standardization of procurement
                         procedures; updating standard bidding documents including preparation of remaining model
                         documents; preparation of bid evaluation guidelines, contract management manual and technical
                         notes including specific to sec toral needs.

                         Component 2 ? Procurement Capacity Development and Institutionalization: The component would
                         help the above five Key Sector Agencies- KSA and six Other Sector Agencies- OSA to improve
                         organizational capacity with a view to enhance their performance in conducting and managing
                         procurement. Attempts would include progressive institutionalization with greater sustainability of
                         the procurement training system. While the component is dedicated to procurement management and
                         capacity development, it will have direct linkages with Component 3 in specific reference to the
                         performance measurement resulting out of the activities of Component 2. The subcomponents are
                         described in the following paragraphs:

                         i.      Procurement management improvement: This subcomponent would help improve
                         procurement management at the key sectoral agencies. Major areas of activities would include:
                         operationalization of dedicated and functional procurement units; strengthening procurement units
                         with qualified staff and equipment; reinforcing agencies? internal audit of procurement; exposure to
                         innovative and proven practices; and twinning with better functioning institutions in other countries
                         of the region.
                         ii.      Capacity building and institutionalization: This subcomponent would aim to enhance
                         procurement capacity of the key sectors with greater institutionalization. Workforce Study in Nepal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has identified over 47,000 procuring entities (cost centers) under about 350 agencies. It is estimated
                         that the selected five KSA would be having over 500 cost centers excluding Village Councils. The
                         total number of procurement entities under six OSA is estimated to be around 350 (excluding
                         schools, colleges etc.). The major activities include capacity enhancing of key sector agencies and
                         other sector agencies by designing and implementing massive training program of various types of
                         targeted long and short training courses to cover audiences (policy level/entry civil servants,
                         procurement officers, estimators, auditors and accountants, bidding community, e-procurement
                         learning, etc.). A network with PPMO, the National Administrative Staff College (NASC) and its
                         affiliates in the regions, the Ministry of Local Development and its Local Development Training
                         Academy will be developed to support gradual operationalization of e-learning. Under the
                         component a testing and certification/accreditation program would also be established and made
                         operational.
                         iii.     Citizen engagement and behavioral change communication: The subcomponent would deal
                         with possible citizen engagement in the monitoring of public procurement including behavioral
                         change among the stakeholders that participate in public procurement services (for example,
                         procurement officials, bidding community, beneficiaries, etc.). Specific attention will be provided in
                         the area of gender sensitivity and the formation of civic engagement forums. Activities would
                         include: formation of citizen engagement forum, developing communication strategy; awareness
                         program for agencies/beneficiaries; education program; advocacy campaign at the grass root
                         decentralized levels; social media campaign, engagement of beneficiary groups; and government-
                         contractors? forum.

                         Component 3 ? Performance Monitoring and Open Contracting with e-GP Platform: This component
                         would help monitoring and evaluation of performance of the public procurement system, in particular
                         reference to the five KSA. The e-GP system is already there in the PPMO. Also, the detailed
                         requirements of open contracting has been studied. In the proposed operation, the performance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measurement and open contracting modules will be developed and integrated within the e-GP
                         framework. The focus would be on the measurement of performance by developing a set of
                         indicators with its data collection procedures and analysis including open contracting, specifically
                         using the e-GP platform to ensure better integrity of data with efficient use of time at the working
                         levels of the agencies. Subcomponents are described below.
                         i.       Developing and implementing procurement performance measurement system: This
                         subcomponent would help in developing a set of key performance indicators to measure efficiency,
                         transparency, effectiveness, and value for money aspects of the public procurement system in
                         general, and five KSA in particular. Once the indicators are developed, a specific module would be
                         introduced with necessary features within the existing e-GP system of PPMO, with direct
                         connectivity to the key sectoral agencies who actually implement procurement. It would be an on-
                         line automated system, without requiring duplication of data entry as procurement events occur; the
                         system would automatically capture those data. Also, PPMO would have a dedicated wing for
                         research and analysis of those indicators, and the performance reports at national as well as agency
                         level would be published on the website.

                         ii.     Implementing open contracting: The aim is to make the procurement data more open,
                         accessible and useful to policy makers, development partners, civil society, and private sector for
                         development effectiveness, using principles of open contracting. Key activities would include:
                         creating/expanding the public database with database already on e-GP sites; standardizing contract
                           data with key features; incorporating visualization features including mechanism to receive and
                           respond to public comments/complaints; facilitating dialogue between PPMO and key implementing
                           agencies; capacity building to increase coverage of procurement information and using contracting
Public Disclosure Copy




                           data for policy making; creating tool to track individual department?s publication of contracting data;
                           leveraging non-state actors to monitor public contracting and contractor performance at the local
                           level.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project is located at Kathmandu and involves mainly reform actions relating to
                           institutional strengthening and capacity development with the use of IT tools. It does not involve any
                           civil works or similar activities and to be assigned Category ➢❨ C➢❨ for Environment. The
                           interventions under the project are not expected to have considerable environmental impact.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not Applicable as no Safeguard Policies is triggered.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (GEN06)
                           Jun Zeng (GSU06)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Zafrul Islam
                           Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                                            Date: 03-May-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Felipe Goya (PMGR)                                           Date: 03-May-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
