                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA13916
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bolivia                            Project ID:   P144597
                            Project Name:     BO Road Sector Capacity Development Project (P144597)
                            Task Team         Gylfi Palsson
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         15-Sep-2015                        Estimated   12-Nov-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI04                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), General transportation sector
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (90%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     225.00           Total Bank Financing:               225.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   166.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              59.00
                              Total                                                                                   225.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance Bolivia's national road sector management
                           and improve the condition of the country's primary paved road network targeted under the project.


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         a)       The World Bank credit and loan will finance PDO supporting ABC’s capacity development
                         and strengthen management and preservation of Bolivia’s primary paved road network through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing of a handful of performance-based and lump-sum contracts (referred to as Contratos de
                         Rehabilitación y Cumplimiento de Estándares - CReCE). ABC has declared its intention of managing
                         the whole of its pavedprimary road network through CReCE– as it is now and as it develops. Project
                         objectives will be achieved through two complementary components implemented in parallel.
                         b)       The project was at concept stage conceived as a Program for Results (PforR) preparation.
                         Following assessment of procurement systems it was found that pursuing PforR would require
                         upfront significant amendments to specific procurement aspects that the Government was not in a
                         position to implement prior to project approval. It was therefore mutually agreed to convert the
                         preparation to an IPF.
                         Component A. Capacity Development - USD10 million
                         c)       Specifically, the Project will finance through disbursement-linked indicators (DLI)
                         achievement of the following.
                         a)       DLI 1. Implementation and use of an integrated financial management information system
                         USD2.5 million).
                         b)       DLI 2. New bid documents (works and supervision) for roads (USD1.0 million).
                         c)       DLI 3. Update and approval of ABC’s Socio-Environmental Manual through guidelines or
                         procedures to strengthen environmental and social management (USD1.0 million).
                         d)       DLI 4. Development of a strategy for primary highway network rehabilitation planning
                         (USD1.5 million).
                         e)       The following additional activities will be financed under this component, but through
                         transactional-based disbursement (USD4.0 million).
                         a)       Support to and strengthening of ABC’s contract management.
                         b)       A Road Safety Capacity Assessment will be undertaken and disseminated.
                         c)       Training and certification by a recognized Contract Management and/or Procurement
                         Institute.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         d)       Support to developing capacity for Road Asset Management and management of
                         performance-based contracts.
                         e)       Project management activities, including audits and incremental operating costs.
                         Component B. Performance-based road contracting of paved primary network - USD215 million
                         f)       The strategic relevance of the component lies in the facts that Bolivia’s primary paved road
                         network, instrumental for cost-effective inland transport that benefits society at large, is in need of
                         systemic maintenance. The overall poor paved highway conditions require a timely and global
                         intervention to strike a better balance between expanding the primary highway network and
                         supporting its periodic and routine maintenance.
                         g)       Based on scheduled periodic preservation needs, ABC has prioritized for financing by the
                         Project the preservation through performance-based contracts of a nearly 567 km corridor in the
                         eastern region of Bolivia
                         h)       The road platform of 7 meters and 1 meter shoulders is for the most part paved with double
                         surface treatment (DST). The ADT density is about 2,000 vehicles on stretches near Santa Cruz, and
                         near the center of the corridor ADT ranges between 500-1000 vehicles. The DST sections on
                         stabilized granular base-course have some 15 to 20 years of service. The surface has had diverse
                         interventions during this time with some stretches of repaving but for the most part only routine
                         maintenance including sealing. Road sections near Santa Cruz de la Sierra have more recent and
                         extensive interventions, including some asphalt concrete (AC) repaving.
                         i)       This Component will finance 5-year CReCE civil works contracts which include all periodic


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         and routine interventions, monitoring consultancy of the work contracts, as well as consultancy
                         services related to evaluation of the performance of the CReCE contracts and contracting
                         methodology.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location is the 567 km road corridor in the eastern region of Bolivia, in the Departments of
                         Beni and Santa Cruz, specifically the north-south corridor linking the Departmental capitals of Santa
                         Cruz de la Sierra – Trinidad. The road constitutes part of Route 004 of the primary road network.
                         This road was paved more than 15 years ago and any negative environmental impacts or
                         archaeological findings occurred during the first road construction 30 years ago. Project activities
                         will be on current alignment in a highly heterogeneous intervened forest, modified since the
                         construction of the road by the activities carried out in the area. The project site area is within the
                         river system of the Amazon Basin, specifically in the basin of the river Itenez.

                         The Project will support ABC’s in preparing and putting in place the initial performance based
                         contracts for the paved road network. These contracts incorporate all interventions needed during a
                         5-year period, including some road rehabilitation, sealing and patching, repaving and all maintenance
                         requirements to achieve a pre-described level of service of the road. The interventions will only be
                         done on existing road alignments.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Angela Maria Caballero Espinoza (GSURR)
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
                         Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            In accordance with OP/BP 4.01 this Project has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      categorized as a Category B project. Potential
                                                                     environmental impacts are considered low, temporary and
                                                                     reversible.

                                                                     Any significant negative environmental impacts that
                                                                     might occur would have already occurred fifteen years
                                                                     ago during the initial paving of the Trinidad – Santa Cruz
                                                                     road.

                                                                     Positive impacts may include:
                                                                     i) improved access to transportation for passengers and
                                                                     transport of goods, (ii) improvement of road safety, and
                                                                     iii) improved communication between isolated regions.

                                                                     Negative potential impacts might include cutting of
                                                                     vegetation, soil erosion, changes in water quality and
                                                                     flows of streams, etc.

                                                                     While the road segments targeted by the project are
                                                                     known, under the CReCE methodology what is bid are


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                        conceptual designs and detailed designs are done by
                                                        selected contractors. For this purpose, an
                                                        Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        prepared and Environmental Management Plans (EMP)
                                                        will be prepared on bases of final designs.

                                                        However, ABC prepared on basis of the conceptual
                                                        designs EMPs for MMyA (Ministry of Environment and
                                                        Water) approval and required environmental licenses have
                                                        been issued.

                                                        Bidding documents to select contractor will include
                                                        requirements in terms of environmental and social
                                                        specialists in the contractor’s team, etc.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   This policy was triggered to prevent that some project
                         4.04                           activities could take place in, or negatively affect, natural
                                                        habitats, even tough, most of the significant negative
                                                        environmental impacts already occurred during the first
                                                        paving of the Trinidad – Santa Cruz road, fifteen years
                                                        ago. The three roads segments to be improved under this
                                                        project are located far away from any local or national
                                                        protected area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The policy is not triggered given that Projects activities do
                                                        not involve conversion of forest lands or critical forest-
                                                        ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The policy is not triggered given that Projects activities
                                                        will not involve procurement, use or storage of pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Road weed and vegetation maintenance do not consider
                                                        the use of any kind of pesticides, chemical controls or any
                                                        similar product.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The policy is triggered to address chance findings;
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           although Projects activities will be undertaken within
                                                        existing right of way and any archaeological findings
                                                        would have been reported during the first road
                                                        construction 30 years ago.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   Two indigenous groups have been identified in project
                         BP 4.10                        area: Guarayo and Siriono.

                                                        Although neither the design of the project or social
                                                        assessment envisages impacts on the indigenous
                                                        communities, the policy is triggered and an Indigenous
                                                        Peoples Plan (IPP) has been prepared so that the IP can
                                                        participate in the project benefits.

                                                        Civil Society Organizations (CSO) and stakeholders were
                                                        consulted during the preparation of the project.



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                         Consultations with indigenous peoples Guarayo and
                                                                         Siriono included indigenous women organizations and the
                                                                         national level organizations. In addition, consultations
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         with the authorities and indigenous Siriono and Guarayo
                                                                         communities, were developed to define the components of
                                                                         IPP. The main conclusion determines that Siriono and
                                                                         Guarayo indigenous groups consider it is critical to spread
                                                                         their culture to external agents (contractors). Three
                                                                         strategic projects were defined under this consideration.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes                 Although neither land acquisition nor resettlement is
                            OP/BP 4.12                                   anticipated, the policy is triggered preventively and
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed, in
                                                                         case during the 5-year duration of the CReCE contracts a
                                                                         resettlement situation develops.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No              The policy is not triggered as Project activities do not
                            4.37                                         involve construction of dams.
                            Projects on International    No              The policy is not triggered as Project activities do not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         affect international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed         No              The policy is not triggered as Project activities do not take
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                             place in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No relevant safeguard issues are observed. From environmental perspective there appear to be no
Public Disclosure Copy




                              substantive issues. Large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are not foreseen due to the
                              project activities. In relation to the town of Loreto located in the province of Beni Marban it is
                              necessary to clarify that it is outside the area of influence of the road, in this sense, there is not any
                              protected area identified. From the social perspective, according to the social assessment, there are
                              no land acquisitions foreseen and no indication of irregular occupation on the right of way along
                              the corridor. However it was considered that, the 23 Road Maintenance Microenterprises, with a
                              total of 164 people (both male and female, household heads) operating on the road project, can be
                              affected on their labor options. Nevertheless, the impacts will depend on the results of the training
                              processes detailed in the Social Assessment as part of the Project Social Management Plan, which
                              could facilitate changes in their production-service pattern, and/or increase their chances of
                              assimilation as workers of the project. For the two indigenous people groups, the road itself is a
                              heartfelt need. Since the road has been built, they believe it helped to define their quality of life,
                              and opened many more possibilities to cover their basic necessities. In the same line, the Project is
                              seen now as a new opportunity for social and economic development. Therefore, no irreversible or
                              significant impacts have been outlined. However for the Guarayo and Sirionó indigenous people,
                              the presence of outsiders that the Project might bring, can be followed by practices that could
                              negatively affect their communities and cultures such as: adoption of disproportionate
                              consumption habits, inadequate relationships with community members, loss of local languages,
                              harassment and exploitation especially of women and eventually of children. Considering so, the
                              IPP has been participatory defined taking on account this cultural impact identified by Siriono and


                                                                           Page 5 of 10
                           Guarayo during the consultation process.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project will improve the condition of the paved primary road network project with important
                           positive effects such as: i) improved access to transportation for passengers and transport of
                           products, (ii) improvement of road safety, and iii) improved communication between isolated
                           regions. Negative impacts may include cutting of vegetation, soil erosion, changes in water quality
                           and flows of streams, etc. Improvement of roads could also indirectly affect/increase the rate of
                           road accidents. Nonetheless, the possibility of negative impacts on indigenous people could be
                           considerable. The possible new interactions due to the increase of heavy trucks and passenger
                           vehicles on the route, along with its drivers, could turn into risks for the indigenous population in
                           the area, especially the most vulnerable ones, which are women and children.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As the project is focused on preservation of existing paved primary road, alternatives have not
                           been considered for this project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Under CReCE performance-based contracting methodology, the contracts are bid out on basis of
                           conceptual design only and final designs are only prepared by the winning contractors once
                           contracted. For this reason, needed safeguard instruments are prepared as framework documents
                           and detailed plans – where needed – will only be prepared on basis of the frameworks once final
                           design is available.

                           The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared by ABC, which takes into
                           consideration the following: ABC's Environmental Manual for Roads (MAC, Manual Ambiental
                           para Carreteras) in line with WB's OP 4.01, OP/BP 4.04 and WBG EHS Guidelines; Manual de
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Dispositivos de Control de Transito; Plan de Aplicacion y Seguimiento Ambiental (PASA) y Plan
                           de Prevencion y Mitigacion, (PPM). Issues related to pedestrian health and safety, particularly
                           around populated areas, have been assessed and mitigated. Occupational health and safety
                           considerations are duly included.

                           The EMF including the Manual and PASA/PPM, has appropriate screening criteria to ensure that:
                           a) impacts on natural habitats are properly evaluated; b) includes mitigation measures to address
                           any environmental liability of past construction and/or road rehabilitation, and potential impacts of
                           increased visitors to sensitive environmental sites expected as a result of the project. Sensitive
                           issues such as environmental protection and proper use of available water sources along the road
                           have been considered as part of the Environmental Management Plan for each of the segments.
                           Also, the EMF, identifies the key environmental responsibilities for each one of the actors.

                           As a sidelight to compliance with the safeguards of the Bank and the national legislation, potential
                           of simple actions have been evaluated to improve environmental management in the municipalities
                           in the area of roads such as campaigns for better management of waste, protection of sites of
                           ecological interest, better understanding of native flora and fauna, and other actions that could
                           highlight the ecological and cultural value of the project area.

                           Even though the project has not considered land acquisitions nor involuntary resettlement of


                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                           people, ABC, as a preventive action, has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, considering
                           all the necessary elements for the preparation of RAPs in the event that future adjustments to the
                           designs have impacts on people or properties. Moreover, given the confirmation of presence of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           indigenous peoples (Guarayo y Siriono) in the project area, ABC has prepared an Indigenous
                           Peoples Plan (IPP).

                           ABC has consulted the organizations of civil society, stakeholders and both indigenous peoples
                           identified in the project area (Guarayo and Siriono). The result is acceptance of the project, and
                           interest in participating of the project benefits through the IPP The 3 main strategies for the PPI,
                           defined by Siriono and Guaryo people are:

                           1. Intercultural Dialogue and knowledge rescue to strengthen Siriono and Guarayo cultures.

                           2. Mechanisms to promote the respect to Siriono and Guarayo people and cultures.

                           3. Education for road's use and garbage management for indigenous Siriono and Guarayo
                           communities.
                           The responsibilities for supervising the environmental and social compliance of the road during
                           construction have been defined, as well as the instruments to ensure that contractors implement
                           any corrective actions identified during such supervisions.

                           ABC Environmental and Social Department (Gerencia Socio Ambiental - GSA) is responsible for
                           compliance with the WB safeguards and with the overall environmental and social supervision of
                           the Project and its compliance with the CPE (Political Constitution of the Plurinational State of
                           Bolivia), Environmental Law (Law 1333) and other applicable legislation to the sector and works.
                           It coordinates closely with the Department of Road Conservation, all aspects related to planning,
                           preparation of environmental studies, environmental compensation programs and supervision. The
                           GSA of ABC has 30 staff in La Paz for the overall country supervision of environmental and
                           social management of all types of road works (including construction of new roads and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           rehabilitation works) which is a constraint for overall environmental and social management of the
                           sector; however, in the regional offices there are 11 environmental engineers that focus on works
                           in their region. Coordination and flux of environmental documentation mostly by hand or internet
                           restrict an efficient process to manage permits, evaluations and reports. GSA complements the
                           supervision of road works with additional environmental consultants on projects as needed.

                           While project implementation is subject to WB safeguard policies, as part of technical assistance
                           targeted improvement in ABC’s Manual Socio-Ambiental para Carreteras will be supported.
                           Specifically, the project will under results-based financing support the preparation and approval of
                           guidelines or procedures for addressing the displacement of occupants of existing right-of-way as
                           a result of road rehabilitation activities; as well as preparation and approval of guidelines/
                           procedures for road rehabilitation contracts that affect indigenous peoples and their territories or
                           resources, mainstreaming gender approach and collective vulnerability of indigenous cultures. The
                           guidelines or procedures will reflect international good practices, including the principles of WB
                           safeguard policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the Social Assessment (SA), all stakeholders related to project area were identified (not
                           only the ones located in the area but other stakeholders with incidence or leverage potential). Civil


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           Society Organizations (CSO) were consulted during the consultation process. Consultations with
                           indigenous peoples Guarayo and Siriono also included consultations with national level
                           organizations in addition to direct consultations with the authorities and communities of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                           peoples. The SA considers characterization of identified communities in the project area,
                           especially the indigenous peoples, highlighting most relevant aspects of the social organization,
                           authorities, livelihoods, among others, to identify its possible linkages with the civil works and
                           potential impacts. During the consultations process, three gender issues were identified: a)
                           Considering road safety, specifically during the time of project operations, women and specially
                           young women, are more exposed than men to sexual harassment, gender/generational violence and
                           racism; b) Some women (indigenous and non- indigenous) who are part of the Road Maintenance
                           Microenterprises are single household heads; c) For Guarayo and Sirionó people, enculturation
                           processes are specially driven by women; therefore, their knowledge about territory and natural
                           resources management, as well as their ways to respect nature, has to be recuperated especially
                           from old women to later be taught to the outsiders that the project brings into the area.
                           Based on these three issues, 4 gender-based actions are taken into account along the project cycle:
                           (i) an analysis of gender differences in road safety will be considered in the Road Safety Capacity
                           Assessment; (ii) Women that are actually part of the Road Maintenance Microenterprises will be
                           encouraged to participate in the training programs planned under the Resettlement Political
                           Framework, to ensure the mitigation of the potential negative impacts on their economy while
                           strengthening their competencies to offer services, (iii) Two IPP Projects were built on the
                           importance to promote respect to Sirionó and Guarayo people and cultures; (iv) In case of
                           involuntary resettlements, the RAPs will ensure that compensations are equal for men and for
                           women.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 14-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              11-Sep-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bolivia                                                     10-Sep-2015
                           Comments: Disclosed on ABC website:
                                         http://www.abc.gob.bo/banco_mundial
                                         Selecting link indicating "PROYECTO DE DESARROLLO DE CAPACIDADES
                                         PARA EL SECTOR VIAL. CARRETERA TRINIDAD – SANTA CRUZ"
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 31-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              11-Sep-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bolivia                                                     11-Sep-2015
                           Comments: Disclosed on ABC website:
                                         http://www.abc.gob.bo/banco_mundial
                                         Selecting link indicating "PROYECTO DE DESARROLLO DE CAPACIDADES
                                         PARA EL SECTOR VIAL. CARRETERA TRINIDAD – SANTA CRUZ"
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Sep-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bolivia                                                          10-Sep-2015
                           Comments: Disclosed on ABC website:
                                         http://www.abc.gob.bo/banco_mundial
                                         Selecting link indicating "PROYECTO DE DESARROLLO DE CAPACIDADES
                                         PARA EL SECTOR VIAL. CARRETERA TRINIDAD – SANTA CRUZ"
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gylfi Palsson
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                         Date: 15-Sep-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                        Date: 15-Sep-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
