                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA20328
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P152959
                            Project Name:      Reduction and Phaseout of PFOS in Priority Sectors (P152959)
                            Task Team          Laurent Granier,Solvita Klapare
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          23-Jan-2017                        Estimated   16-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN2A                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          67.22              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   42.97
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          24.25
                              Total                                                                                      67.22
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to reduce PFOS in selected sectors and enterprises in China in a
                           sustainable manner.
                            3. Project Description
                           China ratified the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) in 2004, a global
                           treaty counting 180 Parties and addressing an increasing number of chemical substances listed as


                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         POPs (currently 26), including perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS), its salts and perfluorooctane
                         sulfonyl fluoride (PFOSF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will consist of three components and project management: the first component addresses
                         PFOS/PFOSF production reduction; the second component addresses PFOS use reduction in
                         chromium mist suppressant for metal plating, in pesticide formulations for invasive pest control, and
                         for PFOS-based firefighting foam; and the third, technical assistance, component will support
                         capacity building and policy development to ensure sustainable phase-out of PFOS in the targeted
                         sectors. Policy development activities will be extended to cover PFOS reduction in the enhanced oil
                         recovery application.

                         Component 1: PFOS Production Reduction
                         The Project will support production phase-out and reduction for primary PFOSF producers and at
                         secondary PFOS producers (approximately 14 companies). Activities to be financed include: closure;
                         conversion of production to non-POPs like chemicals; and adoption of best environmental practices
                         at facilities that will continue production of PFOS and PFOSF for acceptable uses under the
                         Stockholm Convention.

                         Conversion of production facilities: This component will finance conversion of PFOSF production
                         facilities and offer incentives to support downstream PFOS manufacturers in switching to new non
                         PFOS-based products. The project would not finance any production of chemicals known to possess
                         persistence, bio-accumulative and toxic (PBT) characteristics. Eligible incremental expenditures
                         would include: (a) development of non-PFOS products; (b) costs related to registration of new
                         products; (c) equipment and technology transfer costs; (d) installation of equipment; (e) training; (f)
                         trial production; (g) incremental costs of new raw materials, utilities, waste management; and (h)
                         costs of disposal of contaminated equipment previously used for producing or storing PFOS.

                         Plant or production line closure: GEF incremental support would be extended to enterprises that
                         might decide to close down their production facility altogether. GEF resources will be used to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support management of environmental liabilities from such closure. Eligible incremental expenditure
                         would include: (a) dismantling costs; (b) disposal costs of contaminated equipment and materials;
                         and (c) consulting services to develop site risk assessment, management and monitoring plans.
                         Remediation beyond disposal of contaminated equipment is expected to be financed by other sources
                         outside of the Project.

                         Promotion of cleaner production: In line with BAT/BEP requirements under the Stockholm
                         Convention, the project would promote introduction of cleaner production techniques and practices
                         so as to limit the risks of environmental releases or to worker's health and safety resulting from PFOS
                         production. Eligible expenditures include: (a) consulting services to develop CP audits; (b)
                         overseeing implementation of CP measures; (c) technology upgrading; and (d) training. The project
                         would also promote phase-out at downstream producers through support to a ➢❨ MEP PFOS
                         stewardship program➢❨ , including strengthening of label specification.

                         Component 2: Reduction of PFOS Use
                         Three priority sectors are addressed in this component: chromium mist suppressants in the metal
                         plating sector, firefighting foam sector, and pesticides for control of red imported fire ant (RIFA).
                         The fourth large sector in terms of consumption, oil production, is addressed through TA only under
                         component 3.


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Chrome mist suppressant in metal plating: The Project will finance demonstration activities to
                         showcase non-PFOS alternatives and closed-loop systems, with equivalent or improved efficacy in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         terms of protection of human health and safety. The demonstration activities include installations of
                         approx. two closed-loop systems for different chrome-plated product lines and introduction of non-
                         PFOS alternatives in at least 20 companies using chromium mist suppressant for manufacturing
                         various products in up to three industrial parks. The industrial parks will be selected during the
                         project implementation. Criteria for selection of these industrial parks would include the number of
                         chrome plating enterprises, environmental management capacity of the industrial parks, and
                         willingness to showcase demonstration activities to similar industry in other industrial parks.

                         The project will finance costs in relation to acquiring of the following: (a) upgrade of facilities to
                         closed-loop systems; (b) chrome plating baths replacement; (c) new chromium mist suppressant; (d)
                         other equipment, testing device, and control systems related to the use of new alternatives; (e)
                         ventilation and safety equipment; (f) site preparation for installation of new equipment; (g) replacing
                         Cr(VI) with Cr(III) which will eliminate the use of chromium mist suppressant altogether; and (h)
                         advanced treatment facilities for up to three industrial parks for removing perfluorinated compounds
                         (PFCs) from water discharge from chrome plating industry.

                         Firefighting foam: The project will finance development and production of non-PFOS firefighting
                         foam at 3-5 firefighting foam manufacturers. The selection criteria of firefighting foam
                         manufacturers would include: (a) research and development capacity; (b) relevant experience with
                         firefighting chemicals; (c) large network of firefighting foam clients; (d) good environmental
                         performance record; (e) in-house capacity to develop non-PFOS surfactants or technical cooperation
                         with reputable surfactant manufacturers; and (f) cost effective proposals.

                         The following costs will be covered by the Project: (a) research and development of new non-PFOS
                         based firefighting foam; (b) environmental and health impact evaluation of new alternatives; (c) new
                         equipment for manufacturing non-PFOS based firefighting foam; (d) site preparation for installing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         new equipment; (e) tanks and storage facilities; (f) testing efficacy of new products; and (g)
                         registration of new surfactants and firefighting foam. In addition, financing costs of new non-PFOS
                         firefighting foam needed for training at 3 training facilities of the public security ministry could be
                         supported, as well as costs of firefighting equipment retrofit or procurement of new equipment,
                         together with facilities for treatment of wastewater discharge.

                         Pest control: The project will finance procurement of pesticides (9 tons total: 6 tons of indoxacarb
                         based baits, 3 tons of cypermethrin based powder, and a small amount of hydramethylnon) for
                         demonstration of a two-phase treatment method using bait and powder to control red fire ants, carried
                         out under component 3.

                         Component 3: Policy and Technical Assistance
                         This component will finance technical assistance activities required to strengthen regulatory and
                         policy framework, standards, and capacity building. These activities are essential for ensuring
                         sustainability of PFOS phase-out in both production and consumption sectors. TA activities include:

                         Standards and Regulations: The Project will carry out activities to develop industry standards, good
                         practices, and regulations to support introduction of non-PFOS alternatives. Supported activities
                         would include: (a) labeling scheme to ensure that commercially available chromium mist suppressant
                         will have to be properly labeled; (b) development of technical specifications for chromium mist

                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         suppressants, including efficacy in protecting human health and safety; (c) standards defining PFOS
                         waste, and related best practices for disposal; specification of discharge of wastewater containing
                         PFOS for electroplating industry in Guangdong province; (d) development of guidelines for cleaner
Public Disclosure Copy




                         production for organofluorine manufacturing industry; (e) revision of cleaner production audit
                         indicator system for electroplating industry to include PFOS in Guangdong Province; (f) technical
                         report on efficacy of non-PFOS based pesticides for controlling red imported fire ant; and (g)
                         development of guidelines for green procurement for the oil sector.

                         Screening of non-PFOS Alternatives: To ascertain that new non-PFOS alternatives to be introduced
                         in China should not have PBT characteristics, a PBT screening system for new chemicals will be
                         established. Supported activities include: (a) guidelines for registration of new chemicals including
                         reporting requirement on PBT characteristics; (b) development of standard testing protocol for
                         determining PBT characteristic of organofluorine chemicals; and (c) screening reports on PBT
                         characteristics of at least 10 non-PFOS chromium mist suppressants.

                         Technical Studies: A series of studies will be carried out under the project to enhance understanding
                         of import/export control of PFOS, and of PFOS use as CMS in electroplating factories in Guangdong
                         province. To guide the chrome plating industry in the future as part of the efforts to sustain
                         achievement of this project, the Project will finance the testing of mist suppression performance of
                         alternatives and develop a list of acceptable chromium mist suppressants. A preliminary study will
                         also be conducted on health impacts of PFOS in China as a first step to scoping and better
                         understanding the issue.

                         Technical Assistance to Eliminate the Use of PFOS in Firefighting: The project will support testing
                         the safety and efficacy of alternative non-PFOS firefighting foams and products; devising technical
                         way forward for substitution of PFOS in the firefighting sector; revising relevant standards as
                         needed; capacity development to detect PFOS substances in foam extinguishing agents; and
                         strengthening the tracking and control of PFOS containing firefighting agents. Since a large quantity
                         of PFOS firefighting foam is used for training, adopting new non-PFOS alternative foam could lead
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to permanent reduction of a significant quantity of PFOS. The project would therefore finance
                         revision of firefighting protocols and training manuals for effective use of new non-PFOS
                         firefighting foam without compromising safety and health of firefighting cadets.

                         Technical Assistance to Eliminate the Use of PFOS for control of RIFA: Demonstration of
                         alternative pest management techniques and practices will be conducted for four years in 5
                         provinces, Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou and Hainan. The project will cover costs related to
                         the ➢❨ training of trainers➢❨ program that will involve ➢❨ training schools➢❨ in the 5
                         demonstration provinces and up to additional 5 provinces. Participants will include county, municipal
                         and provincial level practitioners.

                         PFOS Registration and Reporting System: The project will strengthen capacity of Ministry of
                         Environment Protection (MEP) and local Environmental Protection Bureaus (EPBs) to enforce
                         regulations and monitoring requirements for hazardous substances. A tracking system will be
                         developed to support registration of producers of PFOSF, secondary PFOS based product
                         manufacturers, and users of PFOS products in firefighting foam industry. The system will assist
                         China to monitor production and supply of PFOS materials from sources to end users. Technical
                         capacity of local EPBs will be strengthened to enable them to carry out or supervise factory audits to
                         prevent any diversion of PFOSF to banned applications. Efforts would mainly focus on strengthening
                         capacity of local EPBs in Fujian and Hubei to control the PFOS supply chain.

                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         Component 4: Project Management
                         Component 4 will finance: (i) costs of operations of three project management offices (PMOs) at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         FECO, Guangdong EPB and Hubei EPB, as well as (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation. Eligible costs
                         include expenditures incurred by the PMOs in carrying out the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Most demonstration activities for PFOSF producers and manufacturers of PFOS-containing products
                         (including the pilot factory under consideration prior to appraisal) are located in Hubei and Fujian
                         Province, central south of China, on fairly flat terrain with temperate-subtropical climate and annual
                         precipitation around 1200 mm. The potential pilots for PFOS application in metal plating are located
                         in Guangdong Province, and demonstration areas for control of red imported fire ants are distributed
                         in Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou, Fujian, and Hainan Province, all in south China with subtropical
                         to tropical climate and various topography.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSU02)
                         Xin Ren (GEN2A)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project will involve demonstration activities and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     pilots to reduce the production and the use of
                                                                    perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and related
                                                                    chemicals, a family of toxic chemicals that are extremely
                                                                    persistent and likely to be carcinogenic to humans.
                                                                    Theindustries to be targeted by the project, i.e., chemical
                                                                    industry, metal plating, pest management and fire
                                                                    protection are heavily polluting and energy/resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    intensive. Given the highly complex environmental
                                                                    impacts and potentially significant risks, a category A was
                                                                    assigned as per the WB safeguard policy.

                                                                    Since most beneficiaries for demonstration can only be
                                                                    determined during implementation, a framework approach
                                                                    was adopted according to the Bank➢❨ s safeguard
                                                                    requirement. An Environment Management Framework
                                                                    (EMF) has been developed under the hands-on instruction
                                                                    of the Bank team. It is designed to guide the screening
                                                                    and selection process, the evaluation of environmental
                                                                    and social risks and the management of these risks for
                                                                    each sector involved under various scenarios. Major
                                                                    impacts and risks, measures and public consultation are
                                                                    described below under II A.

                                                                    Social risks and impacts may be livelihoods loss or land
                                                                    acquisition following enterprise production line closure or
                                                                    relocation, or impacts on project enterprise employees➢❨
                                                                    job security, and on local residents in project sites. For


                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                                                       example, possible relocation of a few PFOS enterprises
                                                       may cause a small number of job changes or job losses.
                                                       Local Chinese labor laws and regulations will be followed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       to ensure appropriate compensation and livelihood
                                                       restoration for affected workers. In all cases of job loss,
                                                       an employee resettlement plan will be prepared by the
                                                       project enterprise and submitted to the World Bank for
                                                       prior review. In case of 20 or more employees to be laid
                                                       off at one time by a project enterprise, a separate
                                                       employee resettlement plan should be prepared by the
                                                       enterprise and submitted to the Bank team for prior
                                                       review before actual layoff of staff of the related
                                                       enterprise be undertaken. Such a plan should be in
                                                       compliance with both the Chinese government labor
                                                       regulations and Bank safeguards policy requirements. In
                                                       case less than 20 employees might be laid-off, the
                                                       employee resettlement plan could be included in the
                                                       environmental and social management plan, while also
                                                       subject to prior WB team review. To address possible
                                                       closure or relocation of the existing facilities, social
                                                       impacts on livelihoods and employees➢❨ job security,
                                                       social management instruments have been included in the
                                                       ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The project will take place mostly within existing
                         4.04                          facilities, industrial parks or farmland. If relocation to
                                                       new facilities were to be required, it is expected that new
                                                       location will be in the urban or suburban areas where
                                                       there is basic infrastructure to support industry. Therefore,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       it does not affect any natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   Not applicable.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   The project will support the procurement and use of
                                                       alternative pest control agents to replace PFOS-based
                                                       insecticides that have been the major means to control red
                                                       imported fire ant in China. A Pest Management Plan
                                                       (PMP) has been developed and annexed to the ESMF.
                                                       The PMP highlights the principle of integrated pest
                                                       management embodied by this OP and focuses on non-
                                                       PFOS based insecticides, their safe storage, transportation
                                                       and application. It includes a monitoring and training
                                                       program for farmers and agricultural technicians.
                         Physical Cultural        No   The project will take place within existing facilities,
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          industrial parks or farmland with no physical cultural
                                                       resource as defined by this OP foreseen for the existing
                                                       and future pilot activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   The targeted industries are located in urban areas where it



                                                        Page 6 of 14
                         BP 4.10                        is unlikely there is any presence of indigenous peoples by
                                                        the criteria of the Bank IP term. In case enterprises have
                                                        to relocate to new areas, they are expected to move to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        industrial parks within urban or semi-urban areas since
                                                        the industry needs basic infrastructure support. Such areas
                                                        are unlikely to have any issues related to indigenous
                                                        people either.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Most of the project activities will be carried out within
                         OP/BP 4.12                     existing facilities of project enterprises with no need for
                                                        additional land. This policy might be triggered however as
                                                        some enterprises that are currently located in residential
                                                        areas may want to produce non-PFOS alternatives, and in
                                                        some provinces establishment of new chemical processes
                                                        in facilities located in residential areas will not be
                                                        allowed. Therefore, they would have to move to a new
                                                        location which is usually an existing industrial park. Even
                                                        if it was not in an industrial park, the need for land in
                                                        terms of project company relocation or expansion would
                                                        be very limited. Currently the largest producer of PFOS in
                                                        China only occupies about 2 ha of land in a town of Hubei
                                                        Province. This one pilot enterprise that is under
                                                        consideration as a demonstration enterprise at time of
                                                        project preparation - though participation is not confirmed
                                                        and details of investments are not yet known - would
                                                        phase out its PFOS production capacity and upgrade
                                                        capacity for other less toxic products. This company has
                                                        no need for additional land acquisition and if it were to
                                                        relocate, it would be to an existing nearby industrial park,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        and all its affected employees (if any) would be
                                                        reassigned within the enterprise. The participating project
                                                        enterprises will be determined during project
                                                        implementation.

                                                        A resettlement policy framework as part of the ESMF has
                                                        been prepared to address potential emerging land
                                                        demands and involuntary resettlement associated with job
                                                        changes or losses during project implementation. It sets
                                                        that local Chinese labor laws and regulations and Bank
                                                        safeguards policy requirements will be followed to ensure
                                                        appropriate compensation and livelihood restoration for
                                                        any affected people under the project. In case of 20 or
                                                        more employees to be laid off in one time by project
                                                        enterprises, according to the Chinese government labor
                                                        regulation, a full employee resettlement plan should be
                                                        prepared by the enterprise and reported to the local labor
                                                        authorities. The plan should be submitted to the Bank
                                                        team for prior review before actual layoff of staff of the
                                                        related enterprise. Those laying off less than 20


                                                         Page 7 of 14
                                                                      employees should follow the Chinese government labor
                                                                      regulations, and the employee resettlement can be covered
                                                                      in the environment assessment report under Op 4.01,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      which will also be subject to prior review by FECO and
                                                                      the Bank task team.

                                                                      The ESMF sets measures and procedures to be followed
                                                                      so as to mitigate social negative impacts. The ESMF
                                                                      states clearly the documents to be prepared if there is any
                                                                      land acquisition or resettlement identified prior to
                                                                      appraisal and during implementation: Resettlement Action
                                                                      Plans (RAP), or due diligence review of recent land
                                                                      acquired as new location of the project beneficiary
                                                                      enterprise, or employee resettlement plan in the case of
                                                                      worker➢❨ s redundancy, or other social safeguards
                                                                      mitigating measures as appropriate will be prepared and
                                                                      implemented according to the Bank safeguards policy as
                                                                      and when required.

                                                                      A professional consultant on social safeguards and broad
                                                                      social development has been hired to prepare the ESMF
                                                                      social part. The ESMF is deemed satisfactory by the Bank
                                                                      team and has been disclosed before appraisal. If any
                                                                      social management instrument is to be prepared during
                                                                      project implementation, it will be also disclosed and
                                                                      consulted by fully following the Bank and Chinese
                                                                      government requirements.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            Not applicable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No            Not applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No            Not applicable.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment
                              The project has overall positive environmental impacts as it supports phasing out or reducing
                              PFOS and replacing with less toxic and persistent chemicals in China. Since demonstration
                              activities mainly involve converting to other products, retrofitting or closing down within an
                              existing factory, impacts during construction in most scenarios are foreseen to be confined within
                              the facility. However, converting and retrofitting often requires dismantling part of the old
                              equipment, reconfiguring pipeline system and/or factory space. Handling and disposal of spoil and
                              scraps, some of which can be hazardous, could pose negative impacts on the environment and
                              workers➢❨ health both on-site and off-site. This needs to be carefully assessed, planned and


                                                                       Page 8 of 14
                           managed for such enterprises once selected during implementation. Due to limited resources, the
                           project will not support site remediation, but only the site assessment of the closed facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Impacts during operation vary considerably due to the diverse set of sectors and sub-projects
                           involved. The EMF describes succinctly the sectors, their main processes and technologies, major
                           pollution and environmental risks associated. Typical for chemical intensive industries, these
                           include air emissions of acidic and alkali chemicals as well as toxic fugitive emissions inside and
                           outside workshops, and flue gas from boilers, water effluent high in non-biodegradable substances
                           or heavy metals, inorganic sludge and solid wastes including hazardous wastes, and their final
                           treatment and disposal off-site.

                           For application in metal plating industry, occupational health impacts and safety risks could occur
                           with the improper use of substitutes for PFOS-containing chromium mist suppressants (CMS),
                           since the latter has been effective in controlling harmful volatile emissions from metal plating
                           solutions. For application of substitute pesticides in agriculture, improper use and storage could
                           lead to safety risks and health hazard for farmers/users as well as soil and water contamination.
                           For application of foam substitute in firefighting, chemicals in foam could be washed away into
                           the surrounding environment, causing contamination of water and soil.

                           Social
                           The project will have positive social benefits as it will reduce the negative health impacts
                           associated with PFOS production by introducing non-PFOS alternatives. It will support closure of
                           redundant facilities, including support for site closure associated with previous production of
                           PFOS. Overall social negative impacts and risks foreseeable will be very limited. At time of
                           project preparation, one company is under consideration as a demonstration enterprise - though
                           participation of the enterprise is not confirmed and details of possible investments are not known -
                           i.e. Hubei Hengxin Chemical Company Limited. According to social assessment, this company
                           was established in 2004 and occupies less than two hectares in Yingcheng City. The project would
                           support phase out of PFOSF production capacity and upgrade the remaining capacity for other less
Public Disclosure Copy




                           toxic products. All project activities would be undertaken on existing public land with no need for
                           any additional land and if it were to relocate it would be to a nearby industrial park, and each
                           affected employee would be reassigned a job within the same company as planned.

                           It is expected that most of the project activities will be carried out within existing facilities, which
                           are on existing public land in urban areas. The project in general has no need for additional land
                           acquisition. However, some of the future project enterprises might also need partial or full
                           production line closure or relocation causing workers to be laid off, although previous experience
                           shows that most workers can be reemployed within the same enterprise in the case of partial
                           closure. Some enterprises that are currently located in residential areas may want to produce non-
                           PFOS alternatives. However, in some provinces establishment of new chemical processes in
                           facilities located in residential areas will not be allowed. Therefore, they would have to move to a
                           new location which is usually expected to be an existing industrial park. Such relocation may
                           cause some employees to lose job if they choose not to move to the new location with the
                           enterprise.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Environment
                           The pollutions and risks during operation as described above can potentially have long-term


                                                                       Page 9 of 14
                           impacts if handled improperly, especially off-site disposal of chemicals and wastes. Most
                           hazardous wastes come from residuals of production processes and sludge of wastewater treatment
                           in facilities or industrial parks. The spent chemicals and fire-fighting foams constitute another
Public Disclosure Copy




                           source of hazardous wastes. Improper disposal could contaminate surface water, ground water and
                           soil, enter into ecosystem with bio-accumulative effects in species and threaten human health
                           eventually.

                           Social
                           In the case of closure or relocation of project enterprises, some employees of the enterprises may
                           have difficulties in reemployment or restoring livelihoods. But the scale of such negative impacts
                           can be minimized as much as possible.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable since it is framework based project for which alternative comparison becomes
                           possible only during implementation. The only pilot identified by appraisal is a PFOS producer
                           willing to convert to production of less toxic products. It does not have feasibility study yet but its
                           preliminary investigation indicates a very limited choice of products it can convert to in a practical
                           way.

                           Not applicable for the social part, either.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment
                           The project will be implemented by a central PMO (FECO) and two provincial PMOs (PPMOs).
                           FECO has over 30 years of experience with international financing institutions, including the WB
                           and GEF. It is familiar with the WB safeguard requirements after it has successfully implemented
                           similar projects, such as the Phase-out of HCFCs Project and GEF Contaminated Site
                           Management Project in recent years, most of them category A. Hubei and Guangdong PPMOs are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           both under their provincial Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB), thus experienced in managing
                           environmental impacts though with less direct experience of the WB safeguard policies.
                           FECO➢❨ s staff in charge of safeguards has been stable, highly dedicated and supportive
                           throughout the safeguard preparation. The two provincial PMOs have designated staff for
                           safeguards to ensure the EMF implementation. Capacity building in environmental safeguard has
                           been provided by the Bank team during preparation and will be continued throughout the project
                           cycle.

                           The EMF prescribes that all environmental safeguard documents required should be submitted to
                           the PMOs for review in order to meet both the domestic and the WB requirements. The first
                           subproject of each sector and all category A sub-projects should also be submitted to the WB for
                           review. The EMF also sets up supervision arrangements and specifies responsibilities of various
                           stakeholders during implementation. The EMF includes in its annexes the Terms of Reference for
                           all safeguard instruments to be used in this project, i.e. EA, the Environmental Management Plan
                           (EMP), Environmental Audit and Environmental Site Assessment.

                           An Environmental Audit was done for Hengxin Chemical Co., a potential pilot for enterprise
                           converting to non-PFOSF production. An EIA will be prepared as soon as project support to
                           Hengxin is confirmed and subproject details are identified.



                                                                      Page 10 of 14
                           Social
                           To address the above social risks and impacts, the client-FECO has prepared a social safeguards
                           instrument ➢❨ ESMF, which includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF states
Public Disclosure Copy




                           that local Chinese labor laws and regulations, and World Bank safeguards policies should be
                           followed to ensure appropriate compensation and livelihood restoration for affected people. In
                           case of 20 or more employees are laid off in one time by a project enterprise, according to the
                           Chinese government labor regulation, a full employee resettlement plan should be prepared by the
                           enterprise and reported to the local labor authorities. The plan should be submitted to the Bank
                           team for prior review before actual layoff of staff of the related enterprise. Those laying off less
                           than 20 employees should follow the Chinese government labor regulations, and the employee
                           resettlement plan which will also be subject to prior review by FECO and the Bank task team can
                           be covered in the environment assessment report under Op 4.01.

                           A social screening will be done for every subproject to assess social impacts and risks. A
                           comprehensive social assessment will be done for every subproject which has negative social
                           impacts and risks. A social assessment report will be done as required accordingly through hiring
                           experienced professionals.

                           A resettlement policy framework (RPF) has also been included in the ESMF to address future
                           possible land acquisition and resettlement, although all the known project activities will be on
                           existing public land and do not need additional acquisition. The RPF describes the overall legal
                           framework, planning principles, procedures, compensation and rehabilitation approach,
                           consultation and participation requirements, grievance redress mechanisms, organization and
                           monitoring arrangements.

                           The national level PMO-FECO has extensive experience in preparing and implementing World
                           Bank financed projects, including GEF projects previously, although provincial PMOs and project
                           enterprises may have little experience in implementing World Bank projects. The Bank team and
                           external social consulting team will provide ongoing training for PMOs and project enterprises.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           FECO has and will continue to provide training and guidance for local PMOs. It has also been
                           agreed to hire an external social consultant team for technical support in dealing with social
                           aspects of the project. Each PMO has delegated a staff to take charge of social safeguards
                           management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Environment
                           Two rounds of local disclosure of the EMF have been conducted as per the Bank requirement for
                           category A project. The first round was conducted during March 2016 at the official websites of
                           the central PMO and several sector associations. The second round was during July 2016 after the
                           complete draft EMF with all its annexes was ready. After each round of disclosure, public
                           consultations have been carried out through meetings and talks with representatives of interested
                           enterprises, branch associations of sectors involved, government agencies concerned at central and
                           provincial level, local PMOs, as well as academia and experts. For Hengxin Company, the only
                           pilot identified prior to appraisal, its environmental audit report has been disclosed locally in the
                           city two rounds in June and August 2016 respectively, followed by consultation with local people
                           to be potentially affected. The concerns and suggestions from all public consultations have been
                           incorporated in the finalization of the EMF and the environmental audit report.



                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                           Social
                           The RPF in the environmental and social management framework, in both Chinese and English,
                           was submitted to the Bank on July 30, 2016 and was deemed satisfactory to the Bank. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           document has been locally disclosed through the internet on August 30, 2016 and the Bank
                           InfoShop on September 7, 2016.

                           Grievance Redress. A mechanism has been established for grievance redress. Grievances will be
                           filed in writing. Starting at community or enterprise level, the grievances can be elevated to
                           county/district, city level if affected people are not satisfied with the resolution at the lower level.
                           The affected people could also file their cases in court if they are not satisfied with the resolution
                           by the project authority. All grievances and their resolution will be recorded. This mechanism has
                           been disclosed to the local population in safeguards instruments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Sep-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        18-Jan-2017
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              29-Jul-2016
                           Comments: Two rounds of local disclosure of the ESMF have been conducted per the Bank
                                         requirement for category A project. The first round was conducted during March
                                         2016 at the official websites of the central PMO and several sector associations. The
                                         second round took place in July 2016 after the complete draft ESMF with all its
                                         annexes was finalized.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              29-Jul-2016
                           Comments: Two rounds of local disclosure of the ESMF have been conducted per the Bank
                                         requirement for category A project. The first round was conducted during March
                                         2016 at the official websites of the central PMO and several sector associations. The
                                         second round took place in July 2016 after the complete draft ESMF with all its
                                         annexes was finalized.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              29-Jul-2016
                           Comments: As part of the ESMF.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                      Page 12 of 14
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Laurent Granier,Solvita Klapare
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 18-Jan-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                       Date: 20-Jan-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 14 of 14
