                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19281

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cambodia                         Project ID:       P153591
                            Project Name:       KH - Livelihood Enhancement and Association of the Poor Project (LEAP)
                                                (P153591)
                            Task Team           Mudita Chamroeun,Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       04-Aug-2016                          Estimated         06-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFA02                                 Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                      Total Bank Financing:          20.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    20.00
                              Total                                                                          20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to help improve livelihoods of targeted poor
                           households in selected provinces and communities.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will support rural and urban poor communities through the enhanced provision
                           of livelihood support services and basic infrastructure. A participatory approach to group formation,
                           needs identification and support activity planning will be applied following the CDD principles.

                           The proposed project will build on the successful pilot activities, incorporating lessons-learned and
                         the results of two independent evaluations, adapting activities to support urban and peri-urban project
                         communities. Activities would be adjusted to reflect the changed conditions since the end of the
                         pilot phase in September 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will have 4 main components.

                         - Component 1: Building and Strengthening Institutions of the Poor
                         - Component 2: Supporting Income Generation
                         - Component 3: Basic Services and Infrastructure
                         - Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring & Evaluation

                         Activities under the 4 components will be adapted and detailed for implementation in rural and urban
                         environments respectively. There would not be specific rural and urban poor components but the
                         project would build on rural pilot experiences and have the proposed project adapt activities for rural
                         and urban communities respectively.

                         Project Components:

                         Component 1: Building and Strengthening Institutions of the Poor (US$ 4million)

                         Building on the experience of supporting 100 SHGs supported during the pilot phase, the objective of
                         this component would be to mobilize and build self-managed, and financially sustainable community
                         based institutions of the poor through a participatory process. The core institutions created will be
                         Self-Help Groups (SHGs) built around common economic interests. In rural communities, these
                         groups will mostly form around agriculture-based livelihood activities, in urban environments,
                         saving and credit, and other common interests will unite groups. Based on the need and opportunity,
                         the project would also support federating SHGs to the commune level to establish "Commune Level
                         Federations" (CLFs), which would perform a financial function as well as economic support services
                         for the producer groups. Depending on the scope of the SHGs, they might form or become part of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Agriculture Cooperative (AC), which would open the possibility for further public and private
                         support offered by RGC and other development partners. The specific activities of Component 1 will
                         be (a) financing NGO partners and a team of community facilitators for social mobilization; (b)
                         training and capacity-building support for each of the community-level institutions; (c) training and
                         financing of a cadre of Community Professional (CPs); (d) start-up supplies and equipment for the
                         community-level institutions; (e) development and use of strategic information, education and
                         communication (IEC) materials.

                         Component 2: Supporting Income Generation (US$ 8million)

                         The main objective of this component would be to increase the income generated by poor households
                         by improving their access to financial services and resources and skills needed for small enterprise
                         growth and improved employment. Activities would include seed grant financing to SHGs and CLFs,
                         support to engage with partner commercial banks and MFIs, value-chain linkages (e.g. middlemen,
                         buyers, suppliers, processors, or directly with consumers), vocational training and job linkages. The
                         specific activities of Component 2 will include (a) identification of market opportunities for rural and
                         urban SHGs and individual members; (b) farmer training and technical assistance to improve
                         production and delivery techniques; (c) marketing research studies; (d) seed capital to producer
                         associations to set up basic organizational structures; and (e) specialized value chain support to
                         producer associations through contracts and marketing tie-ups with private sector agencies. Co-
                         financing of small-scale economic infrastruc ture (storage facilities, agro-processing, packaging and
                         delivery channels) could also be undertaken on a demand-driven basis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Basi c Services and Infrastructure (US$ 6million)

                         The objective of this component is to improve the quality and availability of basic social and
                         economic services and infrastructure for poor and vulnerable communities. Activities would focus on
                         the upgrading or rehabilitation of small-scale infrastructure and services, which contribute to
                         improved income generating potential for poor households. Specific activities could include storage
                         facilities, small roads/footpaths, water supply and sanitation, education/training facilities, among
                         others, to be identified during preparation. Where communities identify gaps in basic infrastructure
                         as a major constraint to livelihood improvements, the project could fund rehabilitation activities or
                         upgrading and expansion of small scale but critical infrastructure. Where project resources are not
                         sufficient for coverage of identified critical needs, the village/community development planning
                         process will be supported to have necessary investments included in the commune/sangkat
                         development and investment plans. The Component will fund planning processes and required
                         technical assistance. It will also finance implementation costs for capacity building, training, and the
                         implementation of small-scale infrastructure projects.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring & Evaluation (US$ 2million)

                         This component would facilitate overall co-ordination, implementation, financial management, and
                         monitoring and evaluation of the project at national provincial, khan, commune, and village/
                         community levels. It would include setting up and strengthening provincial and municipality level
                         project units, providing office infrastructure and logistic support, and setting up monitoring, auditing,
                         and evaluation and learning systems.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed IDA credit is $20 million. The main project implementing agency will be Ministry of
                         Interior (MoI), with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) providing
                         substantial technical support to improve agriculture, livestock, fisheries and other livelihood
                         activities' management practices. Substantial progress has been made on the preliminary design of
                         the project and its geographical coverage. The rural coverage of the project beneficiaries in the Siem
                         Reap province would include poor households within the originally piloted targeted 50 communes
                         and the final target urban poor communities in Phnom Penh to be supported will be selected from a
                         the need assessment list of urban poor communities in the Phnom Penh area, prepared based on
                         PPC's criteria.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Capacity of the Both National and Sub-National level on Bank Safeguards. The Bank assessed Siem
                         Reap province and Phnom Penh Capital's capacity to implement and monitor the environmental and
                         social safeguards. There are 45 officers under Department of Environment of Siem Reap
                         Municipality. About 3-4 officers are technical level. At Phnom Penh Capital there are 70 officers
                         under the Department of Environment. 12 officers are responsible to prepare and monitor the
                         Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Initial Environmental Examination (IEE). Phnom Penh
                         Capital has proven experience in environmental and social impact assessment and monitoring. They
                         have experienced in preparing and implementing the Environmental and Social Safeguard
                         Framework from the ADB funded project. However, both Siem Reap and Phnom Penh Capital have
                           limit experience on the Bank safeguard policies. As the project will involve small scale
                           infrastructure, the project activities will likely have minor impacts. Due to the limited experience of
                           the municipalities on the Bank's safeguard policies, the Bank team will provide safeguard training to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           municipalities' staff to familiarize them with the Bank's safeguard policy. Siem Reap and Phnom
                           Penh Capital have already assigned environmental and social safeguard officers for the rural poor
                           and urban poor aspects of the project to be safeguard focal points during project preparation and
                           implementation period. They will be responsible for preparing the environmental and social
                           safeguard tools.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bunlong Leng (GEN2B)
                           Juan Martinez (GSU02)
                           Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GEN2B)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            From the lesson learnt from the previous LEAP pilot
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       projects, the activities implemented in the pilot
                                                                            communes included livestock raising, vegetable
                                                                            farming, rice cultivation, fishery, rice mill, home
                                                                            business including home-made bakery, and fertilizer
                                                                            shop, etc. The environmental impacts from the pilot
                                                                            activities can be summarized as air/odor quality from
                                                                            rice mill and livestock raising, soil erosion, usage of
                                                                            pesticides, fertilizers, and/or chemical substances,
                                                                            pollution of surface water and ground water resulting
                                                                            from the rural livelihoods interventions. For urban
                                                                            poor, public infrastructure such as water supply,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            sewerage system and road maintenance may be
                                                                            required. The proposed project will consider funding
                                                                            small-scale infrastructure where identified by
                                                                            communities as priority needs. No major road
                                                                            construction activities will be supported, however,
                                                                            where road rehabilitation is expected to have
                                                                            significant positive impact on a larger poor
                                                                            community, the proposed project might consider.
                                                                            Investments could be made by groups or the
                                                                            proposed project in storages or small warehouses,
                                                                            community wells or simple on-farm irrigation
                                                                            equipment, household water supply improvements
                                                                            and sewerage and latrines, amongst other. Given the
                                                                            small scale nature of these activities the impacts from
                                                                            Basic Services and Infrastructure and income
                                                                            generating activities are minor, temporary, site
                                                                            specific and can be managed through proper
                                                                            mitigation measures, the project is proposed as
                                                                            category "B" as certain mitigation measures and
                                                             monitoring actions will have to be implemented
                                                             during the civil works in order to minimize, prevent
                                                             and reduce possible temporary and site specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             impacts on the environment. Social Assessment (SA)
                                                             will be conducted to ensure the project activities will
                                                             address communities' needs according to the socio-
                                                             economic aspects taken into an account gender and
                                                             vulnerable groups. ESMF from the previous LEAP
                                                             project will be updated to ensure that the
                                                             environmental and social impacts are appropriately
                                                             addressed and in compliance with the national
                                                             environmental laws/regulations and the World Bank
                                                             Safeguard Policies prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The LEAP project as well as proposed sub-projects
                                                             which will be proposed may include a minor sub-
                                                             grant facility to producer group or their association to
                                                             create small scale productive infrastructure (e.g.
                                                             post-harvest processing equipment, storage facilities
                                                             andpoultry shed, etc.). These activities may affect the
                                                             natural habitats, protected areas and biodiversity.
                                                             However, an environmental screening checklist will
                                                             be prepared to avoid project activities not to impact
                                                             the protected area and natural habitats in Siem Reap.
                                                             More detailed information about the project activities
                                                             and protected area and natural habitats within or
                                                             nearby 50 communes during project preparation will
                                                             be identified if this policy will be triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   Small scale rural infrastructure and civil works such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             as irrigation system and reservoir may affect the
                                                             forest in project area. This need to be confirmed
                                                             during project preparation. More detailed
                                                             information of the forest in the project area will be
                                                             identified if this policy will be triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   Limited negative impacts on water quality may occur
                                                             due to unsustainable farming practices and usage of
                                                             chemical pesticides. Some rural livelihood
                                                             interventions would possibly involve agricultural
                                                             production, which may lead to agricultural
                                                             intensification and eventually the usage of pesticides.
                                                             Based on the LASED experience and the discussion
                                                             with three of the 6 LEAP pilot communes, it is
                                                             unlikely that the farmers will use chemical fertilizer
                                                             and prohibited insecticide/herbicide due to its high
                                                             cost. However, their rice cultivation and vegetable
                                                             farming may lead to pesticides usage in the future.
                                                             Although the project will not promote purchase/use /
                                                             promote an increase use of pesticides, to the task
                                                              team will confirm triggering this policy during the
                                                              project preparation and a pesticide management plan
                                                              (PMP) could be included in ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   As project may finance rural infrastructure such as
                         OP/BP 4.11                           irrigation system and reservoir for agricultural
                                                              purposes, etc., which may impact on unknown,
                                                              physical cultural resources as defined by OP/BP
                                                              4.11. Therefore, Physical Cultural Resources policy
                                                              should be triggered due to the project's location is in
                                                              Siem Reap, a province of major cultural heritage. A
                                                              chance find procedure of physical cultural resources
                                                              will be integrated as part of ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       TBD   As part of project preparation, more detailed
                         4.10                                 screening process will be conducted through the
                                                              social assessment to identify whether indigenous
                                                              peoples are present in, or have collective attachment
                                                              to the project area. The Social assessment will cover
                                                              the proposed original envisaged 50 communes and
                                                              the targeted communities in Phnom Penh. If presence
                                                              of Indigenous Peoples is confirmed an Indigenous
                                                              Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared with a
                                                              free prior and informed consultation with affected
                                                              indigenous peoples at each stage of project
                                                              preparation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   There is a potential that some type of land
                         BP 4.12                              acquisition could happen - mainly in a form of land
                                                              donations. Small pieces of land for the benefit of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              communities for purposes such as small grain
                                                              storage, cattle sheds, among others; also for the
                                                              proposed activities under component 3 related to
                                                              finance basic public infrastructure and services
                                                              provision (upgrading of roads, water supply and
                                                              sewerage systems, improving education and training
                                                              facilities, and other small-scale investments).
                                                              Appropriate resettlement instruments (RPF, RAP,
                                                              etc.), including land donation protocols should be
                                                              prepared for the following reasons: because the
                                                              LEAP project is embedded in a community driven
                                                              development model whereby local communities/
                                                              groups of households (the SHGs) will be making
                                                              decisions regarding the types of interventions they
                                                              seek since these may require land donations and the
                                                              acquisition of land; also for the urban support
                                                              activities, the proposed assessment of urban poor
                                                              communities should provide more detailed
                                                              information. For these reasons, the OP 4.12 is
                                                              triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   TBD                        The project will not support construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                                                                        investments that rely on the services of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        dams. However, it will be confirmed during project
                                                                                                                        preparation if the project would finance the
                                                                                                                        construction of small wiers that will regulate the flow
                                                                                                                        of small creaks which may be classified as dams. The
                                                                                                                        wiers to be built that are classified as "small dams"
                                                                                                                        as defined in the policy will require generic dam
                                                                                                                        safety measures designed by qualified engineers.
                                 Projects on International                                   TBD                        It is unlikely that project activities will involve in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterways unless the project will
                                                                                                                        finance the construction of gravity-fed water systems
                                                                                                                        or small scale irrigation systems that take water from
                                                                                                                        rivers that are direct or indirect tributaries of the
                                                                                                                        Mekong, an international waterway. This will be
                                                                                                                        confirmed during the project preparation if this
                                                                                                                        policy will be triggered. And if the policy is
                                                                                                                        triggered, riparian countries (China, Lao PDR,
                                                                                                                        Myanmar, Thailand and the Mekong River
                                                                                                                        commission) will be notified prior to appraisal.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      No project activities are involved in disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is expected that the QER for the LEAP project will take place in May 2016 at which time the
                                      PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared.

                                      The respective Environmental and Social Safeguards instrument include frameworks: (ESMF
                                      RPF, IPPF) and plans (PMP, and RP) will be prepared prior to appraisal of the Project and will
                                      cover all policy requirements including requirements for social assessment and free, prior and
                                      informed consultations under 4.10.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mudita Chamroeun,Erik Caldwell Johnson
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                      Date: 06-Jul-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                Date: 07-Jul-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
