                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR20922
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                                     Project ID:           P114866
                            Project Name:      Secondary Educ. Development Program II (P114866)
                            Task Team          Cornelia Jesse
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2010              Estimated     27-May-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GED01                     Lending       Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                     No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       469.30           Total Bank Financing:    150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                  319.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         150.00
                              Total                                                                                               469.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The World Bank APL program development objective (PDO) will be to assist the Government of
                           Tanzania (GoT) in implementing secondary education reforms to improve
                           learning outcomes among secondary students. In the long-term, the APLs will ass
                           ist in "building a high quality, productive and adaptive labor force for the ben
                           efit of the economy towards the realization of the MKUKUTA goals" (as cited in d
                           raft SEDP II). The PDO is expected to be achieved through three APLs and will be
                           measured using evidence regarding student learning outcomes.


                                                                                 Page 1 of 4
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The World Bank APL program development objective (PDO) will be to assist the Government of
                         Tanzania (GoT) in implementing secondary education reforms to improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning outcomes among secondary students. In the long-term, the APLs will ass
                         ist in "building a high quality, productive and adaptive labor force for the ben
                         efit of the economy towards the realization of the MKUKUTA goals" (as cited in d
                         raft SEDP II). The PDO is expected to be achieved through three APLs and will be
                         measured using evidence regarding student learning outcomes.
                          3. Project Description
                         The Secondary Education Development Program aims to improve the quality of secondary
                         education, with a focus on underserved areas by: (i) upgrading existing school infrastructure; (ii)
                         improving the equitable provision of teachers and the quality of teaching, with a focus on
                         mathematics, the sciences, and languages; (iii) ensuring adequate financing to schools for the
                         purchase of teaching and learning materials and improving utilization of transferred resources; and
                         (iv) providing capacity building and technical assistance to implement current and future reforms.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         National Scope (mainly rural and peri-urban)

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU05)
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                         Naima A Hasci (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    No
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed        No
                          Areas OP/BP 7.60


                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project triggered OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment, due to the planned construction or
                              rehabilitation of facilities such as classrooms, laboratories, offices, and teacher residences within
                              the compounds of existing educational institutions and has been assigned Environmental
                              Screening Category B. Potential adverse environmental and social impacts included noise, dust,
                              soil and water pollution from construction wastes and traffic problems under component 1.

                              As confirmed with the Government of Tanzania, the project had no adverse social impacts due to
                              land acquisition, because all construction or rehabilitation activities took place within existing
                              educational perimeters and the land allocated by the government to the specific schools for
                              education infrastructure purposes with no claims on them. Therefore, a separate Resettlement
                              Policy Framework was not prepared, and OP 4.12 was not triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                None
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                To address the potential negative environmental and social impacts consistent with the
                              requirements of the triggered safeguard policy, the Government prepared an Environmental and
                              Social Management Framework (ESMF), consistent with Tanzanian national environmental laws
Public Disclosure Copy




                              as well as the Bank's safeguard policy, Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. The ESMF
                              describes Tanzania's general environmental policies and laws, the Bank's safeguard policies,
                              outlines an environmental and social screening process which includes an environmental and
                              social checklist, codes of practice and procedures, and implementation and monitoring and
                              evaluation arrangements. The program coordinated with the National Environmental Management
                              Council (NEMC) to receive any required technical assistance.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Ministry of Education and Vocational Training (MoEVT), Prime Minister's Office - Regional
                              Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG), and participating teacher training colleges
                              and schools. No major environmental issues. The ESMF was approved and disclosed in the Bank's
                              InfoShop on April 28, 2010 and disclosed locally on the MoEVT website. The Kiswahili version
                              of the document was also made available locally.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                           23-Feb-2010
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                        16-Mar-2010


                                                                          Page 3 of 4
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Cornelia Jesse
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)                         Date: 15-Dec-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                         Page 4 of 4
