INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                             Report No.: ISDSC 12705
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          World                     Project ID:   P155263
Project Name:     Extractive Industries Transparancy Initiative Validation and Data Support
Team Leader(s): Ekaterina Mikhaylova,Diana M. Corbin
Estimated Date    15-Jul-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GEEDR                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), Oil and gas (25%), Other
Mining and Extractive Industries (25%)
Theme(s):         Tax policy and administration (50%), Other accountability/anti-corruption
(25%), Participation and civic engagement (25%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  0.9                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                         Amount
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative                                 0.9
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
Proposed Objective is to facilitate global EITI implementation and compliance by supporting EITI
validation process in calendar year 2015 and improving access to information through a public EITI
website.
C. Project Description
The grant will finance validation of eight countries that are due for validation (or re-validation) in
calendar year 2015 as well as improve EITI website.
Component 1: Validation. In 2013, Based on the decision of the EITI Board on August 21, 2013
(Board Circular 157) and EITI-MDTF donors agreed that validation would be managed at the
international level and funded by the EITI-MDTF. Previously, EITI validation was paid for by the
implementing countries. This was found to be sub-optimal, as it often presented a conflict of interest.
The procedures were changed as part of the 2013 EITI Standard. There are 8 validations due in 2015
validation: 5 compliant countries (Azerbaijan, Timor Leste, Ghana, Mongolia and Kyrgystan) and 2


﻿candidate countries (Solomon Islands and Sao Tome e Principe). In addition, it is likely that some
countries (e.g., the Philippines) will request early validation in 2015.
The validation process is managed by International EITI Secretariat, who selects Validators and
O
)       manages there their contracts and payments. Validation work follows a standard terms of reference
ToRs to produce standardized reports that are then reviewed considered by the Validation Committee
of the EITI Board to make a recommendation to the Board to determine if the country will be
declared EITI Compliant
Component 2: Improved access to EITI data through the EITI Website. The World Bank Group and
the EITI International Secretariat have undertaken a number of activities to improve the access to and
use of EITI data. Currently, most EITI data is "locked" in pdf documents, and often cannot easily be
accessed and used to inform public debate. The summary data currently collected by the EITI
International Secretariat (and made available at www.eiti.org) is quite general and doesn't address
the scope of disclosures under the revised EITI Standard.
There are several projects underway to address this challenge, including supporting implementing
countries to make their EITI data more accessible in-country, and a number of projects aimed at
developing EITI data standards that will improve access and comparability of data. Together with the
IMF, the EITI International Secretariat has developed a summary data template that provides
consistent and detailed information for all reports published in accordance with the EITI Standard.
Improvements to the EITI website will substantially increase the amount on EITI data that is made
available at the global level. While the main use of the disclosed information takes place within each
implementing country, the global EITI website play a key role in promoting the work of the EITI at
the country level, and in supporting comparative analysis of EITI data.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This is a global program. EITI website is global outreach. Validations will include upto 8 countries
across Asia, Africa, and Asia.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
There are no safeguards issues associated with this project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No            The project is technical assistance, no
BP 4.01                                      environmental impacts expected. Validation of
EITI countries is a process based assessment of
their compliance with EITI requirements.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No


﻿Physical Cultural Resources OP/ No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
0
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
4.12
O
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
Projects on International         No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):          Name: Ekaterina Mikhaylova,Diana M. Corbin
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 17-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                          Date: 18-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


