                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25240




                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category        Country
                                                             Supporting Critical
                                                             Infrastructure Resilience
                           P168167                                                        C - Not Required (C)          Turkey
                                                             and Disaster-Risk
                                                             Awareness in Turkey
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                        Investment Project
                           Esse Ayse Erkan Orenbas                                        GSU09
                                                                                                                        Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                       1.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                          1.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                          1.00
                                 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                               1.00


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to inform building resilience into critical infrastructures and support disaster risk
                           awareness at the community level.

                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1. Supporting Disaster Risk Awareness Raising

                           TUBİTAK, The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey, is the leading agency responsible for
                           the management, funding, and conducting of research in Turkey. TUBITAK holds thirteen Science Centers
                           across the country with 5 of them currently open to visitors and 8 of them under construction. Science
                           centers assume a critical role in Turkey in terms of rendering scientific culture more widespread, TUBİTAK
                           aims to increase state-of-the-art science centers in the country and display local (municipalities,


                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                                          Page 2 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey




                           governorships, universities) and national authorities’ scientific and information dissemination projects which
                           go beyond conventional methods.

                           The Component aims to facilitate establishment of disaster risk awareness raising corners/zones within
                           science centers. Currently certain Science Centers hold designated space to accommodate DRM equipment
                           demonstrating hydraulic shaking, panels that visualize movements of fault lines that cross the country, an
                           interactive section/panel through which audience can direct with their body movements to simulate seismic
                           events and an informatory section on volcanic activities. This component will finance establishment of
                           disaster risk awareness raising zones within these science centers in Turkey that would inform the overall
                           society on why and how disasters happen, how to take prevention measures against disasters, how to
                           behave during and after major disasters, structural and non-structural consequences of and preparatory
                           measures against natural disasters. The equipment to be designed, procured and mantled will be multi-
                           hazard in nature and complement learning abilities of groups that are not necessarily scientists or DRM
Public Disclosure Copy




                           experts. The science centers staff will also be gathered in a technical workshop tackling with the content,
                           nature, use and maintenance of the newly introduced equipment and the way they complement learning
                           abilities of target groups.

                           Given the vast outreach capacity of science centers the activity will provide ample opportunity to expose
                           individuals, public institutions and NGOs to disaster risk information, empower community-based disaster
                           awareness raising and set an example for other Science Centers across the country.

                           Component 2. Critical infrastructure

                           Critical infrastructure is an asset or system which is essential for the maintenance of vital societal functions.
                           Reducing the vulnerabilities of critical infrastructure and increasing their resilience against natural disasters,
                           terrorism or malicious behavior requires fostering prevention and preparedness by improving the protection
                           of critical infrastructures and addressing crisis management. This notion is also a key agenda item within the
                           European Union and has its reflections on pre-accession countries like Turkey. To this end, the Component
                           will finance development of an advisory note that builds on the 2008 Directive on European Critical
                           Infrastructures and informs protection of critical infrastructures by providing a scientific basis for a better
                           understanding of criticalities and interdependencies at all levels in Turkey while looking into international
                           best practices.

                           This component will also finance a follow-up multi-hazard risk assessment on energy and logistics sector and
                           develop an adaptation plan at sectorial scale. This work will be an opportunity to conduct impact studies to
                           strengthen the competitiveness within these sectors by minimizing their business/service disruption. The
                           locality of the assessment will be identified via factoring the intensity of assets in a given locality, information
                           availability, replication opportunities, priority for the region, etc. The Component will also facilitate conduct
                           of a technical workshop that would enable dissemination of results and participation of public and private
                           entities, business owners, decision-makers etc. The workshop will serve as a platform the showcase good
                           practices conducted in those settings whose risk and infrastructure profiles are similar to that of Turkey and
                           trigger peer learning and networking opportunities.


                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey




                           The Component will lastly finance establishment of an online platform to be administered by AFAD and
                           accessible to stakeholders of all natures. The platform will embody a critical infrastructure risk assessment
                           matrix that would help stakeholders rank the risk that predominantly threatens their assets, lives and
                           savings. The matrix will be multi-hazard in nature whilst clustering different scenarios, return periods and
                           would factor in proxies to compute the domino effect/cascading impact that critical facilities and their
                           production/service streams would be subject to in given disasters. This would help AFAD develop a critical
                           infrastructure mapping at the national scale and instill prevention/preparedness measures accordingly. The
                           activities identified under Component 2 will seek alignment and coordinating with Japan Program’s
                           collaboration with the FCI team on Resilient Industry, to the extent possible.

                           Component 3. Business Continuity Planning

                           The component will facilitate conduct of analytical work to assess varying dependencies on lifeline utilities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           their capacity to withstand service outage and the impact on their supply-chain. This work will be an
                           opportunity to work at SME-level, opening a whole new field of business for risk assessment and impact
                           studies to strengthen the competitiveness along the supply chain and better understanding their
                           dependency on lifeline utilities. It will develop a business continuity plan for a selected sector that could then
                           be tailored down to product level. The study will also use and adapt the concepts of domino impact (spill-
                           over impact within the same sector) and cascading impact (spill-over impact in other sectors). The activities
                           identified under Component 3 will seek alignment and coordinating with Japan Program’s collaboration with
                           the FCI team on Resilient Industry, to the extent possible.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The Project is predominantly composed of analytical work that is coupled with a goods provision and
                          installation activity to take place in Konya TUBITAK Science Center (Component 1). No civil works will take
                          place. Should there be any changes in the location the Task Team will be informed accordingly to mitigate
                          potential impacts (if any). The analytical work to be produced under Component 2 and 3 on critical
                          infrastructure and business continuity planning respectively, will take into account the safeguards policies of
                          the Bank and the outputs will not be in conflict with the principles of the safeguard policies. The Project is
                          expected to have positive social impacts to the community-at-large. The project aims to set up disaster risk
                          awareness zones within the already established Science Centers of TUBITAK. In terms of Bank’s safeguards
                          policies, since the Project aims to involve mainly consultancy works and mimial goods provision, no land
                          acquisition or resettlement will take place hence OP 4.12 will not be triggered. Since the main beneficiaries
                          of these centers will be students and the local community, and moreover that these places are expected to


                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                                Page 4 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey




                          turn into public spaces it would be important to consider the following aspects to make sure that the center
                          is accessible and inclusive by all means to the extent possible such as (i) integrating inclusive design aspects
                          such as accessible for elderly, disabled and making it gender-friendly as well as child proof (ii) equipping
                          science center staff to benefit from awareness training not only in the technical side of the DRM field but
                          also in the psycho-social aspects that may relate to adverse emotions for some participants (especially those
                          who had disaster related negative experience or trauma) who may come and want to benefit from these
                          centers.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Recipient has been a partner in a number of BETF activities financed by the Bank up until recent past.
                          Hence they are familiar with the safeguards policies of the Bank. Given the analytical work predominant
Public Disclosure Copy




                          nature of the Project none of the safeguards OPs are triggered. However the Safeguards Team will provide
                          regular implementation support as needed and close follow up to Project activities once implementation
                          starts



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Arzu Uraz Yavas, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Esra Arikan, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 No
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan


                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                                   The World Bank
                                   Supporting Critical Infrastructure Resilience and Disaster-Risk Awareness in Turkey




                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           26-Jul-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              Since none of the safeguards policies are triggered, no safeguard-related studies will be required.


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Esse Ayse Erkan Orenbas
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         03-Aug-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       David N. Sislen                                   06-Aug-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Aug 06, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 6
