                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA15147
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Macedonia, former Yugoslav                   P154464
                                                                             Project ID:
                                               Republic of
                            Project Name:      Second Municipal Services Improvement Project (P154464)
                            Task Team       Toshiaki Keicho
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2015                            Estimated   22-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSU09                                   Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (30%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (15%), Solid
                                              waste management (15%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Powe r (20%), Sub-
                                              national government administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Municipal finance (25%),
                                              Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      28.97           Total Bank Financing:                     28.97
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         28.97
                              Total                                                                                         28.97
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Development Objective of MSIP2 Project (PDO) is to improve transparency, financial
                           sustainability and inclusive delivery of targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.

                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Second Municipal Services Improvement Project (MSIP2) of EUR25 million presents
                         the second phase of the on-going Municipal Services Improvement Project (MSIP, P096481) with an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aim to respond to the strong demand by the municipalities for the local infrastructure financing. It
                         will be built on the experience of MSIP and its lessons learned to enhance the impact of a well-
                         performing project.

                         MSIP aims at improving the transparency, financial sustainability, and delivery of targeted municipal
                         services. Its implementation is progressing well, and the sub-project results so far demonstrate good
                         progress towards achieving its PDO. To date, a total of 51 sub-loan agreements have been signed
                         with eligible municipalities under the MSIP component of Municipal Investments (loan component),
                         out of which 33 sub-projects were completed and 11 are under implementation, while others are
                         either at the tendering stage or about to start the tendering process. Furthermore, 22 sub-projects are
                         currently under preparation by the respective municipalities with support from the Project
                         Management Unit (PMU). In addition, 19 municipalities submitted applications to access funds
                         under the MSIP component of Performance-based Investment Grants, with six performance grants
                         agreements signed, and four grant activities already successfully completed. Some of the MSIP
                         accomplishments to date include: more than 11,000 households with new water connections; about
                         240,000 people with access to regular solid waste collection; and all participating municipalities/
                         utilities publish their budget information on their websites.

                         The original IBRD Loan for MSIP (approved on March 26, 2009) was in the amount of US$25
                         million equivalent. It was followed by Additional Financing loan of US$50 million equivalent
                         approved by the Board on May 10, 2012. More recently, a new Component introducing the EU IPA-
                         financed Rural Investment Window of EUR15.5 million, Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF),
                         was added on December 22, 2014 to provide grants for priority rural infrastructure investments in
                         eligible municipalities through the existing MSIP implementation mechanism.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To date, more than 40 percent of MSIP total loan amount (including both original loan and AF funds)
                         has been disbursed. In addition, about EUR47.2 million have already been committed for municipal
                         investments under the existing sub-projects pipeline. This represents 98 percent of all available MSIP
                         investment funds, excluding the IPA-financed window. Thus, the MSIP funds are now fully
                         committed and the project cannot respond to new applications from the municipalities. At the same
                         time, municipalities continue to express growing interest and demand in using MSIP financing.

                         Given a persisting needs for improving municipal infrastructure and based on the positive experience
                         in implementation of MSIP, the Government of FYR Macedonia requested the Bank for a new
                         project or additional financing to MSIP in the amount of EUR25 million. Since the on-going MSIP
                         already has two additional financings, including the recently approved IPA window, it was decided
                         to proceed with preparation of a new operation that would present the second phase of MSIP. This is
                         also a good opportunity to take stock of implementation experience under MSIP and bring in the
                         needed adjustments if any.

                         MSIP2 will continue to focus on improving the transparency, financial sustainability, and delivery of
                         targeted services under the responsibility of participating municipalities and their CSEs, such as
                         water supply, sanitation, and solid waste management, as well as energy efficiency, urban transport,
                         and other services delivered by municipalities. It will adopt the implementation arrangements and
                         mechanisms that proved to be effective under the MSIP with some adjustments introduced based on


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         the MSIP experience and lessons learned. In addition, MSIP2 aims to enhance inclusive service
                         delivery by targeting poorer and marginalized communities for infrastructure improvements through
                         the grant component. The positive aspects of MSIP experience, which the new project will adopt,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include the access to loans affordable to municipalities (sub-loans), demand-driven process with
                         participating municipalities selecting priority investments out of the wide variety of municipal
                         investments, support for municipalities throughout sub-project cycle contributing to capacity
                         building, and increased transparency and disclosure of information by participating municipalities as
                         an eligibility condition. The lessons learned include the need to improve construction supervision and
                         quality of technical documentation prepared by the municipalities.

                         MSIP2 will have a composition of the components similar to MSIP, with the several adjustments, as
                         follows:

                         Component A - Municipal Investments (Euro 18.5 million): will provide sub-loans to municipalities
                         for investments in (i) revenue-generating public services, and (ii) other projects of high priority for
                         the municipalities and with cost-saving potential.

                         Component B - Poverty/Social Inclusion Investment Grants (Euro 5 million): will provide investment
                         grants to municipalities as an incentive for them to invest in infrastructure improvements in poorer
                         and marginalized communities within their jurisdictions.

                         Component C - Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Capacity Building (Euro 1.5
                         million): supports operational costs of the PMU and assists with project implementation and
                         monitoring, as well as finance consultancy services and technical assistance for (i) sub-project
                         preparation/implementation and local capacity building for municipalities and CSEs to improve
                         service delivery, and (ii) national level institutional strengthening.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project activities will be located throughout the country. Location of sub-projects are not known
                         at present, as it will be determined on eligibility basis based on multiple criteria analysis. The sub-
                         projects are likely to be located in all regions of the country. Until now, sub-projects prepared for
                         First Municipal Services Project were located in municipalities of Vinica, Berovo, Bosilovo. Kriva
                         PAlanka, Rankovce, Petrovec, Cashka, Shuto Orizari etc, about 40 rural and urban municipalities and
                         have included activities such as: improvement of public street lightning; rehabilitation and energy
                         efficiency measures in public buildings (schools, kindergartens, municipal administration buildings);
                         reconstruction of municipal roads; rehabilitation of water supply networks; construction and/or
                         rehabilitation of storm water drainage systems; provision of basic equipment and vehicles for
                         communal waste management.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
                         Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The design of this project follows that of the first except
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      the grant component is not conditional; grants will now go
                                                                     to the poorest neighborhoods without condition of having



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                                                        achieved certain goals with loan support. Physical works
                                                        are expected to be small scale rehabilitation (of water
                                                        supply networks, schools, heating pumps, streets and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        sewerage), for which EMP Checklist will likely be
                                                        sufficient. The Environmental Assessment and
                                                        Management Framework (EAMF) for the first project will
                                                        be updated as needed; it includes screening criteria and
                                                        processes for land acquisition and environmental aspects.
                                                        The EAMF will present overview of the legal framework
                                                        of environmental and local-self government sectors in
                                                        Macedonia; procedures for environmental assessment for
                                                        the project development required under national
                                                        legislation; procedures for environmental assessment for
                                                        project development under World Bank procedures, and
                                                        analysis of potential environmental impacts caused by
                                                        sub-projects during implementation of different types of
                                                        activities. The EAMF will list potential negative
                                                        environmental impacts for each type of project activities
                                                        and will provide list of environmental mitigation and
                                                        monitoring activities in order to mitigate and neutralize
                                                        the relevant impacts. This will provide a framework
                                                        outlining how Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
                                                        will be developed for each type of sub-project, and when
                                                        site-specific EA/EIA are needed.
                                                        Sub-projects which would qualify for Category A rating
                                                        according to OP 4.01 will be ineligible for financing
                                                        under the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural        No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project has programmatic nature of design, it will
                         OP/BP 4.12                     finance sub-projects proposed by municipalities.
                                                        Implementing agency has sent the draft Resettlement
                                                        Policy Framework. The project will finance demand
                                                        driven municipal infrastructure available to any
                                                        municipality and some sub-projects may require
                                                        temporary access to land, possibly land acquisition. Sub-
                                                        projects are not likely to require resettlement. The PMU
                                                        will check potential for this trigger in all investments and



                                                         Page 4 of 8
                                                                      ensure: (i) whether land acquisition or access to land is
                                                                      required; (ii) if private land acquisition can be avoided;
                                                                      and (iii) where land acquisition or resettlement is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      required, that it is done in accordance with agreed
                                                                      procedures in RPF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   Yes           The project will support activities that could take place on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      trans-boundary waterways as defined in OP 7.50.
                                                                      Macedonia is a small country and has several rivers that
                                                                      flow trans-boundary. Nevertheless, it is anticipated that
                                                                      investments supported under MSIP2 will not (i) adversely
                                                                      change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other
                                                                      riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected by the
                                                                      other riparians' possible water use. Project investments are
                                                                      expected to support the rehabilitation, improvement or
                                                                      minor additions or minor expansions of existing schemes.

                                                                      Like the ongoing MSIP, however, the MSIP2 consists
                                                                      only of rehabilitation and improving efficiency of water
                                                                      use, and it aims to contribute substantially for reducing
                                                                      extremely high water consumption rates. Based on this,
                                                                      the exemption from the notification requirement under OP
                                                                      7.50, Para 7a, was requested to be applied for this project
                                                                      which was approved by RVP on October 6, 2015.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Although there is a demand driven nature of project Component A (Municipal Investments) and
                              Component B (Poverty/Social Inclusion Investment Grants) the list of sub-projects to be financed
                              throughout the project life is not known ex-ante. The safeguards issues and impacts are associated
                              with the activities under Components A and B of the project, but if properly executed, are not
                              expected to generate significant or irreversible adverse environmental effects.
                              No significant land acquisition or resettlement is expected under the proposed or likely
                              subprojects, although there may be temporary land acquisition during period of civil works.
                              Sub-projects which would qualify for Category A rating according to OP 4.01 will be ineligible
                              for financing under the project. The procedure for determining whether subprojects are eligible or
                              not is outlined in the Project Operational Manual (POM). Similarly, the procedure for determining
                              whether an EA/EMP or EMP alone is required for a subproject, depending on its nature, is laid out
                              in the POM.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           None expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project alternatives will be evaluated for any proposed investment, including the alternative of
                           doing nothing. The project will seek to avoid the involuntary acquisition of land and subsequent
                           impacts as detailed in OP 4.12. Where involuntary acquisition of land cannot be avoided, the
                           project will seek to minimize impacts by adopting such changes as shifts in alignment, reductions
                           of site footprints, etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In accordance with the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.1, an Environmental Assessment and
                           Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared for the project. The draft EAMF was
                           completed in September 2015, and disclosed in country on October 7, 2015.
                           The EAMF and POM of the ongoing project detail the implementation roles of the Borrower and
                           the Bank in preparation, approval and execution of EMPs for each sub-project. As part of sub-
                           project identification, the Project Management Unit (PMU) undertakes environmental screening
                           for each proposed sub-project and develops respective environmental management and mitigation
                           plans (EMPs), which are subsequently included in bidding documents. Environmentally-related
                           activities and procedures are carried out by the Borrower as designed, with due diligence and
                           sufficient attention to details. Compliance with measures prescribed in sub-project specific EMPs
                           is reviewed by PMU staff at regular intervals and written reports on findings prepared and filed in
                           the PMU.
                           Contracts for civil works under the project are subject to screening for environmental impacts by
                           the Ministry of Environment in the Borrower country. All studies and bidding documents related
                           to civil engineering works include measures to minimize and/or mitigate potential environmental
                           damage. Separate EMPs alone or site-specific EA/EIAs and EMPs are prepared for each sub-
                           project; even if EA/EIA studies are not required by the national legislation, the Borrower observes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           requirements set in the EAMF and respective EMPs prepared for this project. Those EMPs/EAs/
                           EIAs are reviewed and endorsed by both the responsible environmental entity in the Borrower
                           country and the World Bank.
                           Monitoring compliance in accordance with the findings of the Environmental Assessment Report
                           and requirements of relevant EMPs, including progress monitoring on EMP implementation, is
                           undertaken by the Ministry of Finance and reported to the World Bank twice per year in the semi-
                           annual progress reports.
                           In addition to the environmental safeguard above, the ongoing project triggered involuntary
                           resettlement safeguard policy (OP 4.12). The PMU checks potential for this trigger in all
                           investments and ensures: (i) whether land acquisition or access to land is required; (ii) if private
                           land acquisition can be avoided; and (iii) where land acquisition/resettlement is required, that it is
                           done in accordance with agreed procedures. The procedures will continue to be the same also for
                           the new project, given to the same nature of the sub-projects.
                           The borrower has knowledge and capacity to comply with the World Bank requirements for
                           Environment and Social Safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project is highly participatory and demand-driven. Key beneficiaries of the subprojects are the
                           customers of the communal service enterprises (CSEs) owned by the municipalities; in cases of
                           services managed directly by the municipalities, such as greenmarkets, the beneficiaries are all


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           users including vendors and consumers. In case the rehabilitation works will pass through private
                           properties, requiring temporary land acquisition during the execution, the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) that has been prepared explains how temporary land acquisition will be treated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in such cases.
                           Public consultations on general EAMF and RPF were held in the week of October 5, 2015, and the
                           finalized safeguards documents were disclosed at Infoshop and in Country on October 7, 2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Sep-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Oct-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           07-Oct-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Sep-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           07-Oct-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         n.a.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Toshiaki Keicho
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                              Date: 07-Oct-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
