                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC13593

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Latin America                   Project ID:      P155978
                            Project Name:   FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities
                                            in LAC Project
                            Team Leader(s): Kimberly Vilar
                            Estimated Date 30-Nov-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GSU04                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):            Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):             Participation and civic engagement (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Social
                                                  Inclusion (60%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.39948                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                          0
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                    0.39948
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to build the capacity of targeted civil society and local communities in
                           Latin America and the Caribbean to enhance their knowledge and understanding of REDD+, thereby
                           allowing them to expand and enhance their participation in REDD+ processes at the national level.


                           Specific activities:

                           (i)     Engage with rural-sector stakeholders on the state of information and issues most relevant to
                           the construction of REDD+ strategies and relevant safeguards in the region from the perspective of a
                           diverse set of CSOs.
                           (ii)    Implement participatory, informational workshops on REDD+ processes for/by forest-
                           dependent local communities. The participatory process detailed in activity (i) will determine
                           whether these activities are carried out nationally in each case or at the regional level.
                         (iii)    Generate knowledge (video documentaries, radio spots, training of trainers modules and
                         other printed materials where appropriate), with CSOs, to facilitate dialogue and decision-making
                         skills of small-scale farming sector and peasant community leaders of organizations implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         REDD+
                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1: Capacity Building Activities (Approx. US $179,766)
                         ACICAFOC will convene regional and national CSOs and regional networks of forest-dependent
                         local communities during project preparation and implementation to further define, through
                         participatory methodologies, the precise capacity building activities to be supported. This will be
                         the result of a self-assessment of the current knowledge of REDD+-related issues and training needs
                         in different countries. However, generally the types of activities that will mostly likely be proposed
                         are workshops through two classroom modalities, both virtually by video technology or in-person by
                         covering travel costs amongst neighboring countries as well as training of trainers’ methodologies to
                         ensure further dissemination of training material. These activities will aim to (i) enhance their
                         understanding and knowledge of REDD+, (ii) promote their participation in the preparation and
                         implementation of REDD+ activities, (iii) enhance their participation in discussions of the role of
                         REDD+ in climate change mitigation, (iv) support capacity building/enhancement of CSO platforms,
                         local communities and networks at the national level that engages with REDD+ and climate change,
                         and (v) enhance women’s participation in REDD+ activities.

                         Component 2: Regional-Level Communication and Dissemination of Project Results (Approx. US
                         $179,766)
                         This component will finance regional-level activities and the design and implementation of a
                         communication strategy to disseminate at the country and regional level, the results of activities
                         carried out by the project, including the preparation of good practices and lessons learned, aimed at
                         addressing capacity building needs of civil society and local communities at all levels so as to foster
                         their effective engagement in REDD+. Activities under this component will finance dissemination of
                         modules prepared in conjunction with CSOs, regional level network forums on REDD+, and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         publication of materials (produced in appropriate languages, where necessary). Data on women and
                         youth participation will be highlighted at the regional level. Regional organizations and networks
                         participating in the FCPF will be targeted. Thus, the communication strategies to be employed will
                         draw upon existing resources, relationships, and networks, including regional learning and exchange
                         forum to the maximum extent possible.

                         Component 3: Management and Administration (Approx. US $39,948)
                         This component will support ACICAFOC’s day-to-day project implementation and management
                         costs, including the incremental time of the project coordinator. Moreover, financial management
                         and procurement assessments (to be completed by appraisal), will determine whether more capacity
                         is needed and whether it will entail an increase in the time of the professionals associated to the
                         project. This would include the preparation of annual work plans, the financing of audit reports, and
                         any other incremental overhead costs incurred as a result of the implementation of the project.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact locations of the capacity building activities have not yet been defined, although options
                         will be narrowed down during preparation of the project. In terms of physical characteristics, the
                         project will not have a physical footprint, as its activities will consist of training services and
                         workshops. Moreover, its target population will be CSOs and forest-dependent local communities in
                           order to focus on rural populations that will not be covered by this project’s sister grant, which will
                           be focusing exclusively on indigenous populations. Therefore, no environmental or social safeguard
                           polies will apply.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kimberly Vilar (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               Given that no physical footprint is associated to
                           BP 4.01                                               the project, it is clear that no environmental
                                                                                 impacts are expected, hence the explanation in
                                                                                 the ISDS under OP/BP 4.01 that the operational
                                                                                 manual for the project will include screening
                                                                                 and follow-up procedures for the management
                                                                                 of potential environmental impacts is not
                                                                                 required in this case.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               Since there are no activities that will directly
                                                                                 impact natural habitats, screening and follow up
                                                                                 procedures are not required.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               Since there are no direct and/or physical impacts
                                                                                 on forests, no screening and follow up
                                                                                 procedures are required.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               None of the activities that would be supported
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 by the Project are expected to involve the
                                                                                 procurement or a substantial increase in the use
                                                                                 of pesticides. This would be specified in an
                                                                                 exclusion list.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               This policy is not triggered because the Project
                           BP 4.11                                               is not expected to support any activities having
                                                                                 an adverse impact on physical cultural
                                                                                 resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered given that the direct
                                                                                 beneficiaries of the project will explicitly be
                                                                                 non-indigenous rural/peasant communities and
                                                                                 organizations, in order to complement the
                                                                                 exclusively indigenous peoples’ grant that is
                                                                                 being funded in parallel.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               None of the activities that would be supported
                           4.12                                                  by the Project are expected to involve physical
                                                                                 displacement and resettlement. Nor are they
                                                                                 expected to involve the involuntary restriction
                                                                                 of community access to natural resources in
                                                                                             legally designated parks or protected areas. This
                                                                                             would be specified in an exclusion list.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   None of the activities that would be supported
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             by the Project are expected to involve the
                                                                                             construction or operation of new or existing
                                                                                             dams.
                           Projects on International                    No                   This policy is not triggered because the Project
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              is not expected to support any activities having
                                                                                             adverse impacts on the efficient utilization and
                                                                                             protection of international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered because the Project
                           7.60                                                              will not support activities in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Kimberly Vilar
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                      Date: 22-Oct-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Markus Kostner (PMGR)                                        Date: 22-Oct-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
