                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24087




                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category    Country
                                                             Energy Efficiency
                                                             Improvements in Public       B - Partial Assessment
                           P166751                                                                                  Kyrgyz Republic
                                                             Buildings in the Kyrgyz      (B)
                                                             Republic
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit             Financing Instrument
                           Katharina B. Gassner,                                                                    Investment Project
                                                                                          GEE03
                           Kathrin Hofer                                                                            Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                   2.66
                           Total Financing                                                                                                      2.66
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                      2.66
                                 Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                                                                   2.66


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed activity aims to pilot innovative energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies in selected public
                           buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic.

                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will be financed through a US$2.66 million recipient-executed grant provided by the
                           Government of Switzerland and channeled through ESMAP, a multi-donor Trust Fund (TF). The RETF is
                           directly linked to the HSIP by providing co-financing towards Component 3, which aims to demonstrate the
                           benefits of EE improvements in public buildings. Due to a timing lag between the HSIP and the proposed
                           RETF, the latter was not submitted as joint co-financing (but its scope was described as part of the HSIP).




                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic




                           The proposed RETF involves three Components: (1) piloting of innovative EE and renewable energy (RE)
                           technologies in selected public buildings; (2) capacity building and technical assistance support; and (3) grant
                           implementation support.

                           COMPONENT 1: Piloting of innovative EE and RE technologies (estimated US$1,522,000 RETF financing).
                           This component will provide investment grants to pilot innovative EE and RE technologies in a number of
                           buildings that will be retrofitted as part of Component 3 of the HSIP.

                           Eligible technologies. Innovative technologies piloted under Component 1 are aimed at complementing
                           standard EE and seismic measures supported under the HSIP, demonstrate viable alternatives to traditional
                           electric heating in public buildings and enhance the combined electricity savings impact. Eligibility criteria for
                           innovative technologies are proposed to include the following: (i) internationally proven and well-tested
                           technologies for buildings; (ii) additional energy savings impact compared to the standard technical EE
Public Disclosure Copy




                           solution supported under the HSIP and/or enhanced reliability of energy supply; (iii) replication potential as
                           assessed through the RE potential; and (iv) sufficient market capacity to supply, install and operate the
                           technologies. On the basis of these criteria and the draft findings of a market assessment on innovative
                           EE/RE technologies, including walk-through energy audits in 10 public buildings, eligible technologies are
                           expected to include (non-exhaustive list): solar photovoltaic (PV) rooftop (with or without power storage
                           battery); sanitary hot water air source heat pump; large air-to-water heat pump for space heating (through
                           ventilation system or central heating network); and LED lighting with controls (movement, daylight, time).
                           Stand-alone RE units (e.g. small hydro, wind, PV) are not eligible under the RETF.

                           Selection of buildings for innovation grants. The innovative technologies would be piloted in a subset of
                           public buildings selected under the HSIP and implemented alongside comprehensive EE and seismic
                           measures supported under the HSIP. The innovation grants will be provided in three annual rounds (in line
                           with the buildings selection and implementation process under HSIP). Prioritization criteria for the selection
                           of buildings where innovation grants will be provided will be based on the results of the detailed energy
                           audits and be made based on the following criteria: (i) technical feasibility, applicability and viability for the
                           building context; (ii) impact on electricity savings; (iii) mitigating impact on power cuts (buildings
                           experiencing frequent power cuts would be prioritized); and (iv) increase in deployment of innovative
                           technologies under the HSIP.

                           Implementation readiness. The first set of buildings to be retrofitted under the HSIP (involving four schools,
                           two kindergartens and two health sector buildings) has been selected and preliminary walk-through energy
                           and seismic audits were conducted for all buildings to confirm eligibility of the buildings as per HSIP criteria
                           and identify potential innovative EE and RE measures. In six out of eight buildings, innovative EE/RE
                           measures have been identified that meet above mentioned criteria for the innovation grants, including: heat
                           pumps for space heating and/or sanitary hot water; lighting control systems; and PV emergency back-up
                           units with power storage battery. Investment costs for these measures are estimated at US$580,000,
                           equaling around 28 percent of the total investment costs. Detailed energy audits and seismic assessments




                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic




                           will be conducted in June-September 2018 to validate these findings and inform detailed designs for the
                           buildings.

                           COMPONENT 2: Capacity building and technical assistance support (estimated US$974,000 RETF financing).
                           This component will support capacity building, awareness raising and technical assistance support for the
                           preparation and implementation of EE and RE investments. Specifically, this would include:

                                  Capacity building for the identification, preparation and implementation of innovative EE and RE
                                   technologies, including training and targeted technical assistance aimed at increasing the capacity and
                                   knowledge of local key stakeholders on innovative EE and RE technologies. The target audience will
                                   include local service providers (e.g. energy audit companies, design firms, local suppliers) as well as
                                   public stakeholders (e.g. ARIS, State Committee for Industry, Energy and Mining; State Agency for
                                   Architecture, Construction and Housing; State Inspectorate on Ecological and Technical Safety; etc.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  Awareness raising activities, mainly aimed at capturing and dissemination achieved results of the
                                   innovative technologies for demonstration, awareness and project promotion purposes.
                                  Technical support for preparation and implementation of EE and RE measures for one annual batch of
                                   buildings retrofitted under the HSIP and the proposed RETF; specifically, this will include energy
                                   audits and seismic assessments for at least seven buildings selected under the HSIP, detailed designs
                                   and technical specifications as well as technical supervision of implemented EE and RE measures.

                           COMPONENT 3: Grant Implementation Support (estimated US$ 165,000 RETF financing). This component
                           will provide Grant implementation support to ARIS, including: (i) PIU staff/ consultants (full-time technical
                           expert throughout the project and a temporary procurement specialist until effectiveness of the HSIP); (ii)
                           Grant-related operating costs; and (iii) annual audits of the Project accounts.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The specific locations of the RETF activities to be carried out under Component 1 will overlap with the
                          buildings selected for the HSIP (i.e., no separate selection for the RETF). It is anticipated however that only a
                          smaller subset of HSIP buildings will be appropriate for innovative measures under the RETF.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          Over the last years ARIS has been acting as PIU in different World Bank projects and could build up significant
                          institutional capacity for the Bank's Safeguard Policies. In addition, a part-time safeguards specialist will be
                          hired under the HSIP to ensure compliance with the ESMF and development of site-specific ESMPs. There is


                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic




                          no land take needed under the Energy Efficiency Component of the HSIP and the RETF will only support a
                          subset of the selected buildings under the HSIP.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Kristine Schwebach, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Qing Wang, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 Yes                     This RETF has direct linkage with the HSIP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                      Component 3. Innovative technologies
                                                                                                      piloted under Component 1 of the RETF are
                                                                                                      aimed at complementing standard EE and
                                                                                                      seismic measures supported under the
                                                                                                      HSIP Component 3, to demonstrate viable
                                                                                                      alternatives to traditional electric heating in
                                                                                                      public buildings and enhance the combined
                                                                                                      electricity savings impact. OP 4.01 on
                                                                                                      Environmental Assessment (EA) is triggered
                                                                                                      as the proposed activities under
                                                                                                      Component 1 might generate similar
                                                                                                      environmental impacts as the HSIP
                                                                                                      Component 3 does, such as dust, noise, soil
                                                                                                      removal and destruction, occupational
                                                                                                      hazards, traffic disruptions, construction
                                                                                                      wastes, etc.

                                                                                                      An ESMF has been prepared and disclosed
                                                                                                      for the HSIP and it requires that for each
                                                                                                      subproject under HSIP Components 3, site-
                                                                                                      specific ESMPs - based on requirements of
                                                                                                      the ESMF - will be developed and
                                                                                                      presented to the Bank for no objection. The
                                                                                                      ESMPs will specify necessary prevention,
                                                                                                      mitigation and monitoring activities to be
                                                                                                      followed during project implementation
                                                                                                      along with the implementing
                                                                                                      arrangements, including with regard to
                                                                                                      hazardous substances, such as asbestos.
                                                                                                      The ESMF and the site-specific ESMPs will
                                                                                                      be applied to this RETF as well. Once the


                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic



                                                                                                      public buildings are selected following the
                                                                                                      established selection criteria under the
                                                                                                      HSIP, energy audits and seismic
                                                                                                      assessments will be conducted in each
                                                                                                      selected building to identify the
                                                                                                      economically most viable energy efficiency
                                                                                                      measures (including eligible measures and
                                                                                                      technologies required by both the HSIP and
                                                                                                      this RETF) and seismic reinforcements
                                                                                                      needed to comply with local regulations.

                                                                                                      The project will not finance any activities
                                                                                                      within natural habitats, wildlife reserves,
                                                                                                      protected areas or critical natural habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No                      and its buffer zones, therefore will not have
                                                                                                      any adverse impact on environmentally and
                                                                                                      socially sensitive areas. Constructions are
                                                                                                      expected to be within city boundaries.
                                                                                                      No project activities (i.e. constructions) will
                                                                                                      be located in forests, in particular any
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                                                                                                      protection or conservation forest areas nor
                                                                                                      critical habitats and buffer zones.
                                                                                                      This project will not procure or use any
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No
                                                                                                      pesticides.
                                                                                                      There are no registered physical cultural
                                                                                                      resources or resources of local or national
                                                                                                      interest in the vicinity of the project areas.
                                                                                                      However, should any PCR be identified by
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                                                                                                      chance at any stage of the project
                                                                                                      implementation, its handling will be
                                                                                                      safeguarded by a PCR management
                                                                                                      procedure presented in the ESMF.
                                                                                                      OP 4.10 is not triggered as project activities
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                                                                                                      do not impact indigenous peoples.
                                                                                                      This project will work within the existing
                                                                                                      footprint of government owned buildings.
                                                                                                      There will be no need for additional access
                                                                                                      for works as the buildings will already have
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                                                                                                      access. All social concerns of health and
                                                                                                      safety not only of contractors but also
                                                                                                      building staff, will be addressed in the
                                                                                                      ESMPs.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No                      The project will not finance dams, nor the
                                                                                                      rehabilitation or any activities related to
                                                                                                      dam operation and safety. It will not


                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Energy Efficiency Improvements in Public Buildings in the Kyrgyz Republic



                                                                                                                      depend on the operation of an existing
                                                                                                                      dam either.
                                                                                                                      The project is not on international
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                                                                                                                      waterways.
                                                                                                                      The project will not finance any activities
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No
                                                                                                                      within territorially disputed areas.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Katharina B. Gassner

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Brandon Enrique Carter                            17-Jul-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Sameer Shukla                                     18-Jul-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Aug 10, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
