INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12358
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Central African Republic  Project ID:  P154304
Parent       P149884
Project ID:
Project Name: Emergency Public Services Response Project (P154304)
Parent Project CF-EMERGENCY PUBLIC SERVICES RESPONSE PROJECT (P149884)
Name:
Task Team       Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,David Tchuinou
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Mar-2015               Estimated     14-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGODR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     10.00            Total Bank Financing:    10.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
IDA Grant                                                                 10.00
Total                                                                     10.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 5


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objective is to re-establish an operational government payroll and
related financial management systems.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed changes introduced under the additional financing will involve and impact the
following: (i) additional allocation to Components 1 and 2 to provide additional fiscal space and time
to embed the reforms initiated under the original project; (ii) inclusion of activity under Component 1
related to the acquisition/deployment of a customized HR/payroll system adapted to the country's
context; and (iii) update on the country PFM system through a Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment. The description of the changes introduced, under the additional
financing are provided below.
Component 1- Payment of Current Salaries.
The additional activities under this component are aligned to those defined in the already existing
subcomponents. They will therefore not contribute to triggering a change in the PDO. The AF will
not change the objective of the component; it intends to scale up to achieve greater development
impact.
Subcomponent 1.1: Update of the HR/payroll databases. This subcomponent will support the
ongoing qualitative activities aiming to finalize the update of the databases with support from UNDP,
as under the ongoing project. This will be followed by the acquisition/deployment of a customized
and integrated system in line with the recommendation and bidding documents developed by UNDP.
Subcomponent 1.2: Payment of the salaries of eligible civil servants excluding defense and security
forces. The ongoing project was designed with the objective of paying four months of salaries to
eligible civil servants and the defense and security forces salaries were to be covered by government
funds. Police and gendarmerie will continue to be paid by UNDP. The same arrangements will be
maintained for the payment of two months of salaries as part of the AF. Under this subcomponent,
the AF will also support the monthly physical verification of presence performed by the General
Inspectorate of Finance.
Component 2 - Technical Assistance to core structures in the Ministries of Finance and Civil Service.
Subcomponent 2.1: Technical assistance for Customs, Taxation, Payroll, General Inspectorate of
Finance and Civil Service. Additional allocation to this subcomponent will cover the Public Treasury
Directorate and will be used to extend the contract of the existing technical experts by two more
years. With three years of technical assistance (one financed by the ongoing project and two by the
AF) in these core structures combined with on-the-job training for national staff, it is expected that
the PFM system will meet basic requirements.
Subcomponent 2.2: Equipment for Customs, Taxation, Payroll, General Inspectorate of Finance and
Civil Service. No change will be implemented under this subcomponent.
Subcomponent 2.3: Support to the PFM reform unit (CS REF) and project operating cost. The
Page 2 of 5


﻿proposed changes will involve an increase of the existing support to the CS REF by two additional
years with the view of overseeing the project activities and the country's economic and governance
reform program. In addition, a PEFA assessment will be undertaken under this subcomponent with
the view to assess progress made over the project's life and draft a new PFM strategy focusing on the
second generation of the reforms.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
A phased approach will be adopted starting in Bangui and moving progressively, as security
improves, into provinces.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          In face of the risk that some civil servants might not
BP 4.10                              deliver basic services (e.g. health and education) in areas
where indigenous peoples (Baaka) are present, an IPPF
was prepared (in line with OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples)
under the original project and incorporated in the Project
Implementation Manual. Its related dissemination
campaign, started under the original project and covered
by the media, was organized with support from the PIU,
the Ministry of Social Affairs, and an NGO. It focused on
(a) explaining the existence of the Litigation Committee
to civil servants from the indigenous community, and (ii)
discussing the factors (including the presence of civil
servants) affecting service delivery in the Baaka
communities This dissemination campaign will be
pursued during the Additional Financing in conjunction
with other Bank-funded projects in these areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Page 3 of 5


﻿Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No reasonable alternatives are identifiable from an environmental management perspective.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In face of the risk that some civil servants might not deliver basic services (e.g. health and
education) in areas where Indigenous Peoples (Baaka) are present, an IPPF was prepared (in line
with OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples) under the original project and incorporated in the Project
Implementation Manual. The AF will pursue dissemination and sensitization activities on this
IPPF in conjunction with other Bank-funded projects in these areas.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An IPPF was prepared (in line with OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples) under the original project and
incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual. The AF will pursue dissemination and
sensitization activities on this IPPF in conjunction with other Bank-funded projects in these areas.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                0 1-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             0 1-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 4 of 5


﻿OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,David Tchuinou
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Renaud Seligmann (PMGR)              Date: 21-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


