                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC19581




                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 Vietnam: Strengthening
                                                                 M&E Capacity for
                           P161176                                                            C - Not Required (C)     Vietnam
                                                                 Improved Performance of
                                                                 Public Investment Projects
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                           Quang Hong Doan, Anh                                                                        Investment Project
                                                                 20-Mar-2017                  GMTP1
                           Phuong Nguyen                                                                               Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                      1.80
                           Total Financing                                                                                                         1.80
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                         2.00
                                  Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                               2.00


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the proposed free standing technical assistance is to strengthen the functional capacity of the MPI and
                           selected provinces in the formulation and implementation of result-based monitoring and evaluation. The TA is
                           focused on urban development projects in the context of the preparation and implementation of Vietnam Socio-
                           Economic Development Plan 2021-25.


                           C. Project Description
                           The project is proposed at the request of the MPI to help improve the capacity for monitoring and evaluation of
                           projects based on reliable and timely data. The operation is proposed to be a Recipient-executed Trust Fund
                           (RETF). The RETF modality would ensure the ownership and leadership of the counterparts as well as the



                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                                         Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects




                           effective application of the results of the operation. The engagement and contribution of the Bank will focus on
                           sharing international good practice, ensuring the robustness of the approach and the quality of the outputs.

                           The proposed RETF will contribute to improving Vietnam’s M&E system for public investment projects. The RETF
                           will aim to support the GoV in the implementation of the restructuring program of management of public
                           investment. The RETF activities will help to (i) enhance result-based M&E approach in legal framework and
                           appraisal methodology, (ii) improve the availability and quality of project data, enhance the approach to M&E.
                           As a result, the RETF is expected to strengthen capacity of MPI and relevant stakeholders in the preparation and
                           implementation of the improved regulatory framework for public investment. Finally, the RETF will contribute to
                           the assessment of the SEDP 2016-20 and the formulation of an evidence-based SEDP 2021-25.

                           The adoption of the improved M&E framework of the RETF focuses on the M&E of urban development projects
                           and is expected to complement the on-going technical assistance under the Mekong Delta Region Urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Upgrading Project (MDRUUP).

                           The project will have three components:

                           Component 1. Review and formulation of a Results-based framework for Public Investment Projects, with
                           pilot for urban projects.

                           Objectives

                           This component will support the MPI to strengthen the result-based framework of public investment projects;
                           and to effectively implement this framework through piloting of urban development projects.

                           Key stakeholders

                           The Department of Investment Supervision and Appraisal (DISA) of MPI will take the lead for this component, as
                           they have the mandate and the leading role in formulation of policies and regulatory framework for appraisal
                           and monitoring of public investment projects. DISA will work with Department of Urban and Infrastructure
                           Development, as well as the selected provincial Departments of Construction and Department of
                           Transport. Their primary focus is on taking stock of urban projects and the current monitoring mechanism and
                           on introducing a new institutionally compatible results-based M&E system.

                           The pilot of the M&E framework will be implemented by the selected Provincial Departments of Construction
                           and Department of Transport, in collaboration with Departments of Planning and Investment. The projects
                           selected for pilot include both non-ODA and ODA projects in the urban sector. The result indicators will be
                           adopted at appraisal stage, which will then be used throughout the project selection, implementation and
                           adjustment to monitor implementation against result.

                           Key activities and outputs

                           Under this Component, DISA will take the overall leading role to carry out the following activities:


                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                             Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects




                                   Take stock of the list of the large ongoing projects in urban sector. Review the current M&E system and
                                    formulate a result-based framework for public investment projects appraisal and monitoring. The
                                    framework will (i) provide sources of information and data for M&E and responsibility of agencies in the
                                    data collection; and (ii) include standardized tools for M&E (including M&E plan, project development
                                    objectives and log frame, and result indicators).
                                   Pilot the M&E result framework in selected urban projects.
                                   Develop report templates on public investment in line with the new M&E framework.
                                   Formulate necessary legal document(s) and manual(s) to guide the implementation of project appraisal
                                    and the M&E framework.
                                   Disseminate the new appraisal and M&E framework and undertake capacity building activities that aim
                                    to use of result-based M&E in urban projects.

                           Component 2. Improve the SBIMIS for on-line reporting and monitoring of public investment projects, with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capability to adopt the M&E result framework for analytical, reporting, and forward capital planning and
                           budgeting purpose.

                           Objectives

                           The Component will contribute to assessing and improving the current project database and hence enable the
                           adoption of the M&E framework developed by the first component of this project. The current reporting
                           requirement will be revised in accordance with the result indicators as specified in the M&E framework. An
                           option for this component is to improve the readiness of SBIMIS for effective two-way information sharing
                           between the specific projects including planned expenditures and physical progress captured by SBIMIS with
                           financial disbursements data recorded in TABMIS. The SBIMIS and TABMIS currently share the same project ID
                           code, which will enable the reconciliation of disbursement data from TABMIS to the SBIMIS. In future, when
                           TABMIS data is exported to the revenue-expenditure data warehouse at the MOF, and planned capital
                           allocation can be transferred from SBIMIS to the MOF data warehouse, it is much more effective for the PIM
                           system to monitor disbursement progress of capital projects. It is noted, however, that a formal agreement
                           among stakeholders is needed to facilitate this two-way information sharing and synchronizing between SBIMIS
                           and the data warehouse.

                           The system will be expected to aggregate necessary information with early warning indicators of problem
                           projects for MPI to strengthen their M&E system and make informed policy decision on capital budget
                           allocation. This component will help to provide reliable data about medium-term commitments of on-going
                           projects, which serves as important inputs to formulate the next medium-term investment plan (MTIP 2021-
                           2025). The component will also help the implementation of the amended Public Investment Law, which requires
                           a move from the current decentralized towards a centralized M&E database. This change requires further
                           improvement of the SBIMIS and its mandatory application in line ministries and provinces. The coverage of the
                           system can be extended to urban projects using provincial own budget. This will provide a complete picture on
                           the whole public investment in Vietnam.




                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                             Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects




                            Key stakeholders

                           The leading agency for the online reporting system is the IT Center under MPI, with active participation of the
                           Department for National Economic Issues (DNEI). While the IT Center is in charge of development, management
                           and training for ministries and provinces to report on their public investment projects online, the DNEI is in
                           charge of the preparation of the SEDP, MTIP, as well as the oversight of the overall public investment efficiency.
                           DNEI and DISA are the main beneficiaries and implementing partners on policy analysis and use of project
                           database for policy making at the MPI and selected provinces.

                           Key outputs and activities

                           Formulate online report templates for public investment projects in line with the M&E framework developed in
                           Component 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   Improve the online system for reporting on public investment projects to capture these indicators and
                                    other needs (including comprehensive coverage, report demand orientation, or early warning indicators
                                    of problem projects).
                                   Expand the coverage of the system to urban projects financed by provincial budget and allow provinces
                                    to use the system to monitor their own projects.
                                   Assess the readiness of the SBIMIS for two-way sharing capability and connectivity to the MOF national
                                    data warehouse and other databases.
                                   Prepare necessary legal documents for rolling out the improved reporting system
                                   Arrange activities for capacity building and support data collection for rolling out the application of the
                                    improved on-line reporting and utilization of the project database for reporting and policy making,
                                    including the implementation of the amended Public Investment Law.

                           Component 3. Administer the PHRD project.

                           Project Management and Administration: A project implementation unit (PIU) will be established to carry out
                           the day-to-day management of the project. The PIU will hire consultants (including financial management
                           consultant, procurement consultant, and administrative assistant) to help with daily activities.

                           Monitoring and Evaluation: M&E consultants will be hired to develop annual program workplan and monitor
                           progress of the program on a six-monthly and annual basis. The consultants will report to the head of the PIU
                           and share reports with the World Bank.

                           Knowledge Dissemination: A kick-off workshop will be organized to train all relevant staffs participating in the
                           project implementation. All outputs of the project will be disclosed and shared to all relevant stakeholders.

                           Key outputs will include:

                           •            Project work plan and budgets



                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                                Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects




                           •            Project progress reports, including M&E

                           •            Financial management and audit reports

                           •            Procurement plans


                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The pilot of the M&E framework will be implemented by the selected Provincial Departments of Construction
                          and Department of Transport, in collaboration with Departments of Planning and Investment. The projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                          selected for pilot can also include ODA projects in the urban sector.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The project will not trigger any safeguard policies.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Martin Henry Lenihan, Social Specialist
                          Son Van Nguyen, Environmental Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No                       The main activities of the grant include: i)
                                                                                                      Review and formulation of a Results-based
                                                                                                      framework for Public Investment Projects
                                                                                                      Appraisal and Monitoring; ii) Improve the
                                                                                                      SBIMIS for on-line reporting and monitoring
                                                                                                      of public investment projects, with
                                                                                                      capability to adopt business intelligence for
                                                                                                      analytical, reporting, and capital planning
                                                                                                      and budgeting purpose; and iii) Administer
                                                                                                      the TA project. The M&E framework might
                                                                                                      contain E&S indicators such as climate
                                                                                                      change indicators. But this project supports
                                                                                                      the development of the M&E framework,
                                                                                                      which is not expected to have potential


                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Vietnam: Strengthening M&E Capacity for Improved Performance of Public Investment Projects



                                                                                                                      adverse environmental and social impacts.
                                                                                                                      Therefore, OP 4.01 is not triggered, and the
                                                                                                                      project is classified as a Category C project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                                       No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Quang Hong Doan

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Peter Leonard                                     16-Oct-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Deepak K. Mishra                                  17-Oct-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Oct 21, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
