INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14950
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Papua New Guinea           Project ID:   P155087
Project Name:   Water Supply and Sanitation Development Project (P155087)
Task Team       Fook Chuan Eng
Leader(s):
Estimated       21-Jan-2016                Estimated     24-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (85%), Sanitation (15%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Urban services and housing for the poor
(60%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      55.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     50.00
.          Total                                                          55.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The specific proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the implementation of the
National WaSH Policy. The PDO will be achieved by (i) supporting the development, establishment
and strengthening of the sector institutional and financing structures provided by the Policy, and (ii)
utilizing these institutional and financing structures to support improved the access and sustainability
of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in selected district and provincial towns.
C. Project Description


﻿The project would comprise a National WaSH Policy component, a rural and peri-urban WSS
component and an urban WSS component. The rural and peri-urban WSS component, and the urban
WSS component are in turn subdivided into a policy implementation or institutionalstrengthening
subcomponent and an associated infrastructure investment subcomponent. A summary of the
components follows.
Component A: National WaSH Policy
Institutional and financing structures for the implementation of the WaSH Policy. This component
will provide technical assistance, capacity building and other related support towards the
establishment, operationalization and strengthening of a WaSH PMU in DNPM. This may include
supporting the WaSH PMU to implement key building blocks of the National WaSH Policy, among
others, (i) the WaSH Development Plan, (ii) a Capacity Development Strategy for the WaSH PMU
and implementers on the ground e.g., districts, (iii) the WaSH Monitoring Information System (MIS),
and (iv) a WaSH Communications and Promotion Plan.
Component B: Rural and Peri-Urban Water and Sanitation (WSS)
Component B. 1: Institutional and financing structures for rural and peri-urban WSS. This
component will provide technical assistance, capacity building and other related support towards: (i)
the planning, development and implementation of rural and/or peri-urban WSS programs by selected
subnational government authorities, and (ii) the development, establishment and initial seed
financing of a Water Fund.
Component B.2: Infrastructure investment in water and sanitation systems in rural and peri-urban
areas. This component will support the construction of an initial batch of rural and/or peri-urban
WSS systems by the selected subnational government authorities referred to in Component B. 1. This
may include pilot development in particularly underdeveloped subsectors e.g., sanitation. It is
envisaged that the systems will be funded through the Water Fund and would represent the first
O
Q)      demonstration of the working of the Fund.
Component C: Urban Water and Sanitation (WSS)
Component C. 1 - Institutional and financing structures for district and provincial towns WSS. This
component will provide technical assistance, capacity building and other related support towards: (i)
the establishment of a community service obligation support and funding scheme for urban WSS, in
relation to the corporatization of Water PNG, (ii) the development and implementation of WSS
service delivery model(s) for district and/or provincial towns, in relation to the corporatization of
Water PNG, (iii) capacity building support to Water PNG, including in utilities management and
operations, financial management, etc., in relation to improving its performance, (iv) technical,
financial and other diagnostic studies related to the water resources and WSS supply operations in
selected district and /or provincial towns, (v) preparation - including the assessment - of selected
WSS sub-projects in district and/or provincial towns, (vi) the management and supervision of the
implementation of these sub-projects.
Component C.2: Infrastructure investment in water and sanitation systems in selected District and /
or Provincial Towns. This component will support: (i) the construction and implementation of new
WSS systems in selected district and/or provincial towns, and (ii) the rehabilitation, augmentation,


﻿extension and/or other improvements of existing WSS services in selected district and/or provincial
towns.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The locations for infrastructure investments under Components B.2 (rural) and C.2 (urban) have not
been determined. In terms of scale, rural schemes are typically small spring-fed, gravity-based piped
systems. In urban settings, investments are likely to be in small reticulated systems within town, with
possible extensions to surrounding villages. Volumes are relatively small, with water sourced from
within or very near town usually from groundwater. For Water PNG's existing operations,
investments may include rehabilitation and performance improvement within existing systems.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The urban WaSH investments are expected to be in district towns where Water PNG has existing
plans to establish new water supply systems. Water PNG has been operating as a fully state-owned
Commercial Statutory Authority since 1987 and has a track record in planning, designing,
constructing, managing and commercially operating water supply and sewerage services in various
provincial and district towns. Between 1994 and 2013, Water PNG implemented approx. US$80
million of development projects, approx. US$45 million of which were donor/lender projects. Hence,
Water PNG's institutional capacity to implement World Bank safeguard policies is expected to be
reasonably competent.
The rural investments are intended to be developed and implemented by the new institutions to be
established under Components A and B. 1: the WaSH PMU and respective District Development
Authorities (DDA). The PMU and DDAs are expected to begin with very weak capacity both for
implementation and operation given the lack of systematic implementation and operations in rural
PNG WSS. Substantial technical assistance and capacity support in safeguards policy
implementation will be required. To allow this capacity to be developed to an acceptable standard the
project design proposes deferring infrastructure financing during the initial years to allow a focus on
institution building.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nicholas John Valentine (GENDR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This policy is triggered due to the proposed physical
OP/BP 4.01                              interventions under Components B.2 and C.2. These
interventions include infrastructure investment in
water and sanitation systems in rural and peri-urban
areas; construction and implementation of new WSS
systems in selected district and/or provincial towns;
and rehabilitation, augmentation, extension and/or
other improvements of existing WSS services in
selected district and/or provincial towns. These
investments will focus predominantly on water
supply systems. Investments in sanitation will be


﻿mostly in rural situations and will be limited to
hygiene behavior, including technical assistance with
simple technologies, i.e. pit latrines. Physical
investments in rural sanitation are expected to be
limited. Investments in urban sanitation
infrastructure will be limited to rehabilitation of
existing Water PNG sewerage systems.
The potential negative environmental impacts are
expected to be associated with civil construction
activities for new water supply systems, utilization of
water resources for these systems and disposal of
minor quantities of sludge from water treatment
plants. No substantial ancillary facilities are expected
to be required for these investments, with only minor
quantities of sludge to be generated which can be
managed by hand and buried. No significant social
impacts are expected as the infrastructure design has
sufficient flexibility to minimize the requirements for
land acquisition. The need for involuntary
resettlement is expected to be very low.
The proposed technical assistance activities under the
project are administratively focused and not expected
to have safeguards implications.
Overall, the project is environmentally beneficial.
The sub-project components are expected to involve
simple, appropriate, low cost technologies that do not
pose any significant environmental consequences.
The provision of safe drinking water and proper
sanitation facilities is expected to have a significant
positive impact on the improvement of livelihoods
and the environment, including reduction in
groundwater pollution. Some minor and temporary
negative environmental impacts may occur, resulting
mainly from the construction activities.
The positive impacts include (i) improved quantity
and quality of safe drinking water (ii) reduction in
water related diseases such as diarrhea, dysentery,
cholera, typhoid and thereby minimizing the cost of
healthcare in households (iii) reduction in infant,
child and maternal mortality and morbidity due to
improved health and sanitation services (iv) reduced
distances to water points which will lead to gains in
productive time for women and girls (v) better and


﻿properly sited sanitation facilities will reduce the risk
of contamination of surface and groundwater
resources.
Regardless of the subproject detail available prior to
appraisal an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared. These
documents will guide the environmental and social
assessment for future investments under the project.
The safeguards instrument for the proposed
construction of district town water supply systems
will be a Limited ESIA, incorporating an
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
and an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
(ARAP). These instruments will be prepared in
accordance with the Environmental and Social
Safeguard Instruments for the Pacific Island
Countries. Sub-projects under this component
identified for first year investments will have these
specific safeguards instruments prepared prior to
appraisal.
All safeguards instruments will clearly describe
institutional arrangements including capacity
assessment and provisions for capacity building.
During preparation the project team will assess the
institutional capacity of the relevant implementing
agencies and, where necessary, design into the
project the necessary instit utional strengthening
components.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD          No impacts on natural habitats are anticipated
however this will be further examined during project
preparation through the ESIA process to establish
whether water supply source development and
distribution will have potential impacts on spring
water sources and waterways. If any potential
impacts are identified, this OP may be triggered at
Appraisal stage.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD          No impacts on Forests are anticipated however this
will be further examined during project preparation.
The examination under this OP will include whether
watershed areas would require changes in
management regime to protect water sources. If any
potential impacts are identified, this OP may be
triggered at Appraisal stage.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09     No           No pest management issues are anticipated.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD         No impacts on Cultural Resources are anticipated
OP/BP 4.11                               however this will be further examined during project
preparation. If any potential impacts are identified,
this OP may be triggered at Appraisal stage. The
ESMF will include a Chance Finds Procedure.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         OP 4.10 would be triggered as the beneficiary
4.10                                     communities are expected to comprise indigenous
peoples. Because the overwhelming majority of
people in the project areas are anticipated to be
indigenous people no separate Indigenous Persons
Plan will be prepared. Instead, the elements of an IPP
will be incorporated into overall design. The Limited
ESIA for the proposed first year investments will
incorporate a social assessment including details of
free, prior and informed consultations. These
requirements will be incorporated in the ESMF for
other future investments and will be based on the
guidance provided in the Environmental and Social
Safeguard Instruments for the Pacific Islands
(ESSIP).
Specifically this will include (i) Summary of legal
and institutional framework, and baseline data, as
relating to Indigenous Peoples in the project context;
(ii) Summary of social assessment findings; (iii)
Summary of consultations with Indigenous Peoples
communities; (iv) Actions to ensure that Indigenous
Peoples receive culturally appropriate social and/or
economic benefits; (v) Actions to address any
adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples communities;
(vi) Cost estimates and financing plan for
implementing actions or activities; (vii) Appropriate
grievance procedures; and (viii) Monitoring and
evaluation arrangements.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        OP 4.12 would be triggered. The need for
BP 4.12                                  involuntary resettlement is expected to be very low
as the bulk of land used for any infrastructure
provided under the project is expected to be either
Government owned, or provided by beneficiary
communities on a voluntary basis. This process will
be further expanded upon during project preparation
and documented in the project ESMF. Any voluntary
land donations will be guided by guidance provided
in the Environmental and Social Safeguard


﻿Instruments for the Pacific Islands (ESSIP). If land
donation is required a detailed VLD protocol will be
developed prior to appraisal.
Specifically this will include: (i) Clear justification
provided on the appropriateness of VLD in the
project context; (ii) Explanation of the requirements
of the donation and the formalization of the donation;
(iii) Clear and detailed due diligence on the owners
and users of land donated; (iv) Clear and detailed
consultation and disclosure arrangements; (v) Steps
taken to establish informed consent of the person
donating the land explained in detail; (vi) Details on
documentation of the legal transfer of land donated
provided; (vii) Detailed and appropriate grievance
redress mechanism established.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Dams will not be used for sourcing water under the
project.
Projects on International    No           Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Nov-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
October 15, 2015 - January 15, 2016
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Fook Chuan Eng
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 07-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                      Date: 08-Oct-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


