                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16525
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P145897
                            Project Name:      GEF Mainstreaming Integrated Water and Environment Management (P145897)
                            Task Team          Liping Jiang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Mar-2016                       Estimated   09-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA02                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               International waters
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         Agricultural extension and research (70%), Water supply (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), Other environment and natural resources
                                              management (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       9.50           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          9.50
                              Total                                                                                      9.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase water productivity and reduce pollution
                           discharges in the project areas to mainstream and scale up an innovative approach to integrated water


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         and environmental management in the three river basins entering the Bohai Sea.

                         The PDO will be achieved through: (a) increasing irrigation water use efficiency and all other ways
Public Disclosure Copy




                         possible to effectively use water under a cap of water consumption; (b) reducing water pollution
                         discharges under a cap of environment capacity and (c) increasing ecological river flows. The above
                         measures will minimize the negative impacts on the ecosystem of Bohai Sea, contributing to the
                         achievement of global environmental benefits (GEBs).
                         3. Project Description
                         The project has the following components:

                         Component 1: Mainstreaming of Innovative IWEM Approach (US$1.20 million of GEF Grant plus
                         US$2.25 million of government financing - total of US$3.45 million). Component 1 will carry out
                         research on new policy options, and the application of existing government policies as well as
                         innovative technologies to mainstream the ET/EC-based IWEM approach and promoting its
                         standardization through the development of operational manuals and guidelines, which will be
                         informed through the results for project-supported activities in two demonstration areas (Component
                         2) in the Hai River Basin complemented with case studies and research combining to encourage a
                         shift towards more efficient modes of production.

                         (a)      Sub-component 1.1 - Studies on application of policies and technologies on mainstreaming
                         the IWEM approach, which will also lead to the formulation of new and/or application of existing
                         policies and technology in support of mainstreaming the IWEM approach. A total of 4 Studies will
                         be supported under this sub-component that will address critical policy issues in China’s water
                         sector; and
                         (b)      Sub-component 1.2 - Preparation of operational manuals and guidelines for the IWEM
                         approach. The development of a series of 5 operational manuals and guidelines will be supported
                         under this sub-component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Demonstration in Hai Basin on the IWEM Approach (US$2.80 million of GEF Grant
                         plus US$87.30 million of Government Financing – total of US$90.10 million). Component 2 will
                         support the preparation and implementation of Target Value Allocation Plans (TVAPs) in two sub-
                         river basins (the Luan and Hutuo) and the Integrated Water and Environment Management Plans
                         (IWEMPs) in two demonstration city areas Cheng-De (water-pollution dominant areas) and Si-Jia-
                         Zhuag (water-overuse dominant areas) in the Hai River Basin whose implementation will lead to
                         improved water productivity, reduced water consumption and water pollution and increased
                         ecological environment flows in the rivers through the integration of ET and EC targets to guide and
                         control water extraction, utilization and pollution discharges. It will be fully supported by results
                         stemming from activities supported under Component 1.

                         (a)      Sub-component 2.1 - Application of the IWEM Approach in Cheng-De. Under this sub-
                         component a TVAP and IWEMP will be supported for the Luan Sub-basin and the Cheng-De
                         municipal district respectively. The implementation of the Plan will be complemented by several
                         project-supported activities; and
                         (b)      Sub-component 2.2 - Application of the IWEM Approach in Si-Jia-Zhuang. Similar to the
                         activities in the previous sub-component a TVAP and IWMEP will be supported for the Hutuo Sub-
                         basin and Shijiazhuang municipal district, respectively accompanied by several supporting activities.

                         Component 3: Scaling up the IWEM Approach to Three River Basins (US$3.60 million of GEF


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         Grant plus US$3.70 million of Government Financing - total of US$7.30 million). Component 3 will
                         scale-up the ET/EC-based IWEM approach with innovative technologies and policy interventions
                         tested in the two pilot sub-river basins and demonstration cities under the previous components to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cover additional areas in the Liao, Hai and Yellow river basins, respectively. Together with the
                         demonstration projects supported under components an estimated 35% of the “Problem Areas” in the
                         three river basins will be covered (see Table 1 above). The development of two platforms with
                         accompanying data bases at the national level will also be supported for purposes of monitoring
                         actual ET values and actual water pollution discharges and facilitating the consultation and
                         negotiation of the ET and EC target values needed to meet the sustainable development objectives
                         among different stakeholders in the scaling-up areas. Innovations in technology and management
                         will be scaled up to help achieve new ET and EC targets in the three river basins. Component 3 will
                         be fully supported with the results achieved in Components 1 and 2.

                         (a)      Sub-component 3.1 - Development of National Water Environment Technology Extension
                         Platform at MEP. Under this sub-component the Project will support the development of a national
                         river basin-based EC targets supported by GIS for nationwide environmental quality improvement to
                         enhance the existing Integrated, Intelligent and International Platform for Environmental Technology
                         (3iPET);
                         (b)      Sub-component 3.2 - Development of a National Water ET Monitoring and Management
                         Platform at MWR. Similar to above, the sub-component will support the development of national
                         ET monitoring and management platform that will include support for a GIS for ET management for
                         national irrigation schemes located in the provinces and RS-based ET data production and
                         monitoring system for these schemes and additional studies;
                         (c)      Sub-component 3.3 - Scaling up the IWEM Approach in Liao River Basin. This sub-
                         component will support scaling-up activities in the Liao River Basin including: (i) providing the
                         manuals prepared and training for the new IWEM approach to the local authorities and stakeholders
                         in the scaling-up areas; (ii) monitoring and analysis on the current status of water consumption and
                         water pollution; (iii) effectiveness assessment of the interventions with application of IWEM
                         approach in the scaling-up areas; and (iv) comments and recommendations with proposed actions to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         continue promoting the IWEM approach;
                         (d)      Sub-component 3.4 - Scaling up the IWEM Approach in Hai River Basin (same as above);
                         and
                         (e)      Sub-component 3.5 - Scaling up the IWEM Approach in Yellow River Basin (same as
                         above).

                         Component 4: Capacity Building and Project Management (US$1.90 million of GEF Grant plus US
                         $1.75 million of Government financing – total of US$3.65 million). Following the suggestions
                         stemming from the STAP review of the Project, Component 4 will place considerable emphasis on
                         strengthening the capacity of the central and local governments to support IWEM through consulting
                         services and training, workshop and study tours.

                         (a)     Sub-component 4.1 - Regional IW learning activities. About one percent of the GEF project
                         grant (US$100,000) will be used to support IW LEARN activities to include the production of at
                         least two project experience notes and one results note, establishment of a project website and
                         support for project staff participation in the Biannual International Waters Conferences;
                         (b)     Sub-component 4.2 - Technical assistance through consulting services. Provision of TA
                         from international and domestic consulting services to project entities in support of project
                         management and implementation;
                         (c)     Sub-component 4.3 - Training and workshops. A series of training activities and workshops

                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                         will be supported to increase institutional capacity in the project entities;
                         (d)      Sub-component 4.4 - Project monitoring and evaluation. The establishment of a project-
                         wide M&E system; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)      Sub-component 4.5 - Project management. Support will be provided under this sub-
                         component to cover staff travel and operational costs of the 5 PMOs (MEP PMO, MWR PMO, Hebei
                         Provincial PMO, Shijiazhuang PMO and Chengde PMO) responsible for project management and
                         implementation. In addition, support will be provided for the development of cooperation
                         agreements and periodical coordination meetings between the respective administrative units
                         responsible for environment and water management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project areas include demonstration area and scaling-up area. The demonstration area is located
                         in the selected demonstration cities including Shi-Jia-Zhuang and Cheng-De in Hebei Province. The
                         locations of project activities on physical investment are all in the demonstration area. The scaling-up
                         area is located in Liaoning, Ningxia and Hebei where there are no project activities on physical
                         investments. The project activities on non-physical investments (e.g. training and research or
                         software development) are for both demonstration and scaling-up areas. The locations of all physical
                         investments under the project (included in Component 2) cannot be finalized until 2017 or 2018
                         based on the government investment programs. The type of the proposed investment activities
                         include installation of water saving equipment in the exiting irrigated area such as the low pressure
                         pipelines, drip irrigation systems and sprinklers etc. and construction of small wastewater treatment
                         plants and pipelines. The detailed description of the planned investment activities are given in Annex
                         2 – table 4 of PAD.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Feng Ji (GEN02)
                         Songling Yao (GSU02)
                         Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            See Section II.A (1).
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            See Section II.A (1).
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The project has no potential to have impacts on the health
                                                                     and quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people
                                                                     and their level of dependence upon or interaction with
                                                                     forests, or aims to bring about changes in its management
                                                                     or protection. This policy is not triggered.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The project does not envision any procurement of
                                                                     pesticides or pesticide application equipment, nor lead to
                                                                     substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent
                                                                     increase in health and environmental risk, nor could
                                                                     maintain or expand present pest management practices
                                                                     that are unsustainable. This policy is not triggered.




                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         Physical Cultural           No   The project will not cause any significant adverse impacts
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11             on the PCRs in the project influence area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No   The IWEM pilot areas under Component 2 in the Hai
                         BP 4.10                          River Basin are ascertained and screened for sure no
                                                          presence of ethnic minority groups, while in the scaling
                                                          up areas under Component 3 in the Hai, Liao and Yellow
                                                          River Basins there won’t be any physical investments but
                                                          ET/EC-based integrated water management policy
                                                          advocacy. A Social Assessment Framework has been
                                                          prepared to guide project implementation with pre-caution
                                                          on project overall social impacts and project consequent
                                                          influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes     The project will pilot demonstrative practice of ET/TC-
                         OP/BP 4.12                       based IWEM in two cities in the Hai River Basin, with
                                                          establishment of new facilities and structures necessary
                                                          for IWEM implementation. For instance, a wastewater
                                                          treatment Plant will be built in Chengde city, and some
                                                          facilities in local irrigation districts will be rehabilitated in
                                                          Shijiazhuang area, which all might entail land acquisition
                                                          and population relocation. OP4.12 is therefore triggered.

                                                          Because the IWEM pilots in the Hai River Basin are
                                                          scheduled to start from 2017 on, all the scheduled
                                                          wastewater treatment plant and water saving irrigation
                                                          facilities and new technologies in the two selected pilot
                                                          citiesdo not have their feasibility studies as well as do not
                                                          determine their sizes and details as yet at the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          appraisal stage. At this point, a Resettlement Policy
                                                          Framework (RPF) has been prepared during project
                                                          preparation so as to ensure the necessary Resettlement
                                                          Action Plans (RAPs) to be developed in time when those
                                                          subprojects and activities causing resettlement are
                                                          designed during the cause of project implementation.

                                                          Only the RAPs have been appropriately prepared and
                                                          reviewed by the Bank as acceptable, could the related
                                                          subprojects be started. At the current stage, the RPF was
                                                          disclosed on the PMO website and local libraries in
                                                          January 2016, and available at the Info-Shop on February
                                                          16, 2016.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No   The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
                         4.37                             of any dams as defined under this policy, or dependent
                                                          upon an existing dam. This polices is not triggered.
                         Projects on International   No   The project will not involve international waterways as
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50             defined under this policy.




                                                            Page 5 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The proposed project will not be in a disputed area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP 4.01: Environmental Assessment (triggered):The project will apply study results (e.g.
                              monitoring, evaluation, and recommendations for water resource management) in the selected
                              area/sites. Evaporation Transpiration (ET) and Emission Control (EC) concepts will be
                              incorporated into the project design to manage water consumption and pollution. The project is
                              expected to bring about overall environmental benefits, such as potential improvement of water
                              quality and reduction of water consumption in the selected area. It will not likely cause any
                              significantly negative environmental impacts.
                              However, TAs for water resources/quality management studies may have down-stream
                              environmental and social impacts. TAs supported by component 2 will have preparation and
                              implementation of water resource management plans for demonstration cities, including
                              demonstration subprojects, e.g. provision of water saving irrigation facilities, and wastewater/
                              waste treatment plants at township level. Though aiming to reduce water consumption and control
                              pollution discharges, these demonstration subprojects likely involve small scale construction
                              activities which cause short term construction nuisance, and bring about management of waste/
                              wastewater during operation phase. The details of these activities cannot be determined until
                              relevant studies are completed during project implementation.
                              OP4.04: Natural Habitats (triggered): The project does not have the potential to cause any
                              significant conversion (loss) or degradation of natural habitats, whether directly (through
                              construction) or indirectly (through human activities induced by the project). Given that there are
                              opportunities for benefits to natural habitats, this policy is triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement (triggered): For water quality control, some wastewater
                              treatment plant and pipeline network will be constructed in the project demonstrative pilot areas in
                              the Hai River Basin; and for water saving, irrigation facilities and improved technologies will be
                              installed. All these would entail land acquisition and population relocation, and triggers this
                              policy. Accordingly, resettlement safeguard instruments were hence prepared.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              This project likely plays a demonstration role for future similar investments in the project area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              n/a
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              An Environmental Management Framework (as part of the Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework) has been prepared, setting out the guidelines and procedures to address the
                              environmental impacts of the project activities. The EMF includes, among others, (i) The Bank’s
                              safeguards policies to be taken into account in the development of the technical assistance
                              activities financed under the project. Draft TORs for the proposed studies will include

                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           requirements for the analysis of potential environmental and social issues and how they will be
                           addressed; (ii) Guidelines and procedures to address environmental issues caused by physical
                           activities financed by the project. Each of the proposed demonstration investments will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           screened for its potential social and environmental impacts to identify/define: (a) safeguards
                           policies triggered; (b) EA category; (c) safeguards instruments to be prepared; and (d) consultation
                           and disclosure requirements; (iii) Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) to address the general
                           construction related impacts.(iv) Institutional arrangement, and Public consultation.
                           The Project is an extension of China GEF Hai Basin Integrated Water and Environment
                           Management
                           Project, which was concluded highly satisfactorily. The central PMO-The Ministry of
                           Environmental
                           Protection (MEP) and the Ministry of Water Resources (MWR) have rich experience on the
                           projects financed by the World Bank. The central Project Management Office (PMO) for the
                           previous GEF project will continue managing this project. The central PMO is familiar with the
                           Bank safeguards policies and procedures.

                           A Social Management Policy Framework was set up in project preparation to outline a Social
                           Assessment study for analyzing the project potential impacts, both positive and negative, during
                           project implementation. While the integrated water management is intensively planned and the
                           related measures rigorously designed under the project, there would appear to be a certain social
                           impact associated with implementation of the management plan. The SA would address the
                           methods and measures to avoid or/and mitigate the adverse impacts in the pilot and up-scaling
                           practice areas. It also would lead to a Social Management Plan together with the project
                           Environment Management Plan in accordance with OP4.01,

                           A Due Diligence Review (DDR) is also outlined the Social Management Policy Framework to
                           monitor and evaluate the practice and results of land acquisition and population resettlement
                           entailed by prior or on-going implementation of infrastructure construction, if any, in the project
                           pilot practice areas, in compliance with the relevant national laws and regulations, as well as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank social policies. The DDR will also be conducted in the consequent implementation of the
                           intensified management plan in the scaling up areas under Component 3 in the three river basins
                           where the project area will be selected during project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public Consultation and Disclosure: In accordance with OP4.01, public consultations have been
                           conducted during the ESMF preparation process, including meetings with project affected people
                           and local Environmental Protection Bureau. The consultation on the draft ESMF was undertaken
                           in December 2015. Feedback and concerns from the consultation have been addressed in the
                           project design and in the ESMF. The ESMF was locally disclosed at the governmental website on
                           January 8, 2016, and disclosed on the Bank Info-Shop on February 16, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         10-Jan-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Feb-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            08-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            08-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liping Jiang
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                          Date: 16-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
