INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16826
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                 Project ID:  P154577
Project Name: College Education Development Project (P 154577)
Task Team       Yoko Nagashima,Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-Feb-2016                Estimated    31-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GED06                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (95%), Public administration- Education (5%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     850.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        750.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               100.00
Total                                                                     850.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objectives are to strengthen the strategic planning and management
capacity of the college education subsector and to improve the teaching and learning environment of
participating colleges.
3. Project Description
The project encompasses three key components that will improve education quality outcomes for
Page 1 of 10


﻿students in the tertiary college sector. Component 1: Strengthening the strategic planning and
management capacity; Component 2: Improving the teaching and learning environment in selected
colleges; and Component 3: Project Management, Communication and Monitoring and Evaluation.
O
Component 1: Strengthening the strategic planning and management capacity (IDA US$ 48 million
through DLIs)
The objective of this component is to strengthen the planning and management of the college
education subsector. The Component would support the implementation of the following
interventions: (i) development and implementation of the initial phase of the Strategic Plan for the
college subsector which identifies system-wide reforms in phases at the national level; and (ii)
improvement of the teacher recruitment and management system through filling teacher vacancies in
government colleges and establishment of an appropriate teacher selection commission for non-
government college teachers.
Sub-component 1.1: Development of a Strategic Plan for the college subsector
A Strategic Plan for the college subsector would provide a consensus-based plan, providing mission,
vision, directions and goals for the college education subsector. The Plan would be based on
analytical background documents on significant sectoral issues to be prepared by experts from
Bangladesh's public and private higher education sector, industry and employers with support from
international experts on a needs-based approach. The Ministry of Education (MoE) would establish a
National Strategic Planning Committee to expedite the process. Six Expert Groups would be formed
provisionally by MoE with each group focusing on one cluster of issues. Information from
background documents prepared by the Expert Groups would feed into the Strategic Plan.
A draft Plan would be produced for wide stakeholder consultation, followed by a Final Plan which
would take outcomes of stakeholder consultations into account. The Final Plan will have a fifteen-
year Plan of Action set out in phases - immediate which is the last two years of the project period,
short-term which refer to the first three years after the project period; medium term of five years and
long-term signifying the last five of the fifteen-year time horizon and be disclosed on the MoE
website. Following its approval of the Strategic Plan, MoE would draft the Development Project
Proposal (DPP) based on the Strategic Plan's recommended actions for the first phase and initiate the
a        first year activities prior to the end of the Project.
Sub-component 1.2: Improvement of the teacher management system
Under this sub-component activities would include: (i) facilitate the process for filling vacancies in
government colleges; and (ii) support MoE's efforts to reform the existing procedure for recruiting
teachers in non-government colleges by establishing a Non-Government Teachers Selection
Commission (NTSC).
There are 3,200 teacher vacancies as of 2014 in the government colleges. There are multiple agencies
(e.g., DSHE, MoE, Ministry of Public Administration and Public Service Commission) involved in
the process of filling the vacancies. The Project would support MoE's efforts to expedite the
recruitment procedure and fill the vacancies through the results based financing.
The recruitment of qualified teachers remains a concern in the non-government colleges. The MoE
has initiated reforms in the recruitment mechanism of non-government college teachers to improve
Page 2 of 10


﻿the transparency and accountability of the process. The Project would support MoE's initiatives in
establishing a new Non-government Teacher Selection Commission by amending the Non-
Government Teachers Registration and Certification Authority (NTRCA) Act.
O
Component 2: Improving the teaching and learning environment in participating colleges (IDA US$
42 million through DLIs)
The objective of this component is to improve the quality of college education teaching learning
under the National University. Two sub-components would support the achievement of this
objective: (i) Sub-component 2.1: Improving the teaching-learning environment in selected colleges;
and (ii) Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening teaching and management capacity in colleges.
Sub-component 2.1:   Improving the teaching-learning environment in participating colleges
Under this sub-component, the Project would support the implementation of the Institutional
Development Grant (IDG) program. IDGs will be provided to a selected number of eligible
government and non-government colleges to support the implementation of Institutional
Development Plans (IDP) in the following areas: (i) upgrading and modernizing basic teaching-
learning facilities of colleges; (ii) improving the connectivity through existing Bangladesh Research
and Education Network (BdREN); (iii) development of soft skills programs and industry-linkages (e.
g. internship, job placement cell, tracer studies, etc.); and (iv) institutional self-assessments for
quality assurance.
Participation in the competitive IDG program will be voluntary. There will be groups of colleges
selected based on their characteristics and interested colleges will participate based on eligibility
criteria. An Operations Manual, which is being developed, would assist colleges to prepare the IDP
and implement the activities included in it utilizing the grants. The design of the IDG has benefited
from the experience of the two IDA-financed on-going projects in Bangladesh: the Skills and
Training Enhancement Project (STEP) on IDP and the Higher Education Quality Enhancement
Project (HEQEP) on Academic Innovation Fund.
Sub-component 2.2:   Strengthening teaching and management capacity in colleges
a        The objective of this sub-component is to bring about qualitative improvements in teaching and
management in the college subsector. This objective would be achieved through support for: (i)
training of trainers; (ii) teacher training; and (iii) capacity building of college management staff. The
Project would also support the development of training contents and materials. Distance learning
through online platforms with international and national training providers will also be developed to
reach the large number of beneficiaries.
Training and capacity building activities would be carried out by a 'Training Consortium'
comprising personnel from national agencies including NU, Bangladesh Open University (BOU),
National Academy for Educational Management, trainers from universities, representatives from
colleges, and individuals from the private sector as required. Training will focus on priority subject
areas to be confirmed: physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, ICT, mathematics, statistics, economics,
media and mass communications, finance/banking, marketing, accounting, tourism, hospitality,
Bangla and English Language. To provide international best practice elements in the design of the
training program, a partnership arrangement is envisaged with University of Nottingham, a globally
ranked university.
Page 3 of 10


﻿Current estimates indicate that training activities would involve about 7,000 teachers from about 500
Masters and Honours colleges, 250 trainers, about 500 college principals, and 250 management
personnel from various levels. To address the large numbers, delivery would be designed as a blend
O
U         of online and face-to-face approaches. An online Training Portal would be developed to provide
information on training; access to training materials and best practices; and a communication
platform for the community of practice. Training will be carried out largely in Bangladesh with small
groups sent for overseas training as required.
Key outcomes expected on completion of the training program include: (i) improvement in
knowledge, skills and methodologies related to teaching and learning in priority subject areas; (ii)
improvement in English Language proficiency and the use of English for Teaching purposes with
similar improvement in Bangla; (iii) improvement in the use of technologies in education; (iv)
developing sustainable communities of practice; (v) alignment of teaching-learning provisions across
National University Colleges and to international standards of education; and (vi) development of a
pool of local trainers to support sustainability of the Teacher Professional Development and Training
Program and to play active supervision and mentoring roles.
Component 3: Project Management, Communication and Monitoring and Evaluation (IDA US$ 10
million)
The objective of this sub-component is to build an effective M&E system. This subcomponent would
support M&E activiti es, including DLI verification, progress reporting, satisfaction surveys, tracer
studies, and effectiveness assessments on key activities. A web-based project management
information system would be established. The monitoring and evaluation activities would be carried
out by the PCU with support from respective departments of NU and DSHE.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented nationwide in selected government and non-government colleges
providing education at the tertiary level. The National University (NU) is the largest provider of
tertiary education, accounting for almost two-thirds of all tertiary enrollments in over 1,700 affiliated
colleges across all 64 districts in Bangladesh. The participating institutions will have to go through
screening mechanism before becoming eligible for financing for any of the subprojects and the exact
location of the subprojects will be known only during the implementation of the Project. Therefore,
an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared which provides the necessary
background for environmental considerations, a checklist of potential environmental issues related to
the probable project activities and suggestive mitigation measures. The Project involves small-scale
physical infrastructure interventions (e.g. civil works, renovation, refurbishment works) and the
environmental impacts due to these activities are anticipated to be limited in scale.
It has been agreed that any infrastructure development and/or refurbishment/extension of existing
infrastructure will only be carried out within the current premises of the colleges and educational
institutions. Public lands if used will be screened to ensure that the lands are encumbrance free and
squatters, leasing farmers, share-croppers etc. are not affected by the project. No land acquisition or
displacement of people (either physical or economic) will be permissible under the project. The
Project is expected to include colleges, which will benefit the ethnic and vulnerable communities. An
SMF containing Small, Ethnic and Vulnerable Communities Development Framework (SEVCF) and
a Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been prepared by MoE/DSHE and the NU for the Project. The SMF
Page 4 of 10


﻿focuses on gender and inclusion aspects especially.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ferdous Jahan (GSU06)
O
Sabah Moyeen (GSU06)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The activities identified under the Project are
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               predominantly technical assistance in nature
(development of soft skills, institutional self-assessment
skills etc.), with only small scale civil works components
or infrastructure development activities. 8. The proposed
Project may finance rehabilitation/renovation/
refurbishment of existing building, classrooms, science
and computer laboratory facilities and establish fiber optic
cable connectivity provided by BdREN. The small-scale
civil works are not anticipated to cause any major
adverse environmental impact and hence the intervention
can be classified as "Category B" project requiring
limited impact assessment. The limited nature of
environmental impacts arising from these small scale
construction activities will trigger OP/BP 4.01 requiring
environmental assessment. Since the physical intervention
and detail design of the infrastructure is not known at this
stage, and may not be known at appraisal, an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been
prepared. The EMF will provide the procedure for
subproject-level environmental screening/assessment and
environmental management.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         This Project will cover colleges all over the country
BP 4.10                             including areas where small ethnic and vulnerable
communities live. Thus, the project will trigger OP 4.10.
An SMF containing Small, Ethnic and Vulnerable
Communities Development Framework (SEVCF) and a
Gender Action Plan (GAP) has been prepared by the
MOE/DSHE and NU for the project. It is important to
mention that the project is not expected to cause any
adverse impact on indigenous people. The Framework
will focus on gender and inclusion aspects, and will
Page 5 of 10


﻿provide guidelines to engage in effective consultation
with small and ethnic minorities communities in general
and students and teachers in particular to maximize the
likelihood of achieving the project's PDO for the said
communities. The project will not have any impacts on
indigenous people, their lands, culture, livelihood or way
of life in any way.
Additionally the SMF contains guidelines for carrying out
a brief social assessment for sub-components to ensure
that the project benefits all students and teachers
irrespective of their gender and ethnic identity. The SMF
provides guidelines for stakeholder identification,
consultation and communication strategy, inclusion and
gender mainstreaming, etc. It also contains institutional
arrangements and roles and responsibilities of people who
will implement the SMF, guidelines for a grievance
redress mechanism, disclosure policies of the World
Bank, and budget for the implementation of the SMF.
Involuntary Resettlement No            The Project will not finance any civil works or activities
OP/BP 4.12                            that are expected to trigger either OP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement. No land acquisition, displacement of people
or communities from private or public lands or any
negative impacts on livelihoods will be permissible under
the project as mentioned above. Any infrastructure
development and/or refurbishment/extension of existing
infrastructure will only be carried out within the current
premises of the colleges and educational institutions.
Public lands if used will be screened to ensure that the
lands are encumbrance free and squatters, leasing farmers,
share-croppers etc. are not affected by the project. No
land acquisition or displacement of people (either physical
or economic) will be permissible under the project. The
project will develop a social management framework
(SMF) which will provide guidelines for carrying out a
social screening to ensure the above impacts are not
triggered and to ensure that the project benefits all
students and teachers irrespective of their gender and
ethnic identity. The SMF will provide guidelines for
stakeholder identification, consultation and
communication strategy, inclusion and gender
mainstreaming, etc. It will also contain institutional
arrangements and roles and responsibilities of people who
will implement the SMF, guidelines for a grievance
redress mechanism, disclosure policies of the World
Bank, and budget for the implementation of the SMF.
Page 6 of 10


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1.     Bangladesh has made considerable progress in economic growth and poverty reduction in
recent years. Bangladesh's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at an average rate of 6.1% in the
past ten years, resulting in a substantial decline in the incidence of poverty.The rapid increase in
per capita income has been attributed to sustained economic growth, declining population growth
and higher remittance inflow from a growing stock of migrant workers. These developments have
led Bangladesh to graduate from Lower Income Country (LIC) to Lower Middle Income Country
(LMIC) status in 2015, based on its $1,080 GNI per capita (Atlas Method) in FY2014.
2.     Along with economic development, human development outcomes have also improved for
Bangladesh. Significant progress has been made towards achieving the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in education. The net primary enrollment rate increased from 66.5 percent in 2005
to 97.3 percent in 2013. Enrollments and pass rates have also increased at the secondary and
higher secondary levels since the early 1990s. Gender parity has already been achieved at both the
primary and secondary education levels. The Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) in tertiary education
increased from 5 percent to 13 percent between 2000 and 2012. The steady increase in the number
of students completing higher secondary education has placed a growing pressure on the tertiary
0
U           education sector to absorb a large and increasing population of eligible secondary students in
recent years.
3.     However, to accelerate the success in economic and social development improving skills
o          and productivity are crucial. According to relevant economic analysis, Bangladesh's economic
growth is expected to continue with around 15 million jobs projected to be created over the next
decade in seven key sectors. Job expansion across these sectors will demand more skilled
professionals in managerial, technical and leadership positions. However, the current skill levels of
the labor force is unlikely to support future market demands. The majority of workers in
Bangladesh is under-educated - 76 percent of workers have a secondary educational qualification
or below and only 22 percent have a tertiary education level degree, while around two percent
have a technical vocational education and training (TVET) certificate or diploma across five major
fields of studies in Commerce, Education, Finance, Manufacturing and Public Administration.
While there is an abundance of low-skilled workers, there is a strong demand for graduates with
higher cognitive and non-cognitive skills and job-specific technical skills. This would require
improving the quality and relevance of tertiary education so that education institutions are
equipped to produce graduates with more market-relevant skills.
4.     Moreover, though Bangladesh has made significant progress in expanding enrollment
Page 7 of 10


﻿since the early 2000s, but access to tertiary education still remains low, especially compared with
other countries in the region. Enrollment in tertiary education has been rising over time partly due
to the increased investment in the expansion of secondary and the rapid growth of private tertiary
education institutions since the early 2000s. Despite a sharp increase in enrollment, the tertiary
GER still lags behind the rates in neighboring country, Nepal (15 percent), and significantly
behind those of middle-income countries such as India (25 percent) and Sri Lanka (17 percent).
Public spending in tertiary education also remains low and inadequate (1.3 percent of national
budget in 2014/15) for developing a globally competitive higher education system.
*         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
1.     The project will cover colleges all over the country including areas where Small Ethnic
and Vulnerable People (SEVP) live. Thus, the project will trigger OP 4.10. This SMF thus include
a Small Ethnic and Vulnerable Communities Development Framework (SEVCDF) and a Gender
Action Plan (GAP) for the project. It is important to mention that the project is not expected to
cause any adverse impact on SEVC. The Framework focuses on gender and inclusion aspects, and
provides guidelines to engage in effective consultation with SEVC in general and students and
teachers in particular to maximize the likelihood of achieving the project's PDO for the said
communities. Given that the project only triggers OP/BP 4.10, and since the exact locations of
project implementation are yet to be determined, the SEVCDF attempts to ensure the participation
of all small ethnic and vulnerable communities in the project in a culturally appropriate and
sensitive manner, that meets the World Bank's stated requirement of free, informed and prior
consultations with the relevant groups during project preparation and during implementation. This
SMF has been developed in full concurrence with national laws and applicable World Bank
Operational Policies.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
1.     In order to promote inclusion the project will undertake: (i) stronger awareness raising
campaign for ensuring access to and increasing the utilization of the facilities made available by
CEDP funding; (ii) initiatives for establishing Industry-University/Colleges collaboration for
fostering research relevance; (iii) standardized measurement for quality across the tertiary
education in college sector and establishment of an independent body for monitoring and
facilitating quality assurance; (iv) initiatives for addressing issues with assessment system and soft
skills of the graduates such as IT literacy, communication skills and moral values (v) initiatives for
addressing particular needs of SEVC, persons with disabilities and women in accessing the
facilities made available by CEDP funding.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The responsible ministry - Ministry of Education - has experience in implementing World Bank
project and familiar with safeguard requirement. Two out of five proposed implementing agencies
- University Grant Commission (UGC) and DSHE are familiar with the World Bank safeguard
policies and requirement. They have gained reasonable experience in implementing Higher
Education Enhancement Project and Secondary Education Quality and Access Enhancement
Project. However, other three proposed implementing agencies Nongovernment Teacher
Registration and Certification Authority (NTRCA), National University (NU) and National
Academy for Educational Management (NAEM) do not have any prior experience in World Bank
safeguard policies. The capacity of the implementing agencies will be strengthened with adequate
training and provision of consultants.
Page 8 of 10


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Once the exact colleges targeted under this project are determined, they will be screened to assess
the presence of SEVC according to the screening formats attached. For institutions where students
from SEVC are found in larger numbers, the above framework will be used as guidance to prepare
Small Ethnic and Communities Development Plan to address the issues of participation, inclusion
and enhancement of positive outcomes for SEVC.
o        B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              03-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               07-Feb-2016
Comments: Documents submitted were the Environmental Management Framework (EMF), and
the Social Managmenet Framework (SMF)
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              03-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               07-Feb-2016
Comments: Document submitted: Framework and Guidelines for Small Ethnic Communities
Plan.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
O
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
These are not triggered
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Page 9 of 10


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yoko Nagashima,Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Dilip Parajuli (PMGR)                Date: 10-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


