                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jul-2017 | Report No: ISDSC22582




                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Project ID                    Project Name                 Environmental Category        Country
                                                          Liberia: Emergency Road
                            P164463                       Maintenance Project (        B - Partial Assessment        Liberia
                                                          P164463 )
                            Team Leader(s)                Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                            A.K. Farhad Ahmed, John                                                                  Investment Project
                                                                                       GTI07
                            Kobina Richardson                                                                        Financing

                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA
Public Disclosure Copy




                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding        [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                 [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                           4,900,000
                           Total Financing                                                                              4,900,000
                            Trust Funds                                                                                 4,900,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                        0

                           DETAILS      -OldFin1




                           Trust Funds
                           Source                               Currency                           Amount                        USD Equivalent
                           Liberia Reconstruction Trust
                                                                USD-US Dollars                   4,900,000                            4,900,000
                           Fund(LRTF)




                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )



                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to restore a basic-transport connectivity along selected road corridors through
                           emergency spot improvements of the critical road sections. It is expected that these improvements will help in the
                           movement of goods and people especially the transportation of election materials and security apparatus for the
                           impending October, 2017 elections.

                           C. Project Description
                           As the October election date overlaps with the rainy season, there is a real risk that the poor condition of key road links
                           may jeopardize timely transportation of election materials to vote centers and many Liberians may not be able to
                           exercise their universal suffrage, which is crucial for ensuring country’s unhindered democratic progress. The proposed
                           operation has been requested by the Government of Liberia on an emergency to ensure the October 2017 elections
                           are not disrupted and pre-empt the risk of such a crisis from emerging. As noted above, more than half of the unpaved
                           road network in Liberia is in poor condition, many roads are not passable during the rainy season, and vehicles have at
                           times been unable to pass many deteriorated sections for weeks at a time.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed operation meets the requirements of Operations Policy (OP) 10.00, paragraph 12, “Situations of Urgent
                           Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints” because Liberia experiences “specific capacity constraints because of
                           fragility” and faces a potential political crisis if it is unable to hold a fair election because election materials could not
                           be transported to all areas of the country due to the road conditions. To enable rapid completion of civil works, the
                           task team proposes a deferment of preparation of safeguards instruments to the implementation phase, as allowed
                           under OP 10.00, paragraph 12, if the safeguards documents are not finalized before the decision meeting. Given the
                           potential nature of the operation and the fact that the election cannot be delayed, the task team proposes allowing up
                           to 40 percent retroactive financing of project activities. These issues will be elaborated further at the decision stage.

                           The proposed operation consists of emergency road maintenance activities, including restoring all-season physical
                           connectivity by making spot improvements to the most severely degraded portions of the Ganta-Zwedru and other
                           road corridors that are essential to the election. The spot-improvement will also improve the country’s emergency
                           response to natural calamities and pandemic emergencies (e.g. Ebola Virus Disease).

                           The project consists of only one component:

                           Component 1: Road Maintenance (US$4,900,000). Restoration of all-season connectivity will be carried out by
                           contractors and will involve the spot-improvement of the some of the impassable sections along the corridors. This will
                           also involve the construction of some minor cross-drainage structures. The road maintenance activities will include
                           grading, reshaping, and surfacing with granular crushed stone, opening turnouts for runoff, and similar activities.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will cover emergency maintenance work for the southeastern road corridor of Liberia, starting from Ganta
                          to Zwedru. The activity will take place in rural areas of Liberia. The road traverses major towns, including Flumpa,


                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                                            Page 3 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )



                          Yarsonnah Town, Kanwee Town Sacleapea City, Loyee Town, Kphartuo Town, Garie Township and Tappita. Critical spot
                          rehabilitation works may be required in some of these towns. While most part of the southeastern region is covered by
                          tropical forest, the vegetation in the immediate environs of the corridor is mainly secondary forest where farming
                          activities have been carried out over the years. Rubber plantations can be found along many sections of the road. The
                          road crosses several streams and rivers. The main rivers along the corridor are the Yar, Weh, and Lee Rivers. There are
                          no critical natural habits or forest area in the immediate environs of the corridor.




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The borrower's capacity to manage safeguards within the road sector is relatively low but improving. The Ministry of
                          Public Works, particularly its Infrastructure Implementation Unit (IIU), has gained substantial experience in managing
                          Bank-financed projects. The IIU has successfully delivered several Bank- financed projects, including the Monrovia-
                          Buchanan Corridor and the Monrovia-Gbarnga-Ganta Corridor. The IIU has a team of full-time staff responsible for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          social and environmental safeguards. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Liberia, which supports the IIU,
                          also has experience in reviewing and monitoring large infrastructure projects including Bank-financed projects in the
                          road sector.




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Seifu S. Mehari (GSU01)
                          Edda Mwakaselo Ivan Smith (GSU01)
                          Sekou Abou Kamara (GEN01)


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                      The investment will consist of Road
                                                                                                      Maintenance involving the spot-
                                                                                                      improvement of some of the impassable
                                                                                                      sections along the corridors. This will
                                                                                                      include construction of critical minor cross-
                                                                                                      drainage structures, stabilization of critical
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes
                                                                                                      spots with granular crushed stone, grading,
                                                                                                      reshaping, and opening of turnouts for
                                                                                                      runoff. Minimal disruption to the
                                                                                                      environment is envisaged. The
                                                                                                      maintenance work may also require borrow
                                                                                                      and quarry materials.
                                                                                                      The maintenance work will not affect
                                                                                                      critical natural habitat or any natural
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                                                                                                      habitat. The work will be confined in the
                                                                                                      existing corridor.


                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )



                                                                                                     The project activities will not have any
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                                                                                                     impacts on forests and access to forests.
                                                                                                     The maintenance work will not require
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No                     financing, acquisition, transportation,
                                                                                                     distribution, storage or use of pesticides.
                                                                                                     OP 4.11 has not been triggered, but as a
                                                                                                     matter of precaution a chance finds
                                                                                                     procedure will be included in the simplified
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                                                                                                     ESMP since the work may require sourcing
                                                                                                     of borrow materials that involves large
                                                                                                     excavation.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No                     OP 4.10 is not applicable to Liberia.
                                                                                                     This policy is triggered as there is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                     possibility that there may be farms and
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 Yes
                                                                                                     small informal commercial trading that
                                                                                                     have encroached on the right of way.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                                                                                                     Project activities will not involve the
                                                                                                     construction of a new dam or the
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                                                                                                     rehabilitation of an existing dam, nor rely
                                                                                                     on dams
                                                                                                     The project does not have any impact on
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No
                                                                                                     international waters.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           21-Jul-2017
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           Since this project qualifies as an emergency project, safeguards instrument will be deferred to implementation period.
                           However, simplified ESMP has been developed which will be upgraded to guide the contractor before the start of
                           emergency repair works.



                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                           A.K. Farhad Ahmed




                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Liberia: Emergency Road Maintenance Project ( P164463 )




                           Approved By

                            Safeguards Advisor:                                Maman-Sani Issa                                   14-Jul-2017

                            Practice Manager/Manager:                          Justin Runji                                      14-Jul-2017


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jul 17, 2017                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 6
