                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: 24 April, 2017

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                              Project ID: P120397
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Afghanistan Agricultural Inputs Project
Task Team Leader. Amanullah Alamzai
Estimated Appraisal Date:                         Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: SASDA                              Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                                  Grant
Sectors: Agricultural extension and research (40%), Crops (25%), Central government
administration (25%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Themes: Nutrition and food security (35%), Export development and competitiveness (28%),
Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (25%), Infrastructure services for private
sector development (10%), e-services (2%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                          0.00
        Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                  (US$M): 67.25 million

Environmental Category: B with partial assessment
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [ ]                         No [ x]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ x]                     Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises                Yes [x]      No []
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The project development objective is strengthened institutional capacity for safety and reliability
of agricultural inputs and sustainable production of certified wheat seed.

3. Project Description:
Summary of Proposed Changes
The technical restructuring proposal comprises four parts: (i) changes to the grant proceeds and
reallocation of funds between components; (ii) changes to the work program ;(iii) changes to the results
framework; and (iv) change to the project’s closing date. Details are provided in the following sections.




                                                     1
Description and Status of Components
The project will continue with its four components: (A) Improved Seed Production; (B) Quarantine
Networks and Quality Control of Agro-chemicals; (C) Improved and Expanded Input Delivery Systems
and (D) Project Implementation and Management.

Component A: Improved Seed Production. This component aims to strengthen a sustainable,
commercially viable, and technically efficient seed production and certification system. The project
focuses on strengthening seed production and distribution for wheat – the country‘s main staple crop –
while supporting other food crops including vegetables and grain legumes where appropriate. The project
covers the entire seed chain beginning with research in variety selection to generate breeder seed,
production of foundation and registered seeds from breeder seed, and multiplication of registered seed
into certified seed. In addition, the project encourages compliance with the seed industry regulatory
framework comprising the national seed policy, the seed law, and accompanying seed rules and
regulations. Component A is organized into 3 sub-components - A1: Assistance to Agricultural Research
Institute of Afghanistan (ARIA) including Varietal Selection and Production of Breeder Seed, A2:
Assistance to Improved Seed Enterprise (ISE) including production of Foundation and A3: Coordination
of Seed Sector by providing support to National Seed Board (NSB), Seed Certification Directorate (SCD)
and Private Seed Enterprise (PSE) through the Afghanistan National Seed Companies Union (ANSCU).
Under this restructuring, the government has removed the class of "registered" seed from the certification
scheme. This does not affect the total amount of seed that can be produced but changes the quantity of
"breeder" and "foundation" class seed to be produced by ARIA, ISE and PSEs.

Component B: Quarantine Networks and Quality Control of Agro-chemicals. This component aims
to build and strengthen institutional capacity and physical infrastructure required for quality control of
agrochemicals and plant quarantine. Physical infrastructure includes establishment of Border
Quarantine Stations and fumigation facilities to facilitate export to the higher paying markets. Project
activities focus on preventing marketing of banned, hazardous, sub-standard, and unreliable pesticides
and fertilizers, as well as preventing introduction and spread of quarantine pest into the Country. This is
bei ng achieved through facilitating enforcement of the recently finalized Pesticides and Plant
Quarantine Acts and Regulations. The goal is to comply with international standards for quality control
of agrochemicals and plant quarantine practices. Component B is organized into 2 sub-components -
Quality Control of Agrochemicals and Plant Quarantine Networks.

Component C: Improved and Expanded Inputs Delivery Systems. The main purpose of Component
C, as per the PAD, is to analyze current agricultural input delivery systems and to develop a plan of
action, to be followed by a pilot input delivery system. Specific activities under this component were
supposed to be identified after the MTR. However, this has not yet happened due to limited capacity
of the Project. Since the Project now has limited time ahead, it was decided to downsize the scope of
this component to piloting a voucher system for wheat seed, which is the primary seed produced under
the project. The main goal is to explore the possibility of replacing the currently insufficient
government-led seed distribution system that is mainly based on providing subsidized seeds to a
limited number of farmers. This approach has hindered the development of a vibrant market -based
wheat seed distribution system. This pilot is an attempt to improve the situation by creating an
environment which strengthens linkages between seed producers and farmers while the government
phases out its involvement in seed distribution and focuses on its regulatory role. With this
structuring, the Component will not pursue piloting an ICT system as outlined in the PAD.
Accordingly, these activities will be cancelled.

Component D: Project Implementation and Management. This component hosts the Implementation
Management and Support Team (IMST) in MAIL with overall responsibility for Monitoring and

                                                    2
Evaluation, Management Information System, Procurement, Financial Management, and implementation
of the ESMF and PMP.
The following main technical Directorates from the MAIL side have been involved in the
preparation and implementation of the project: (i) for Component A: the Agricultural Research
Institute of Afghanistan (ARIA), the Improved Seeds Enterprise (ISE) and the National Seed
Board (NSB); (ii) for Component B: the Directorates for Plant Protection and Quarantine
(PPQD).

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The project sites will partially overlap with those of the NHLP, OFWMP and IRDP.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Mr. Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
Mr. Qais Agah (SASDS)
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes            No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                      X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

During the preparation phase of the AAIP Project, an ESMF and a Pest Management Plan (PMP)
have been developed and adopted by the line ministry to effectively address environmental and
social concerns under this project. The Ministry continues to use these tools as the key
documents guiding safeguards efforts under this project. The overall safeguards performance of
the project is Moderately Satisfactory MS. The project was confronted with critical shortages and
turn-over of key staff including the project director, environmental and social safeguards
specialists which hindered progress in implementing the ESMF and PMP, particularly regarding
the preparation of ESMP for sub-projects and implementation of PMP. During the midterm
review carried out in 2016 and the subsequent mission, these issues were shared with the
leadership of the ministry along with a set of recommendations. Subsequently, the project has

                                               3
recently demonstrated good progress in a number of areas, including the filling of key positions
such as environmental, social safeguards and IPM specialists. With these additions the project
has recently demonstrated some good progress in a number of areas. Key progress includes
establishing of a functional GRM mechanism, training of stakeholders on IPM approaches and
preparing ESMPs for the key construction project. In addition, land clearance documents for
several construction sub-projects have been gathered. Currently the project safeguards team pays
extra attention to cover the remaining shortcomings including the addressing of two land
ownership claims made by individuals in some few construction sites.

Under this restructuring proposal, all the social and environmental safeguards arrangements
remain the same, except for triggering OP 4.12 on involuntarily resettlement. The main reason is
that some of the infrastructure items such as quarantine stations supported by AAIP require land
at specific sites close to border crossings. The Government identified land for all of the planned
infrastructure, however, it has recently been reported that individuals have claimed ownership of
land at a few of the sites. These claims are now being reviewed by the governmental and official
departments including the courts. If any sites are found to be the property of private owners,
under the current safeguards arrangements of the project, the Government will not be able to
acquire the land in these locations even with compensation for the owner. This restructuring
offers the opportunity to equip the project with the Resettlement Policy Framework provisions
that allows land acquisition as per World Bank OP 4.12, as and when the need arises. The
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide preparation of Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs (where needed).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

The project envisages a significant amount of physical works – including construction of new
buildings and the rehabilitation of existing ones. Since this includes a number of laboratories,
liquid waste resulting from the laboratory operations may contain chemical substances which can
contaminate water quality. The ESMF comprises screening list to be used to identify such cases.

Insofar as the project engages with farmers for training and capacity building purposes, the PMP
discusses the IPM approach where the pesticide should be the last resort and priority would be
given to natural and agriculture pest control methods. Both the ESMF and the PMP have best
practice guidelines for the proper identification, storage and application of pesticides if they are
to be used by farmers.

Also, some farmers are receiving high quality fertilizer and agro-chemicals to increase their
agriculture production, when other farmers see that they immediately go to the local market,
purchase available agrochemicals and fertilizers, mostly not tested, low quality and are outdated.
This is because currently no law and regulation are enforced to improve the input system and as
a result, all sort of low quality inputs are pouring into the country market that could potentially
damage water resources and degrade general environment. To mitigate this project has been
preparing laboratories to test the inputs, e.g., fertilizers and agrochemicals and will help control
and manage the market. In order to properly take care of this issue and avoid and reduce the
impacts the government has prepared and passed a Pesticide Law, but yet to be strengthened by

                                                 4
the relevant regulation and both should be enforced. Therefore, it is expected that the
government soon accomplish this task and properly operationalize the package to avoid and
reduce the potential impacts on the environment.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

To achieve the project’s development objective (strengthened institutional capacity for safety
and reliability of agricultural inputs and sustainable production of certified wheat seed), there are
no alternatives available to the activities described in the project document. Both the ESMF and
the PMP include procedures and screening lists to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts that
may result from civil works undertaken by the project.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The Implementation Management and Technical Support Unit (IMST) in the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) has already been established. While the project
suffered from critical lack of safeguards staff during the early implementation phases, it has
finally succeeded in filling the key safeguards positions with qualified individuals. With a full
time, project director and safeguards staff on board now the project is well positioned to ensure
its compliance with the Safeguards’ guidelines.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

 Agricultural inputs stakeholders identified during preparation of ESMF and PMP include the
following:
    1. Male and female farmers with and without land (including hired labor)
    2. Farmers’ organizations and cooperatives
    3. Input retailers, wholesalers and importers
    4. NGOs
    5. Private sector incl. ANSOR and private seed enterprises (PSEs)
    6. Donors involved in agricultural input supply
    7. Relevant directorates/departments of MAIL, DAILs, DOWAs, NEPA
    8. Border Control Posts
    9. CDC members (male and female)
    10. Kabul University (in particular Agriculture Faculty and Medical Faculty), agriculture
    colleges

Stakeholder consultations were conducted during the development phase of both the PMP and
the ESMF. The minutes of these consultations are available in working document in MAIL,
including lists of participants.

                                                  5
In all subprojects which require consultations with relevant stakeholders, consultations will be
conducted to elicit the views of both the male and the female population.

The project conducted a series of consultations with General Directorate of Planning and
Programs Coordination at Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) to review
the revised ESMF and newly developed RPF for the restructuring proposal. In addition, the
document was reviewed from legal perspective by legal expert in Policy Analysis and Legal
Advisory Department (PALAD) and their comments and feedbacks have been incorporated. The
final version of the ESMF with revisions and RPF will be publically disclosed in country on
Ministry’s website and the World Bank’ external website.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?NO,                         28/04/2017
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                               20/03/2017
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           05/04/2017
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                            28/04/2017
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? NO                         28/04/2017
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                               29/03/2017
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           28/04/2017
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                            28/04/2017
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: NA
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 9/9/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            9/10/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                             9/12/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                               6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ X]     No [ ]    N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [X ]     No [ ]    N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          Yes
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [X]     No [ ]    N/A []
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?



                                                 7
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                8
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been      Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the          Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been        Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                       Name               Date
 Task Team Leader:                Amanullah Alamzai             24/04/2017
 Senior Environmental Specialist: Mohammad Arif Rasuli          24/04/2017
 Social Development Specialist    Qais Agah                     24/04/2017
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development
 Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:                  Mr. Martien Van Nieuwkoop
   Comments:




                                               9
