                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE
               Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSR21286
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Brazil                         Project ID:                 P126372
    Project Name:                      Recife Swap Education and Public Management (P126372)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Michael Drabble
    Estimated Appraisal                26-Sep-2011                    Estimated Board             29-May-2012
    Date:                                                             Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GED04                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                          Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           921.60                            Total Bank Financing: 130.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                          Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                     791.60
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                        130.00
    Total                                                                                                        921.60
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child education, create
conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, an                               d improve
municipal public management.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child education, create
conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, an                               d improve
municipal public management.
3. Project Description
The revised Project has two components, the first of which will co-finance existing eligible government
programs in early childhood and primary education via a result-based approach and, the second of which will

                                                      Page 1 of 10
provide technical assistance to strengthen public sector management.

Component 1: Strengthen coverage of Early Childhood Education (ECE) and create conditions conducive to
learning in Primary Education. This component would provide support for the implementation of the EEPs in
the following areas: (a) rehabilitate ECE centers, including construction of Municipal Early Child Education
Centers (ECECs); (b) create conditions more conducive to learning in Fundamental Education; (c)
professional development of the municipal teaching force; and (d) education management

Component 2: Strengthen institutions for more efficient and effective public management.
This component would provide technical assistance to strengthen the MOR’s public management in the
following areas: (a) educational evaluation and administration; (b) tax administration; (c) Increasing
efficiency of public expenditures; (d) Municipal planning and Project management; (e) urban mobility
management.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Project activities will take place in the urban municipality of Recife. The municipality of Recife is
located along the Atlantic Ocean coast, occupying a fluvio-marine plain formed by the rivers Beberibe,
Capibaribe, Tejipió, Jaboatão and Pirapama. The region has numerous islands, swamps, widespread
mangroves, and a few hills, located mainly in the north and west parts.

The Recife territory is densely occupied, and there are few remnants of the primary vegetation, the Atlantic
Forest, which occurred mainly in the high areas. The mangroves are found along the coast and rivers?
margins. Its degradation was intense, but there are, still, large areas of preserved mangroves due to the
difficulties in occupying such sites. In the last years, the MOR took numerous actions to protect the local
ecosystems, and created over twenty protected areas (Zonas Especiais de Proteção Ambiental -ZEPA)
totaling approximately 6,000 hectares. The county also has extensive areas classified as Permanent
Preservation Areas, APPs, encompassing the riparian vegetation. The city expansion, in the last decades, was
characterized by the occupation of sensitive areas, such as rivers margins, swamps, mangroves and inclined
terrains. Low-income neighborhoods are located, commonly, on sensitive areas, such as former mangroves,
favoring recurrent flooding and landslides. Noteworthy to mention that the Federal Government lists Recife
as a priority for concluding the natural disasters risk assessment, and implementing a risk mitigation plan.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa( GSU04 )

 Gunars H. Platais( GEN04 )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Y               The Project Restructuring did not add any
                                                              activity with potential to generate significant
                                                              environmental impacts, and the expected
                                                              environmental impacts continues to be limited
                                                              in scope, localized, and temporary.
                                                              Consequently, the Project remains as Category
                                                              B. However, the Project Restructuring
                                                              triggered, on a precautions basis, two additional
                                                              safeguard policies: the Physical Cultural
                                                              Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11) and the Natural


                                                  Page 2 of 10
                                                       Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04). The Project
                                                       environmental assessment, an Environmental
                                                       and Social Management Framework ESMF,
                                                       was reviewed to include provisions related to
                                                       construction of new Municipal Early Child
                                                       Education Centers, and the new triggered
                                                       safeguards.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Y             The Municipal Early Child Education Centers
                                                       seek to attend highly vulnerable populations,
                                                       and are being located throughout the entire
                                                       county. The Municipal Early Child Education
                                                       Centers construction may have small
                                                       interferences with remaining natural habitats,
                                                       considering that the Municipality of Recife is
                                                       abundant in riparian vegetation and protected
                                                       areas. Consequently, the Project Restructuring
                                                       triggered, on a precautions basis, the Natural
                                                       Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04).
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       N             This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                       does not have impacts on the health and quality
                                                       of forests, does not affect the rights and welfare
                                                       of people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                       interaction with forests, and does not bring
                                                       changes in the management, protection, or
                                                       utilization of natural forests or plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  N             This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                       does not involve pest management and will not
                                                       finance the procurement of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Y             The construction of Municipal Early Child
                                                       Education Centers could pose potential
                                                       interferences with culturally relevant buildings,
                                                       especially in the old downtown area, known by
                                                       numerous historical sites. Due to that, the
                                                       Project Restructuring triggered, on a
                                                       precautions basis, the Physical Cultural
                                                       Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11)
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            N             This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                       does not interfere with Indigenous Peoples as
                                                       defined by OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. There
                                                       are no Indigenous Lands within the project’s
                                                       area of interference.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Y             The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP
                                                       4.12) has been triggered because the Project
                                                       involves (i) support to new Early Childhood
                                                       Education Centers (ECEC) built and equipped
                                                       by the Municipality of Recife (MOR) and (ii)
                                                       Type 2 Technical Assistance activities related
                                                       with the formulation of studies to be used in the

                                             Page 3 of 10
          process of improving urban mobility planning
          that may have significant down-stream impacts
          (according to the definitions and guidance
          provided by the “Interim Guidelines on the
          Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
          Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed
          Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the
          Bank – January 2014).
          Given that land acquisition is expected under
          the project, OP/BP 4.12 is triggered and two
          approaches have been taken to address
          potential adverse impacts related with
          involuntary taking of land leading to
          involuntary economic and physical
          displacement.
          First Approach – Applied to Land Acquisition
          taking place before Project’s Restructuring and
          OP 4.12 triggering:
          Considering that the processes of land
          acquisition for the construction of ECECs built
          and opened between 2011 and 2016 have
          started much earlier than the beginning of the
          Project’s restructuring process and the
          triggering of OP 4.12 (late 2015), the operation
          deals with a situation of “late discovery of
          involuntary resettlement needs” due to “the
          redefinition of the scope of a component of the
          Project”.
          In these situations, there is no condition to
          prepare Resettlement Action Plans and the
          “good practice” recommends the preparation
          by the Client of a “retroactive assessment”.
          The Client carried out this “retroactive
          assessment” of land acquisition procedures
          followed for the construction of 15 ECECs that
          occurred between 2011 and 2016 (though the
          Project will support only ECECs built from
          2015 onwards) and provided satisfactory
          information relating to the scope and
          magnitude of adverse impacts, the
          compensation paid for assets, and agreements
          reached with displaced people. The Task Team
          analyzed the information provided by the
          Client and prepared a due diligence Technical
          Note.
          The “retroactive assessment” shows that in
          only one out of 15 cases of land acquisition for
          the construction of ECECs (2011-2016), there
          was one family of squatters who was adversely
          affected by physical displacement. An


Page 4 of 10
                                                             agreement between the Municipality and the
                                                             Displaced Family was reached about the
                                                             compensation value (land plus built premises
                                                             used as shelter), the compensation was already
                                                             paid and land tenure rights definitely
                                                             transferred for the municipality. The
                                                             compensation value was set at the market value
                                                             plus transaction costs. There are no pending
                                                             issues.
                                                             Second Approach – Applied to Land
                                                             Acquisition taken place after Project’s
                                                             Restructuring:
                                                             As (i) site locations of new ECECs have not
                                                             been defined yet and (ii) envisaged Type 2
                                                             Technical Assistance activities may lead to
                                                             downstream adverse impacts related with
                                                             involuntary resettlement, the borrower updated
                                                             the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that
                                                             was prepared for the Original Project in 2011.
                                                             The updated RPF provides the principles and
                                                             guidelines to deal with adverse effects related
                                                             with involuntary resettlement in both situations.
                                                             These principles and guidelines will guide the
                                                             preparation of Resettlement Action
                                                             Plans/Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans
                                                             that may be eventually needed in the case that
                                                             land acquisition is required for the site-specific
                                                             building of new ECECs and may lead to direct
                                                             adverse impacts related with involuntary
                                                             resettlement. They will also guide the
                                                             implementation of the envisaged Type 2
                                                             Technical Assistance activities.
                                                             The updated RPF has been publicly consulted,
                                                             and disseminated in country since November
                                                             2015 and will be disclosed at the InfoShop after
                                                             Project’s restructuring.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    N
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP N
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        N

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project was classified as Category B, given the investments focus on education and institutional
strengthening. Most activities supported by the Project had no potential adverse environmental and social

                                                 Page 5 of 10
effects, and the rehabilitation of Early Childhood Education Centers, on existing footprints, was the only
activity that could cause minor environmental impacts, triggering OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment).
The MOR prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), given that the exact
locations of the ECEs were unknown. The ESMF was disclosed prior to Appraisal, and addressed the
appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures to be taken during implementation.

The proposed Project restructuring entails a revision of the Project Development Objective to better reflect
the adjusted project scope and the expected impact of Project activities, but did not add any activity with
potential to generate significant environmental impacts. The expected environmental impacts continues to be
limited in scope, localized, and temporary. Consequently, the Project remains as a Category B. It was
necessary, however, reviewing and updating the environmental assessment.
The two revised sub-components that may generate environmental impacts (directly and indirectly), and
demand Environmental Safeguards considerations, are the Sub-component 1(a) ECE Rehabilitation, and the
Sub-component 2(f), Urban Mobility Management.
Originally, the Project assumed that only rehabilitation services on existing building footprints would be
eligible, but the revised Sub-component 1(a) includes the construction of Municipal Early Childhood
Education Centers in the peripheries, and 'unoccupied' areas and buildings in the downtown zone. Some
construction sites have not been defined yet, recommending the use of a social and environmental
management framework, as the appropriate EA instrument.
The construction of Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers may have small interferences with
remaining natural habitats, considering that the Municipality of Recife is abundant in riparian vegetation and
protected areas, commonly at an advanced stage of degradation. The construction of new ECEs could
interfere with culturally relevant buildings, especially in the old downtown area, known for numerous
historical sites. Consequently, the Project restructuring triggered, on a precautionary basis, two additional
safeguard policies: the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04).
The restructured Project would trigger, therefore, the following safeguards:

• Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
• Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
• Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
• Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

The revised ESMF was prepared, following Bank team recommendations. It addressed the environmental
guidelines for location and construction of Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers, and included
provisions related to all triggered safeguards. The revised ESMF, also, adds health and safety considerations,
mainly related to risk assessment, selected sites environmental quality conditions and fire prevention
measures.

A “retroactive assessment” of procedures related with land acquisition for the construction of ECECs that
occurred between 2011 and 2016 was prepared by Client and analyzed by the social safeguard specialist
assigned to the Project. The client has also updated and publically disclosed the Project’s Resettlement Policy
Framework to address direct adverse involuntary resettlement impacts that may be caused by site-specific
land acquisition for the construction of new ESECs as well as the downstream impacts related with the two
studies aimed at improving urban mobility and planning in Recife: (a) the Land Management Plan and (b) the
Recife's Restructuring and Economic Revitalization Plan.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
As noted above, most activities supported by the Project have no potential adverse environmental and social
effects. The construction of Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers is the only activity that may


                                                 Page 6 of 10
generate direct adverse impacts. However, the Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers require small
buildings, with area varying from 460 to 1,200 square meters, and the early child education activity do not
generate significant emissions and/or effluents. In sum, potential environmental impacts due to this activity
are localized and limited in scope.

Most Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers are being located in urban consolidated areas, with
adequate sanitation infrastructure. The Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers located in the
peripheries, lacking sanitation, are being equipped with septic tanks. Most Municipal Early Childhood
Education Centers do not pose, either, interference with protected areas or remnants of natural vegetation.
However, the Municipality of Recife is facing problems to find new areas for the construction of Municipal
Early Childhood Education Centers, and is being forced to evaluate plots located nearby protected areas. The
reviewed ESMF has strict procedures for those circumstances. Some Municipal Early Childhood Education
Centers are being developed in the old downtown area, known by numerous historical sites. The Physical
Cultural Resources safeguards was triggered on a precautionary basis, considering that the Municipality has a
strict legislation protecting culturally relevant sites.

Municipal Early Child Education Centers are site-specific and their potentially adverse impacts related with
involuntary resettlement tend to be small in scope. The Resettlement Policy Framework set the principles and
guidelines to be followed during project implementation to address (avoid, minimize, or mitigate) these
adverse impacts.

The revised Sub-component 2(f) will support the preparation of two studies related aimed at improving urban
mobility and planning in Recife: (a) the Land Management Plan and (b) Recife's Restructuring and Economic
Revitalization Plan. Both studies look to improve mobility in key areas of the MOR’s territory. The referred
studies preparation do not have direct adverse environmental impacts. Nevertheless, the outcomes of both
studies may have downstream environmental and social implications going forward, entailing risks and
potentially inducing adverse impacts. The two TORs were reviewed by Bank consultants, incorporating
environmental and social provisions to be considered in the mentioned urban planning studies, in a manner
that reflects the principles of the Bank Safeguards. The two TORs comply with the instructions expressed in
the Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in
Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank (OPSOR and LEGEN, 2014).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The revised ESMF determines that the location of new Municipal Early Childhood Education Centers must
comprise the analysis of alternatives, specially, in the case of potential risks to the children, or interference
with protected areas.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Client prepared an updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including an
updated Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), in compliance with the World Bank's Operational Policies
triggered for the Project restructuring.
The Municipality organized a public consultation of the ESMF and IRF. Both documents were disseminated
and published on its website at: http://www.recife.pe.gov.br

The updated ESMF comprises an overall impact assessment, and a detailed guideline for the characterization
of all sites proposed for the ECEs’ location. The characterization addresses urban infrastructure, access
conditions, ambient quality, natural disasters risk, man-made hazards, sanitation infrastructure and potential
interferences with protected areas and historical sites. Sites that may pose any risk for the children are not
eligible. The ESMF has guidelines for evaluating the new sites eligibility, what may demand additional
studies on alternatives of location, sanitation infrastructure, and potential interference with physical cultural

                                                   Page 7 of 10
   resources. The ESMF also has general environmental guidelines for the construction works. The
   environmental management procedures defined in the updated ESMF are being adopted by the Municipality
   since late 2015.

   The Municipality of Recife revised and updated the RPF) that has been prepared for the Original Project in
   2011 to provide guidelines to be followed in both: (i) the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans that may
   be eventually needed in the cases of new ECECs which location has not been defined yet; and (ii) the
   implementation of the envisaged Type 2 Technical Assistance activities.
   The municipality of Recife has large experience working with involuntary resettlement issues according to
   the principles and guidelines of OP 4.12. In the last 10 years, it worked with a large number of displaced
   people due to involuntary resettlement in two World Bank operations: BR Municipal APL: Recife (P089013)
   and BR Recife Urban Upgrading Project (P049265). In both operations, involuntary resettlement activities
   were under the institutional responsibility of URB Recife (Empresa de Urbanização do Recife). This agency
   was created in 1973 and is a reference in dealing with the adverse impacts of involuntary resettlement in
   urban upgrading projects in Brazil.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   The key stakeholders in the project include parent associations, teachers and teachers' unions, Civil Society
   Organizations (CSOs) involved in education delivery or urban mobility, civil servants, taxpayers, and the
   municipal administration.

   The Municipality ofRecife organized several consultative forums to involve key stakeholders in issues of
   education policy design and implementation. This included the Municipal Education Conference
   (Conferência Municipal de Educação, or COMUDE), which holds periodic consultations with teachers,
   parent associations, educational agencies and CSOs. The Municipality held consultations with NGOs
   involved in early childhood education, community groups, parents, and teachers unions among others
   regarding the Project activities.

   Preliminary versions of the ESMF and the RPF were publicly disclosed for virtual consultation on the
   Municipality's website. The website allows users to file contributions, comments and suggestions. A
   consultation round on the ESMF and RPF was held at date with the participation of ## people, representing
   diverse stakeholders. All contributions received during the consultation round and through the virtual channel
   were considered, incorporated in the documents or replied. A compilation of these contributions and answers
   have been added as an annex of the ESMF.

   The final versions of the ESMF and the RPF have been public disclosed in country on the Municipality of
   Recife. They will be disclosed at the InfoShop upon approval of Project’s restructuring.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Oct-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      06-Mar-2017
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Brazil                                                                       03-Dec-2015
    Comments: PHENVCOMM
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                                                    Page 8 of 10
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       27-Oct-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    06-Mar-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Brazil                                                                   03-Dec-2015
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or   Yes   []    No []         NA          []
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes    [X]   No []         NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Yes   []    No []         NA          []
 the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?              Yes   []    No [X]        TBD         []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or      Yes   []    No [X]        TBD         []
 access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
 other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?



                                              Page 9 of 10
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Michael Drabble
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Noreen Beg (SA)                    Date: 08-Mar-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                         Page 10 of 10
