                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR9980
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P112838
                            Project Name:       China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)
                            Task Team           Arturo Ardila Gomez
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           27-Oct-2009                                  Estimated   30-Mar-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Urban Transport (87%), Public administration- Transportation (13%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                              No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      1173.30                 Total Bank Financing:      100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                           1073.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               100.00
                              Total                                                                                              1173.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance mobility within and to the central area of
                           Wuhan (the area within the 2nd Ring Road) in an environmentally
                           sustainable, integrated, and safe manner. The achievement of this PDO will be
                           measured through a combination of indicators such as: travel times along particu


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         lar routes, traffic volumes, PT performance indicators (frequencies, boardings a
                         nd alightings at bus stops, passengers flows at busiest stations, boardings per
                         bus-km, bus total trip times along specific routes), and other user satisfaction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         surveys (including for disabled and vulnerable users).
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance mobility within and to the central area of
                         Wuhan (the area within the 2nd Ring Road) in an environmentally
                         sustainable, integrated, and safe manner. The achievement of this PDO will be
                         measured through a combination of indicators such as: travel times along particu
                         lar routes, traffic volumes, PT performance indicators (frequencies, boardings a
                         nd alightings at bus stops, passengers flows at busiest stations, boardings per
                         bus-km, bus total trip times along specific routes), and other user satisfaction
                         surveys (including for disabled and vulnerable users).
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will involve priority interventions in public transport, better integration of transport
                         modes, expanded traffic management schemes, road improvements, and technical assistance
                         activities. It will consist of five main components, as follows:

                         Component 1. The original design of this component included improvements on four PT priority
                         corridors and construction of four PT terminals and interchanges. To date, only 5.4 km of the 8.1 km
                         of the Heping Avenue corridor in Wuchang has been completed. The Hanyang Avenue corridor is
                         being redesigned for better integration with the metro and will be completed during the remaining
                         project period. Two corridors along Jiefang Avenue (existing road from Hangkong road to Huangpu
                         road) and Xinhua Street/Youyi Street in Hankou are proposed to be dropped from the project under
                         the restructuring. The detailed design for the four PT terminals is ongoing and construction is
                         expected to start in 2016. No change is proposed to the PT terminals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. The original design of this component includes financing for RS interventions on six
                         corridors. Of these, three have been completed and three are proposed to be dropped under the
                         restructuring due to: (a) road function changes on the existing Jiefang Avenue (this is the same
                         section referred to above under in PT component), (b) overlap with metro construction on Longyang
                         Avenue, and (c) partially constructed using local financing on Yanhe Avenue. A new corridor
                         (Baishazhou Avenue) is proposed to be added under the restructuring.

                         Component 3. Road Improvement Component includes the rehabilitation, upgrading, and
                         construction of three key links of the urban road network of Wuhan. The original design of this
                         component included the following activities: (a) Jiefang Avenue rehabilitation and extension
                         comprising (i) rehabilitation of 6.7 km of Jiefang Avenue (from Huangpu Road to Dibian Road), and
                         (ii) construction of a new 2.6 km extension from Dibian Road to the 3rd Ring Road; and (b)
                         Shuidong road improvement comprising (i) rehabilitation of ground-level road along the Shuidong
                         Road, and (ii) new construction of the elevated-level of the Shuidong Road. There is no change for
                         the restructuring. Some sections of the Jiefang Avenue will be financed by counterpart fund, but will
                         remain as part of the project.

                         Component 4. Travel Demand Management aims to lay the foundations for possible future travel
                         demand management measures in Wuhan by financing equipment and support for training and
                         capacity building. No change is proposed in this component.


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                           Component 5. Institutional Development and Capacity Building Component includes key selected
                           studies and a comprehensive capacity building plan that would support Wuhan to use the Bank-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financed project as a platform for dialog and international experience on comprehensive urban
                           transport-related issues relevant to the city. This component will delete a study on urban-rural
                           integration, and add a study on ITS feasibility and sustainability.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Wuhan, Hubei Province, PR China.

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
                           Juan D. Quintero (OPSOR)
                           Peishen Wang (GENDR)
                           Zhefu Liu (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is a straightforward urban transport infrastructure project, and will have positive
                              environmental and social impact by improving the road network and promoting public transport
                              which in turn will reduce environmental pollution related to vehicle emissions. Given the urban
                              context and common types of civil works involved, the project is classified as Category B due to


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                           its low environmental sensitivity. The major negative impacts of the project will be common
                           environmental issues related to construction activities, i.e. land acquisition, construction noise, air-
                           borne dust, loss of surface vegetation, water pollution and soil erosion, solid waste/spoil disposal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           disturbance of traffic and social activities of local community during construction period. Traffic
                           noise, safety and community severance will be main issues during operation. These environmental
                           and social impacts are well understood and can be readily mitigated with good construction
                           management and mitigation measures developed in the EMP. There is no large scale, significant or
                           irreversible impacts envisioned in the project.

                           At project restructuring, a few project activities under public transport and road safety have been
                           cancelled. Additional activities of installation of signaling and monitoring equipment at two
                           existing streets are proposed. These newly proposed activities are the same in nature as those
                           included under the Public Transport and Road Safety components. There is no civil works
                           involved, and there is no new environmental impacts envisaged that are not covered by existing
                           EIA and EMP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The proposed project components are highly consistent with the Wuhan Urban Transport
                           Strategy and part of the most urgently needed priorities identified by the Transport Strategy. The
                           full of these priorities will further improve the urban traffic condition and promote public transport
                           development in Wuhan, hence contribute to overall urban development.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The road alignment, location of bus terminal/transfer and parking sites were determined by
                           overall Urban Master Plan and relevant road/public transport plans and were taken as given.
                           However, as part of the ongoing Wuhan Urban Transport Project, Wuhan conducted an
                           Environmental Assessment of its Urban Transport Strategy as a whole. This assessment helped to
                           identify environmentally sensitive sites and terrains and confirmed that the larger transport plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           was consistent with sound environmental principles.

                           During project feasibility and design stage, alternatives analysis mainly focused on technical
                           configurations for roads, interchanges and the parking site. Comprehensive comparison has been
                           conducted for environmental, social, technical and financial factors, and final selection is based on
                           overall optimum consideration. In particular:

                           - Jiefang Dadao. The existing road was developed as a high-speed urban express road with no
                           pedestrian facilities. At the same time this is the road along which the LRT is being extended.
                           Further, while very limited pedestrian and NMV facilities were envisioned, this was incongruous
                           with the surrounding land-use which is being developed as heavily commercial and residential. A
                           key constraint limiting options for the road network development in north-eastern Hankou had to
                           do with limited options to cross rail lines at Baibuting. The project preparation process included a
                           rigorous alternatives analysis with two goals: (i) to generate alternative options to create
                           additional capacity in this corridor which could reduce some of the traffic pressures on Jiefang
                           Dadao; and (ii) to optimize the design for this route to facilitate a safer and more people-centered
                           solution integrated with the LRT. As a result of this analysis: (a) Jiefang Dadao was down-graded
                           from Expressway standard to Primary Distributor and redesigned to reduce its attractiveness for
                           through traffic, to improve pedestrian crossing facilities, and to improve the integration and access
                           to public transport. The width of some sections was reduced from an original 8 lanes to 6 lanes to

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                           minimize resettlement impact. And (b) Adjustments were also made in the adjacent road network
                           to provide alternative routes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Design of Shuidong Section (section of the 2nd Ring Road, from Heping Dadao to Zhongbei Lu,
                           length: 3.3 km, width: 50 # 130 m). Two alternatives were developed for this section of the 2nd
                           Ring Road: an elevated and an at-grade roadway. A detailed cost analysis of both alternatives was
                           carried out by the Design Institute. Because of higher resettlement costs and delays associated with
                           the construction of the at-grade roadway, the elevated alternative was preferred.

                           - Safety Corridors. A variety of different levels of treatment were considered for the road safety
                           corridors at preparation stage. In light of Chinese and international experience, a final decision was
                           made to favor physical channelization over road markings, and mid-block signals over
                           unsignalized zebra crossings in order to achieve the PDO#s in terms of enhanced safety.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             To address the environmental impacts, the Wuhan PMO has entrusted the China Railway Siyuan
                           Survey and Design Group Co. Ltd, a Class A environmental impact assessment consultant
                           certified by Ministry of Environmental Protection, for EIA/EMPs preparation with the advice and
                           comments from the Bank task team. An EIA Report and two EMPs (one for each component) have
                           been developed to address the potential environmental impacts and necessary mitigation measures
                           to avoid, minimize and mitigate the adverse environmental impacts. In summary, these include:

                           Prior to Construction:
                           -Land acquisition and resettlement. The alignment and terminal/site alternatives have been
                           analyzed, with a consideration of reducing land acquisition and resettlement. For those
                           unavoidable acquisition and resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan has been developed in
                           accordance with World Bank OP4.12. Details are summarized in Social Safeguards section of this
                           Annex.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -Landscape aesthetics. Special attention has been paid for the design of landscape and greening of
                           interchanges, green belt on road sides. A total greening area of 40 ha has been designed in the
                           project, well outweighing the estimated loss of 15 ha before project. The 4.6 ha green park along
                           Shuidong Section of 2nd Ring Road will be mostly restored under the viaduct, with similar
                           functions as green belt and social activity places for local communities.
                           -Noise mitigation measures. A total of 374,994 m2 noise absorption road surface has been
                           designed for the three roads, with additional noise barriers in total 1,500 m at various locations to
                           mitigate noise impact on roadside sensitive sites. Furthermore, about 1,700 m2 noise insulation
                           windows will be provided for three communities for special protection.
                           -Wastewater from bus terminals. Wastewater treatment facilities have been designed for bus
                           terminals and parking site in line with relevant national standards.

                           Construction Stage:
                           -Social Disturbance. The road construction activities will have impact on local road traffic and
                           disturbance of local people#s daily life. There is also potential impact on utility facilities (water,
                           gas, power, communication etc.). These impacts will be mitigated by proper planning of road
                           traffic diversion, coordination with police department and other relevant authorities. The public
                           utility facilities will be carefully identified and orderly relocated without interrupting usual life of
                           local community. Temporary access roads with adequate safety measures (temporary bridge,
                           protection net, night light etc.) will be provided for nearby residents, business, schools etc. to


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                         minimize impact of social disturbance. Semi-closure will be adopted for the construction site to
                         allow passing of the bicycles and public buses.
                         -Noise. Project construction will have temporary noise impact on local communities. Main
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigation measures include use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; careful
                         scheduling of construction activities near sensitive sites; installation of temporary noise reduction
                         facility if necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public notice as well as
                         approval are required for activities that need continuous construction over nighttime as per city
                         regulations.
                         -Air pollution. Construction activities will cause temporary impact of airborne dust. The
                         mitigation measures to be adopted include frequent water spraying on construction site and access
                         road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and timely clean up of spills;
                         material or waste hauling will avoid densely populated areas, and for certain sensitive section such
                         as schools/kindergartens, transportation will be arranged during nighttime; burning construction
                         waste is strictly forbidden; enclosure wall will be installed to minimize airborne dust dispersion;
                         timely restoration and greening of construction site; closed asphalt mixing system will be adopted
                         to avoid air emission during road pavement process.
                         -Surface vegetation. Roadside trees will be relocated following relevant regulations and
                         procedures well established in Wuhan. Construction activities will be limited within ROW to
                         avoid unnecessary damage of green area and farmland. In addition, significant amount of greening
                         has been designed which is more than the green area before project. Therefore, upon project
                         completion, the loss of surface vegetation will be fully recovered and enhanced.
                         -Soil waste. The project will generate about 5.6 million m3 spoil materials, which will be properly
                         disposed of under overall coordination of City Hygiene Management Bureau. As per Wuhan City
                         Spoil Waste Management Regulation, all contractors will be required to apply for permit for spoil
                         material transportation and disposal from the City Hygiene Management Bureau which will
                         designates the disposal location and transport routes.
                         -Surface Water. Construction wastewater and sewage will be treated through sedimentation and
                         septic tanks before discharged into municipal wastewater network. Waste material or slurry will
                         not be allowed to be discharged into surface water.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -Cultural property. Precautions will be paid for construction near the two cultural properties along
                         Jiefang Avenue, i.e. limit the construction activities within enclosure-fencing; establish public
                         bulletin board to disclose environmental measures and contact information for grievance. Chance
                         find procedures will follow the requirement of national regulations, i.e. excavation will be stopped
                         immediately in case relics are found, and report should be made to city cultural property authority.
                         Construction will only resume after the relevant authority has completed survey and necessary
                         protection, and authorizes the resumption.
                         -         Traffic Management Measures during Construction Stage for Public Transport and Traffic
                         Safety Components. Adequate attention will be paid to traffic management measures during
                         construction. The Feasibility Study of Traffic Safety Component (Chinese Version) include traffic
                         management measures, enforcements and safety education along construction site corridors.
                         Furthermore, during the Detailed Design and Construction Stages, the following specific measures
                         will be included:
                         i.        Area-wide traffic management measures during construction stage, which will take into
                         account the joint impacts of various projects in construction;
                         ii.       Accessibility assessment/measures for local residents, shops, schools and other business
                         areas;
                         iii.      Further refinements of Health and Safety measures for cross-site traffic, especially non-
                         motorized traffics, such as pedestrians, bicycles.



                                                                    Page 6 of 9
                          Operation:
                          -Landscape. More than 40 ha greening area will be established, including greening of roadsides,
                          interchanges, intersections, and bus terminal and parking sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          -Noise. The designed noise mitigation measures will be implemented and maintained. Intensive
                          roadside green belt and tree planting will also contribute to noise reduction during operation.
                          -Air pollution. Modeling results indicate the air quality along the project roads will be in
                          compliance with relevant standards. The #greening belt# will be planted that will help reduce
                          traffic air pollution. In the previous Wuhan Urban Transport Project, a Motor Vehicle Emission
                          Control Strategy Study has been successfully conducted, based on which Wuhan Municipal
                          Government has revised its Motor Vehicle Emission Pollution Control Act and issued
                          Implementation Plan for Motor Vehicle Emission Pollution Control (effective since July 1, 2009).
                          -Wastewater. Wastewater treatment facilities in bus terminal/parking sites will be properly
                          maintained and monitored during operation.
                          -Solid Waste Solid waste during operation mainly comes from administration buildings and ships.
                          This will be mitigated by installation of solid waste collection facility; regular transportation to
                          landfill for final disposal.
                          -Safety. Traffic safety will be ensured through proper traffic management system (signaling,
                          signage) and infrastructures such as MV/NMV separation barriers, pedestrian crossing facilities
                          etc.
                          -Sunshine. Due to wide ROW, the viaduct section of the 2nd Ring Road will not have impact of
                          sunshine blocking on roadside buildings.

                          The newly added activities under the project restructuring, i.e. installation of intelligent traffic
                          management equipment such as traffic signals and monitoring equipment, are the same activities
                          as others under Public Transport and Road Safety components, thus do not trigger any new
                          environmental issues that are not envisaged in the original EIA and EMP. The existing EMP is
                          adequate to accommodate the project adjustment, and no new EA document is required.

                          Social Safeguards:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The Bank task team conducted middle term reviews to the project and concluded that the
                          resettlement works on Shuidong Road in Wuchang downtown were completed satisfactorily. All
                          of the displaced families had moved into their new apartments. The three affected village
                          committees joined in Wuhan municipal programs sounded as ??village-inside-city improvement
                          project?? and played important roles in the resettlement activities. The resettlement policies
                          carried out by the village committees were in consistence to the resettlement policies in the RAP.
                          Most of the displaced families could receive three sets of apartments, some are more. All of the
                          displaced families could also receive their bonus from the village development project beyond of
                          the policies in the RAP.

                           The PMO proposed two new project components to be supported by the project restructure as
                           Hanyang Avenue and Baishazhou Avenue. The Bank loan savings will support the intelligent
                           traffic management system, such as; traffic lighting, etc. There are no any collective land and any
                           structures to be required by those two project components. Bank OP 4.12 and 4.10 is not triggered.
                           RAP and IPDP is not requested.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                             The key stakeholders include local project-affected people and relevant local government
                           agencies. Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during EA preparation. The first
                           round was conducted during March 16 # 20, 2009, through field interview and questionnaire
Public Disclosure Copy




                           survey among project-affected people, local village committees, schools and hospitals. A total of
                           210 participants were consulted. The main concerns raised by the public were noise/dust impacts,
                           traffic disturbance, pedestrian crossing and aesthetics during construction, and resettlement
                           compensation. All these concerns were addressed in the project design, RAP and EIA/EMPs. The
                           second round of public consultation was conducted during May 25 # June 5, 2009 after the draft
                           EIA report had been prepared. Two public meetings were held in local communities and total 270
                           questionnaires were collected through individual interview. The main concerns from general
                           public include traffic disturbance and noise/dust pollution during construction, for which proper
                           mitigation measures have been included in EIA/EMPs and explained to the public. The draft EIA
                           received broad support and satisfaction from public consulted. As required by Chinese EIA
                           regulations, the first round information disclosure was carried out on March 13, 2009, in which
                           brief project information and commencement of EIA was published in Wuhan Evening
                           Newspaper. The second round of disclosure was conducted on April 4, 2008, when draft EIA
                           report (simplified version) was disclosed through internet (www.crfsdi.com) with announcement
                           published in Wuhan Evening Newspaper. The full EIA report was disclosed through internet on
                           May 20, 2009. The Chinese and English EIA/EMPs were submitted to Infoshop for disclosure on
                           August 11, 2009.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Jul-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Aug-2009
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            20-May-2009
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Aug-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Aug-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            04-Jul-2009
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                Date: 25-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                               Date: 25-Jun-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
