                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA9650
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                            Project ID:   P150631
                            Project Name:      KH-Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project II (P150631)
                            Task Team          Mudita Chamroeun
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Jun-2015                         Estimated   19-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA02                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads an d Highways (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Land administration and management
                                              (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      26.86           Total Bank Financing:                    25.06
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            1.80
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  25.06
                              Total                                                                                        26.86
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to help improve the target beneficiaries' access to agriculture
                           resources and selected infrastructure and social services in project communities.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         The project would build on the successful implementation and experiences of the completed LASED
                         Project and associated Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) funded projects, as well as the good
                         practices in the sector. It would address the remaining priority needs of LASED Project beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by providing a package of agricultural technology assistance and infrastructure support to make their
                         lands productive and sustainable. The project would have two main components plus a contingent
                         emergency response component, summarized below, and would be implemented over a five-year
                         period. Based on experience, the project duration is the minimum time required to achieve the
                         desired outcomes and results, as well as the sustainability of investments and livelihoods.

                         Component 1: Infrastructure and Livelihood Systems (total estimated cost US$22.71 million; to be
                         fully financed by IDA Credit)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Social Land Concession Investment Planning and Prioritization (total estimated
                         cost US$3.44 million; to be fully financed by IDA Credit).

                         This would support the planning and prioritization of investments in selected SLC sites in the project
                         provinces, including: (a) participatory preparation and updating of SLC plans, including land
                         surveying, detailed land use planning, processing of requests for land allocation, sensitization and
                         communication on social land concession (SLC) processes and implementation of participatory
                         review processes by communal authorities, and land allocation and demarcation of and within the
                         selected SLC sites; (b) identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate SLC sub-project
                         technology and infrastructure investments, including the carrying out of a baseline survey, agro-
                         ecosystem analysis, water management planning, assessment of environmental and social safeguards
                         implications, and establishment of SLC-related management information system as input to the SLC
                         planning and prioritization.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Land Preparation and Infrastructure Development (total estimated cost US
                         $14.80 million; to be fully financed by IDA Credit).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This would support the provision of technical assistance and community grants to beneficiaries for
                         the implementation of sub-projects for the purposes of land preparation and implementation of
                         prioritized infrastructure investments in the selected SLC sites, including: (a) provision of settling-in
                         assistance to new land recipients; (b) provision of initial land preparation assistance including a first
                         cover crop; and (c) provision of productive and social community infrastructure such as rural roads,
                         small-scale irrigation systems, rural water supply and sanitation, education facilities, health posts and
                         community centers, among others.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (total estimated cost US$4.47 million;
                         to be fully financed by IDA Credit).

                         This would support the provision of technical assistance and community grants to beneficiaries for
                         the implementation of SLC sub-projects for the purposes of consolidation and improvement of
                         agricultural production systems and improvements in the livelihoods, food security and nutrition
                         status of land recipients, including: (a) conduct of community organizing and development
                         activities; (b) provision of agricultural service and extension support following a pluralistic service
                         provider approach; (c) establishment of farmer-managed demonstration plots and model farms; (d)
                         establishment and/or strengthening of farmers organizations, agriculture cooperatives, production
                         and marketing groups and other community interest groups; and (e) establishment/provision of a


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         community fund to strengthen successful local initiatives.

                         Component 2: Project Management (total estimated cost of US$4.15 million; of which about US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $2.35 million would be financed by IDA Credit)

                         This component would support the provision of technical and operational assistance for the overall
                         project administration and coordination, including: (a) social and environmental safeguards
                         compliance and monitoring; (b) procurement planning and contracts management; (c) financial
                         management, disbursement and audit; and (d) monitoring and evaluation.

                         Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response (total estimated cost US$0.00 million; to be fully
                         financed by IDA Credit)

                         This component, with an initial allocation of zero dollars, is part of IDA’s support to an Immediate
                         Response Mechanism (IRM) in Cambodia. The IRM allows reallocation of a portion of undisbursed
                         balances of IDA-financed investment projects for recovery and reconstruction supportfollowing a
                         formal Government request in the event of an eligible emergency. With IDA’s support, Cambodia is
                         developing its Emergency Response Manual (ERM). The ERM will detail eligible uses, financial
                         management, procurement, safeguard and any other necessary implementation arrangements. The
                         preparation and acceptance of the ERM is a condition prior to disbursement of any funds reallocated
                         to this component. The ERM will also serve as the component's operation manual. In the event that
                         the component is activated, the Project Development Objective and results framework may be
                         amended as needed under a Level Two restructuring to reflect the provision of immediate and
                         effective response to the eligible crisis or emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would cover a total of 14 SLC sites in the five provinces of Kratie, Tbong Khmum
                         (formerly part of Kampong Cham), Kampong Thom, Kampong Chhnang and Kampong Speu. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sites include the eight (8) sites under the LASED Project, five (5) sites under two (2) projects funded
                         under the Bank-administered JSDF and one (1) new site in Kampong Thom Province. See the map
                         in LASED II PIM and the consolidated map in LASED II PAD for details of SLC sites. The total
                         area to be covered is approximately 17,000 hectares, benefiting some 5,150 families.

                         Social and environmental safeguard screening reports for a new proposed SLC site in Dong
                         Commune were prepared by the implementing agency and were endorsed by the Bank environmental
                         and social safeguard specialists during the LASED implementation support mission in October 2013.
                         The new proposed SLC site has been verified by the Bank safeguard specialists, with no protected
                         forest or environmental hot spots at the support mission in November 2014. The Bank safeguard
                         specialists verified the safeguard screening reports after checking the provincial hotspots and visited
                         the Dong Commune site. There are no Indigenous Peoples in existing LASED site. The social
                         screening by the World Bank and the implementing agency confirmed no presence of Indigenous
                         Peoples in the new SLC during project preparation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bunlong Leng (GEN02)
                         Jun Zeng (GSU06)




                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The project investments such as small scale community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               infrastructure and agricultural and livelihood activities are
                                                             expected to have minimal environmental and social
                                                             impacts during works implementation. Typical impacts of
                                                             small scale civil works include limited land clearance,
                                                             temporary erosion and sedimentation of water bodies,
                                                             dust and waste generation, etc. Given the small scale
                                                             nature of these activities, impacts as experienced under
                                                             the LASED Project were temporary and irreversible, and
                                                             should be managed using the Environmental Management
                                                             Plan (EMP) prepared for small scale infrastructure.

                                                             In addition, agricultural and livelihood activities although
                                                             small scale and done manually may have some impacts on
                                                             land and soil. This would be addressed with the project
                                                             promoting soil and water conservation, hence impacts are
                                                             expected to be minor and would be manageable by using
                                                             these conservation measures together with proper land use
                                                             planning.

                                                             There may also be some remnant forests/remaining
                                                             patches of forests within the new SLC site that maybe
                                                             affected during the land development. The experiences
                                                             under the LASED Project would be taken into account by
                                                             carefully including different land uses in the land use
                                                             planning and mapping processes and delineate forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             patches as communal forests for protection and
                                                             conservation. These have been proven successful under
                                                             LASED project and would continue to be adopted under
                                                             LASED II Project.

                                                             All the existing LASED and JSDF-funded sites are
                                                             cleared from unexploded ordinances (UXO). The new
                                                             proposed SLC site in Dong Commune was screened and
                                                             confirmed to have no UXO during the implementation
                                                             support missions in October 2013 and November 2014.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        The land use plan implementation and the small scale
                         4.04                                infrastructure investments may impact on the natural
                                                             habitat such as wetlands, natural ponds or remaining
                                                             forest patches. However the impact of small-scale civil
                                                             works on natural habitats will be avoided through the
                                                             Land use planning. The land use planning process will
                                                             also identify different land uses within the SLC and
                                                             delineate natural habitats (e.g. forest patches or wetlands
                                                             or natural ponds) for community protection and
                                                             preservation, as practiced under LASED. No known


                                                              Page 4 of 11
                                                        protected areas during LASED implementation and the
                                                        new site screening.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The infrastructure investments and the development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        new SLC site may impact on remnant forests. However,
                                                        the practice under the LASED Project of including and
                                                        delineating different land uses, including the community
                                                        forest, in land use planning would be continued. Remnant
                                                        forests, if any would be delineated and reserved for
                                                        community protection and conservation as per the Land
                                                        Use Planning and Implementation provided for in the EA-
                                                        EMP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     While the project would have a strong focus on
                                                        agricultural production, it is not expected to lead to
                                                        increase usage of pesticide. The experience under the
                                                        While the project would have a strong focus on
                                                        agricultural production, it is not expected to lead to
                                                        increase usage of pesticide. The experience under the
                                                        LASED Project was that the communities rely solely on
                                                        crop rotation, inter-cropping and multiple cropping to
                                                        manage pests and diseases rather than on pesticides
                                                        because of the prohibitive costs of pesticides and impacts
                                                        on health. The adoption of sound agricultural practices
                                                        would continue to be promoted and supported under
                                                        LASED II Project.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The community infrastructure investments may impact on
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           unknown, buried physical cultural resources. Procedures
                                                        to address chance find during project implementation are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        part of the EMP. No issue has been encountered under the
                                                        LASED Project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Ethnic minorities are not present in present SLC sites
                         BP 4.10                        under LASED. For the new SLC site, ethnic screening
                                                        was conducted and did not find any IP community (the
                                                        Khmer Loeu or “hill tribes”) in project areas (including its
                                                        potential recruited villages). Therefore, the policy is
                                                        would not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used under
                         OP/BP 4.12                     the LASED project was updated based on the experience
                                                        gained for use under the LASED II. It was reviewed by
                                                        the Bank and found to be in line with the Bank's OP 4.12.
                                                        it provides the process and approach to minimize potential
                                                        loss of land or assets as a result of SLC processes.
                                                        Furthermore, The new infrastructure investments might
                                                        need some land acquisition. However, exact locations of
                                                        new small scale infrastructure could not be determined
                                                        during project preparation. The Project would ensure that
                                                        existing land use patterns would be clearly demarcated so



                                                         Page 5 of 11
                                                                      no one who opt out of or are not eligible for participation
                                                                      in the SCL would lose assets as a result of re-blocking.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes           The policy is triggered since the project may finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37                                      construction of embankments (i.e., weir or water storage
                                                                      facility) for small scale gravity irrigation in the prioritized
                                                                      communities, which would be identified during project
                                                                      implementation. The exact sites and number of these
                                                                      embankments are not determined yet. Therefore, during
                                                                      the implementation stage, the implementing agencies (e.g.
                                                                      NCDDS) or its consultant will conduct environmental
                                                                      safeguard screening in order to determine if each small-
                                                                      scale irrigation or weir investment will require any
                                                                      additional environmental assessment. A Dam Safety
                                                                      Specialist was also included in the Task Team to support
                                                                      project preparation and monitor the generic dam safety
                                                                      and environmental protection measures during project
                                                                      implementation. Activities would include: (a) review of
                                                                      the TOR and evaluation of the bidding documents to
                                                                      ensure qualified dam engineers are recruited for weirs and
                                                                      embankments design; (b) review of the design and
                                                                      investigation reports and procurement documents; and
                                                                      (c) monitoring of construction activities as required under
                                                                      OP/BP 4.37.
                            Projects on International   No            The policy is not triggered since the small upstream
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      embankments or weirs planned for construction are
                                                                      located in small in-land streams, which are far from the
                                                                      Mekong River and its main tributaries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project would not involve any activity in any known
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              a. Social Safeguards. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used under the LASED project
                              was updated based on the experience gained for use under the LASED II. It was reviewed by the
                              Bank and found to be in line with the Bank's OP 4.12. it provides the process and approach to
                              minimize potential loss of land or assets as a result of SLC processes. The new SLC site might be
                              impacted by the project's land acquisition. The new small scale infrastructure investment might
                              also need to acquire land. Since all proposed project activities would follow the approved SLC
                              Land Use Plans, the impact from involuntary resettlement is expected to be minor. Other sites are
                              already existing under LASED and LASED II will support further improvements of these sites,
                              including support to livelihoods, thus impacts are deemed to be positive.

                             b. Environmental Safeguards. The project's development activities such as small scale community
                             infrastructure and agricultural and livelihood activities would have minimal environmental and


                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                           social impacts during implementation. Typical impacts for small scale civil works include land
                           clearance, erosion and sedimentation of water bodies, dust and waste generation, etc. Given the
                           small scale nature of these activities, impacts as experienced under the completed LASED Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           are temporary, reversible, and manageable through construction management techniques described
                           in the EA-EMP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No cumulative or long-term impacts are foreseen. The project activities such as small scale
                           community infrastructure and agricultural and livelihood activities might induce minimal, short-
                           term, direct and indirect environmental and social impacts during the civil work activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No project alternatives are required.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used under the LASED project was updated based on
                           the experience gained for use under the LASED II. It was reviewed by the Bank and found to be
                           in line with the Bank's OP 4.12. The Project would use the following approach to minimize
                           potential loss of land or assets as a result of SLC processes: (a) in case a local resident who is a
                           legal owner of land as defined under the Land Law loses fixed assets or access to agricultural land
                           in the planned SLC area, he/she is entitled to receive compensation for land and assets at the
                           replacement value; (b) the planning of SLCs would include practical measures to avoid that poor
                           unauthorized local residents, whose livelihood is dependent on use of land in the planned SLC
                           area, lose fixed assets or access to agricultural land due to the SLC program; (c) land loss within a
                           designated SLC area by any unauthorized poor local resident whose livelihood is dependent on use
                           of land in the planned SLC area, and who began to use this land before the cut-off date, would be
                           eligible to obtain land within the SLC not exceeding the land allocation fixed for regular SLC
Public Disclosure Copy




                           applicants; (d) land speculators enjoying unauthorized use of land in an SLC area would not be
                           entitled to apply for land within the SLC, and may only receive compensation for investments
                           made on up to 5 hectares of the land illegally occupied within the SLC area; and (e) the project-
                           supported social land concession programs are not used as a form of compensation to mitigate the
                           resettlement impacts from other projects.

                           The implementing agency has also updated the Environmental Assessment and Environmental
                           Management Plan (EA-EMP) that was prepared under the LASED Project. This consists of land
                           use planning and implementation procedure for agricultural and livelihood activities and the EMP
                           for small scale civil work. The land use planning procedure was used to delineate natural habitats
                           (e.g., forest patches or wetlands or natural ponds) for community protection and preservation. The
                           EMP was used to manage temporary and reversible impacts caused by small scale civil works. The
                           EMP is aligned with the government Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual (C/
                           S PIM) which includes procedures for monitoring and recording the environment and safety
                           measures for the commune-based infrastructure investments.

                           The following environmental and social safeguards lessons learned from the original/completed
                           LASED Project have been taken into account under the LASED II Project:

                           For Environmental Safeguards:


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                           a. Land use planning and implementation - The participatory land use maps and site development
                           plans of all SLCs have to carefully delineate the different land uses. The land use plan must
                           integrate the remaining patches of forests, bodies of water, and planned green buffers which are all
Public Disclosure Copy




                           declared for community conservation and protection. The land use plan should also take into
                           account early environmental and agricultural carrying capacity. The participatory land use
                           planning should also identify unauthorized land users and potential land loss within a designated
                           SLC area. Proposed actions to be taken should be in line with the Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF) and through meaningful consultation.

                           b. EMP for Community Infrastructure investments –The Provincial LASED Team worked closely
                           with the Commune Council to monitor the contractors and ensure safeguards and safety measures
                           at the construction sites. However, recording of the safeguards monitoring results requires more
                           improvement since written monitoring record is limited. Therefore, for other small scale
                           infrastructure investments, the LASED II Provincial Team would work closely with the Commune
                           Councils to monitor the contractors and ensure environmental and safety measures at the
                           construction sites.

                           c. Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual (C/S Fund PIM) - The EA-EMP is
                           aligned with the overarching guidelines and provisions in the C/S Fund PIM such as the
                           implementation of civil works. The C/S Fund PIM is also consistent with the requirements of the
                           Bank Environmental Assessment Policy (O.P.4.01) and had also been used by the Bank's Rural
                           Infrastructure and Local Governance Project (RILGP). NCDDS has experience on safeguards
                           implementation. However, the NCDDS staff need further support in implementing the C/S Fund
                           PIM such as the procedures for monitoring and recording the environment and safety measures for
                           infrastructure investments at the community level.

                           The NCDDS staff need further support in capacity development through hands-on training and on-
                           site mentoring on the records of the EMP implication. The NCDDS would continue to perform
                           this role and also provide further capacity development training and mentoring on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of environmental and social safeguards tools to the implementing staff based at
                           the sub-national level.

                           For Social Safeguards:
                           Community Infrastructure investments -The participatory approach of the project requires the
                           participation in rural development activities by commune officials, village officials and land users
                           at all stage. This is the best way to avoid or minimize land acquisition and involuntary
                           resettlement. The participation exercise should also aims to provide (a) special attentions to
                           households headed by disadvantaged women; (b) gender equality in access to information on land
                           distribution and land use, in decision-making in the household/community, and in addressing
                           grievances; (c) gender equality in benefit from rural development and livelihood support services;
                           and (d) gender equality in entitlement for land use and ownership. And also indigenous people's
                           families living in the existing SLC sites would be fully consulted for project activities plans.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Community people, Commune Council members, community-based organizations and SLC
                           implementing staff on the ground were consulted on the draft environmental and social safeguard
                           instrument to be used on LASED II, including the RPF and the EA-EMP during technical support
                           mission – appraisal preparations in June 15 to July 3, 2015, and stakeholders’ consultation


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           workshop conducted on June 23-24, 2015. The lessons learned, concerns and views collected at
                           the consultation were incorporated in the RPF and the EA-EMP. The consultation Minutes in
                           Khmer were updated accordingly. The safeguard instruments (i.e. RPF and EA-EMP) were
Public Disclosure Copy




                           translated into local language (Khmer) and were disclosed in the website of the implementing
                           agency and posted in the information board at the commune, district and provincial offices where
                           the SLC sites are located. Consultations on the updated instruments will continue to be undertaken
                           through Board submission and during implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Jan-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         14-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         14-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?

                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mudita Chamroeun
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 16-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                     Date: 17-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
