                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA1048
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Liberia                            Project ID:   P146827
                            Project Name:      Liberia Youth Opportunities Project (P146827)
                            Task Team          Suleiman Namara
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          10-Mar-2015                        Estimated   06-Nov-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSP07                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (88%), Public administration- Other social services (12%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (63%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social
                                              Care Services (37%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      10.00           Total Bank Financing:                   10.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 10.00
                              Total                                                                                       10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to improve access to income generation opportunities for
                           targeted youth and strengthen the government's capacity to implement its cash transfer program.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will provide apprenticeships to vulnerable youth in urban areas and support agricultural

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         transformation and value chain addition using a productive public works and CDD approaches
                         particularly for youth in rural areas. To mitigate the impact of future shocks, the project will also
                         improve the efficiency in the delivery of cash transfers to targeted households including youth.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Particular focus will be paid to pre-employment and life skills activities to strengthen youth
                         participation in the labor market. The YOP activities will be designed and implemented directly or in
                         close cooperation with the private sector (formal and informal). The project will have four
                         components:

                         Component 1: Pre-Employment Social Support and Household Enterprises for Urban Youth.

                         •       Sub-component 1A: Pre-Employment Social Support
                         •       Sub-component 1B: Household Enterprises
                         •       Sub-component 1C: Capacity and Systems Building

                         Component 2: Productive Public Works and Life Skills Support for Rural Youth.

                         •       Sub-component 2A: Productive Public Works and Life Skills Support
                         •       Sub-component 2B: Capacity and Systems Building

                         Component 3: Capacity and Systems Building for Cash Transfers.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation and Coordination.

                         •       Sub-component 4A: Project Implementation and Coordination by the Ministry of Youth and
                         Sports
                         •       Sub-component 4B: Project Implementation and Coordination by the Liberian Agency for
                         Community Empowerment
                         •       Sub-component 4C: Project Implementation and Coordination by the Ministry of Gender,
                         Children and Social Protection
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         TThe project will be implemented within both urban and rural areas within all the fifteen counties of
                         the country, primarily targeted at vulnerable and poor youth. It is proposed that the geographical
                         allocation is primarily based on the number of extreme poor in each region and county.
                         Subcomponents 1B (household enterprises) and 2A (Productive public works) will involve works
                         within both urban and rural areas within beneficiary communities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)
                         Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project triggers OP4.01 due to the proposed
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     beneficiary activities under Subcomponents 1B
                                                                    (household enterprises; support apprenticeship for e.g.
                                                                    carpentry, metal fabrication, block making, and electrical
                                                                    technicians) and 2A (Productive public works; e.g.



                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                                                        provide support for community level small scale
                                                        agricultural farming). Subcomponent 2A will upscale the
                                                        ongoing Community Livelihood component of the YES
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Additional Financing Project, therefore, the recently
                                                        revised ESMF for the YES Liberia Additional Financing
                                                        has been updated and re-disclosed to provide mitigation
                                                        for the potential environmental impacts associated with
                                                        the scope of works under these project components.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    Natural habitats are not expected to be significantly
                         4.04                           impacted by the project, as subproject screening checklist
                                                        will identify any potential natural area for further
                                                        assessment.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Forests are not expected to be significantly impacted by
                                                        the project; all subprojects that might trigger OP4.36 are
                                                        eliminated at the screening stage.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The small scale community agriculture subproject
                                                        activities under the PSN component will not involve the
                                                        use of pesticides. Chemical pesticides have been included
                                                        on the negative list of the project.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The works to be undertaken under this project are not
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           expected to trigger this safeguard. All subprojects that
                                                        might trigger OP4.11 will be screened and chance find
                                                        procedures will be included in the subsequent ESMPs/
                                                        ESIAs following the outcome of the screening exercise as
                                                        the case may be required.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                         BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Component 2A of the project emphasizes the
                         OP/BP 4.12                     implementation of a community-level farm production.
                                                        This activity will include acquisition and preparation of
                                                        land for communal agricultural production. This may lead
                                                        to temporary loss of land, livelihoods, incomes and assets.
                                                        It can also deepen vulnerability for women or migrant
                                                        occupiers of community lands that has been released for
                                                        the project.

                                                        The RPF for the YES project has been revised and re-
                                                        disclosed. It includes measures to sustain and enhance the
                                                        mitigation provision for this component as it an upscaling
                                                        of its Community Livelihood component. All sub-projects
                                                        will be screened for potential impacts during project
                                                        implementation. However, no physical displacement is
                                                        anticipated under this project. Therefore, resettlement
                                                        action plans are not expected to be developed for sub-
                                                        projects that have been identified




                                                         Page 3 of 8
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             NA
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No             NA
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             NA
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Detailed assessment of the activities of the project components show that the activities under
                              Subcomponents 2A (Productive public works) and 1B (household enterprises), could have
                              potential environmental and social impacts on human health and other identified receptors within
                              the wider environment. The subproject activities under subcomponent 2A will build on the pilot
                              that has been designed under the ongoing YES Project Additional Financing (YES AF) (P147967).
                              Main positive potential environment impact involves promoting better use of land and water
                              resources through small scale communal farming. Some negative potential environmental impacts
                              include soil erosion, eutrophication of aquatic environments, crop residue and other solid waste,
                              atmospheric emissions (including particulates), noise and use of pesticides and occupational health
                              and safety impacts to both operatives the members of the beneficiary communities.

                             Project activities will lead to positive social impacts by providing short term income earning
                             opportunities for the youth and household. Beneficiaries will be assisted to overcome constraints
                             to agricultural productivity through improved agriculture technology and improved farming
                             practices, providing agricultural inputs, including basic life and entrepreneurial training. However
Public Disclosure Copy




                             it is foreseen that the project may have impact on land and livelihood as land is required for
                             preparation and implementation of the community-level farm production.

                             The potential environmental and social impacts are localized and can be easily mitigated. The
                             project has therefore been categorized as B: Partial Assessment in accordance with World Bank
                             Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/
                             BP 4.12).

                             To comply with these policy requirements, the project will update the recently revised and updated
                             ESMF (consulted on and publicly disclosed on June 13, 2014 and in on Infoshop on July 9, 2014
                             and RPF (consulted on and publicly disclosed on June 13, 2014 and in on Infoshop on July 9,
                             2014) for the YES Additional Financing (P147967). This approach will sustain the existing
                             effective implementation of the safeguard mitigation measures for the YES AF whilst designing
                             new mitigation measures for potential new impacts.

                              It is very highly unlikely that any of the proposed activities under this project will result in
                              potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts as has been evidenced by observations
                              and reports from the ongoing YES AF.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                           TThe safeguard issues identified under the YES AF which relates to component 2A of the YOB in
                           particular are not expected to have any indirect and/or long-term impacts. Furthermore,
                           establishing preventive mitigation measures and ensuring their proper implementation throughout
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the implementation of subproject activities will limit any potential adverse effects in the
                           immediate and longer-term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives were not considered relevant because the potential impacts of this project are
                           considered minimal as observed and validated by the performance of the safeguard arrangements
                           under the ongoing YES AF so far.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To comply with triggered Bank Environment Policy (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/
                           BP 4.12) and Country environmental statutory environmental and social regulatory requirements,
                           the Government of Liberia has decided to update the recently revised ESMF and RPF (both widely
                           consulted on and publicly disclosed on June 13, 2014 and in on Infoshop on July 9, 2014) it
                           developed for the YES AF to sustain mitigation of the ongoing activities which the YOP will
                           upscale.

                          Justification for Adoption of YES AF (P147967) ESMF and RPF
                          The activities under components 1B (household enterprises; support apprenticeship for e.g.
                          carpentry, metal fabrication, block making, and electrical technicians) and 2A (Productive public
                          works; e.g. provide support for community level small scale agricultural farming) have been
                          identified as the most likely source of potential environmental and social impacts to human health
                          and the wider environments of the subproject locations. The subproject activities under component
                          2A of YOP in particular will upscale on the activities of the Community Livelihood component
                          that has been designed under the ongoing YES AF (P147967). The revised ESMF and RPF for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          YES AF were designed with the objective of providing mitigation for the same small scale
                          community demand driven based agriculture and activities which the YOP is intending to upscale
                          within rural counties of the country.

                          The safeguard arrangements within the existing ESMF and RPF for the YES AF have
                          demonstrated robust assessment and effective implementation in mitigating the identified potential
                          environmental and social impacts since project inception. Several subprojects (similar to those the
                          YOP component 2A is intended to upscale) have been screened correctly and the relevant follow
                          on assessments and mitigation measures have been applied where required. Additionally, where
                          the subproject screening process results in land uptake for the agriculture and aquaculture activity,
                          appropriate due diligence (all necessary documentation to show voluntary donation of land by
                          community and government- depending on land ownership) have been undertaken in compliance
                          with the safeguard arrangement within the RPF to meet the requirements of OP 4.12.

                          Currently, The Liberia Agency for Community Empowerment (LACE) is the implementing
                          agency for the Community Livelihood component under the YES AF. LACE will continue to be
                          the main implementing agency for both components 1B and 2A for the YOP during its
                          implementation phase.

                          Over the years, LACE has successfully implemented several World Bank funded investments


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                          projects and has got staff who have experience on the requirements of Bank safeguard policies. In
                          April 2014, a safeguard audit was undertaken as part of the YES AF project preparation and the
                          report’s recommendations on proper record keeping and technical capacity development through
Public Disclosure Copy




                          training have been implemented. Safeguard workshop has been organized as training to key
                          project implementers at the LACE secretariat and the safeguard implementation arrangement
                          within the secretariat has been well defined to ensure successful implementation at the national,
                          regional and community levels.

                          At the national level, a social protection programme manager takes overall responsibility for the
                          effective implementation of the safeguard arrangements for the YES AF. LACE regional engineers
                          coordinate safeguard activities at the regional/county level. Community Facilitators coordinate
                          safeguard activities at the community level with the help of agric technicians.

                          This safeguard implementation arrangement and capacity at the LACE will be sustained under the
                          YOP to continue the effective implementation of the upscaling subproject activities under
                          component 2A and 1B. Additionally, a Project Operational Manual (POM) for the parent YES
                          project was revised for the YES AF to integrate the revised safeguard arrangements into the
                          subproject identification, selection and preparation process. The POM also contained a negative
                          list of project of subprojects to prevent funding and procurement of pesticides. Specific monitoring
                          indicators were also included in the POM to monitor performance and compliance of safeguard
                          instruments and arrangements. The safeguard arrangements within the POM of the YES AF will
                          be replicated and sustained in the POM of the YOP to integrate agreed safeguard arrangements
                          into the identification, selection and preparation of subprojects.

                           Furthermore, a Productive Public Works technical manual of labor-intensive agricultural activities
                           will be developed before the start of the project and will propose a menu of activities to be
                           financed by sub-component 2A. This menu will guide planning and identification of agricultural
                           sub-projects at the community level. The sub-project technical manual will also include technical
                           design, work productivity norms, social and environmental mitigations measures. Further details
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be provided in the POM.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders involved in the YOP include the Ministries of Youth & Sports, Gender
                           Children and Social Protection, Planning and Economic Affairs, Education, Labor, Agriculture,
                           and Public Works, LACE, training service providers, Community Facilitators, Community
                           Technicians, communities benefiting from the components 2A and 1B. Throughout the Project’s
                           development, these stakeholders will be involved in a series of discussions regarding its rationale,
                           design, and implementation arrangements. They will continue to be involved throughout its
                           implementation; community participation—specifically regarding the selection of Project
                           beneficiaries and the works undertaken.

                          Additionally, various stakeholder consultations have been held during the revisions of the ESMF
                          and RPF as part of the YES AF. The consultations took the form of community fora, focus group
                          meetings at both community and roundtable meetings. Key project stakeholders identified for
                          consultations included Government ministries and agencies, specifically the Local Government
                          Authorities, local NGOs, and project beneficiary community members. Meetings have been held
                          with key officials and opinion leaders to examine the level of awareness and involvement with the
                          Project, concerns of Project implementation, and to obtain relevant documents or baseline


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           information of Project area and the environmental and social setting of Liberia.

                           The consultation of the revised ESMF and RPF was undertaken within selected communities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           geographically representative counties from March 23, 2014 to April 3, 2014. The consultations
                           also served to gather information on the mandates and permitting requirements to inform the
                           development of the Project.

                           The updated ESMF and RPF has again been publicly disclosed in country on the February 25,
                           2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Liberia                                                          25-Feb-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Liberia                                                          25-Feb-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Suleiman Namara
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                     Date: 04-May-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)                    Date: 20-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
