                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19952

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Tanzania                       Project ID:      P161757
                            Project Name:        Accelerating Solar Water Pumping via Innovative Financing
                            Team Leader(s):      Kristoffer Welsien,Zaruhi Tokhmakhyan
                            Estimated Date       16-Jan-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GWA01                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.5                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                       2.5
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to support sustainable access to water in selected rural
                           communities in Tanzania.
                           C. Project Description
                           The overarching goal of the Project is to ensure sustainable access to rural water supply which has
                           been a key challenge for the sector for decades. The diesel generator has been one of the main
                           impediment to sustainability, both because of its high operational costs but also its frequent
                           maintenance requirements not to mention its carbon emission offset. These O&M requirements leads
                           to severe monetary constraints for the COWSOs and a recent study funded by the World Bank (2015)
                           found that approximately 30% of the Community Owned Water Supply Organizations (COWSOs)
                           are not economically sustainable; a majority of these COWSOs rely on diesel generators. This
                           financial constraint significantly limits the COWSOs ability to investment in maintenance and repair
                           but also their ability to invest in coverage expansion to cover unserved populations surrounding sub-
                           villages.

                           This Project intends to support sustainable access to water in selected rural communities of Tanzania
                           by replacing the existing old inefficient diesel electric pumps with clean and climate friendly solar
                           (PV) pumping systems and strengthen the sustainability of rural water supply. The proposed
                         interventions are expected to result in reduced operations and maintenance costs for the COWSOs
                         thus providing them with financial resources to extend water pumping facilities to presently unserved
                         communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Through a blended finance approach, combining 50% debt finance and 50% output-based subsidies,
                         the Project will reach poor communities in rural Tanzania. In addition, the proposed Project will pilot
                         an innovative mobile-banking payment platform to collect user COWSO fees. Lastly, the Project is
                         the first attempt to leverage private sector financing in Tanzania's water sector.

                         The donor subsidy is an essential part of the Project design. PV, blended financing and mobile
                         payment are all novelties in the Tanzania rural water sub-sector and combined with the high
                         Tanzanian interest rate (18%) there is a risk that both the COWSOs and the financial sector will not
                         buy-in to this Project. To ensure the Project is attractive to all stakeholders the 50% subsidy is
                         important as it will reduce the total capital costs repayable by the COWSOs and to make repayment
                         terms, rates, and durations feasible for repayment under Tanzanian banking standards and
                         regulations.

                         A comprehensive database containing 335 eligible villages has already been established of which
                         146 villages will be selected for the proposed pilot Project. An ongoing pilot in two villages in the
                         Arusha region will inform the design of the proposed Project in term of the overall interest in the
                         financing services for PVP investments. To facilitate and coordinate the project activities, a COWSO
                         Renewable Energy Fund (CREF) will be established under a trust structure administered by the
                         Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) with board members consisting of MOWI, World Bank, and other
                         Development Partners and Stakeholders.

                         Component 1: Subsidies for loans for the replacement of diesel pumps (US$ 2.2 million). This
                         component will facilitate a loan to 146 COWSOs to replace their diesel generators with solar-
                         powered pumping systems, benefiting 730,000 beneficiaries. The US$ 2.2 million GPOBA grant will
                         facilitate a 50% subsidy to each COWSO's investment in solar system, which will significantly
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reduce the COWSOs' cost of water extraction.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Independent Verification Agent (US$ 300,000). This
                         component will support technical assistance, establishment of mobile money payment mechanisms,
                         program roll out expenditures, and training and sensitization of COWSOs to increase confidence in
                         repayment of loans. This component will build the institutional capacity of the CREF as well as
                         provide support for Project administration. The COWSO sensitization component would sensitize the
                         COWSO about the CREF services and conditions and further train the COWSO to ensure they meet
                         the basic requirements for the intervention. This component will finance IVA, either a firm or
                         individual consultants, to independently verify outputs and recommend release of subsidy funds. The
                         Bank will provide its no objection for the selection of IVAs and the disbursement of funds.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project involves very limited construction in the 146 rural villages in Tanzania. The Project will
                         not create new water infrastructure but merely install one array of solar PV panels in each village
                         ranging from 12-40 m2 in close proximity to the existing pumping station. The PV panels will be
                         installed at an average high of 3 meters.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower's capacity on safeguard policies was developed under the WSDP Phase I (2007-2014)
                           Program. Although still weak, the borrower has the capacity to guide the Project on safeguard
                           policies as it involves very small and simple constructions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes           There are no major environmental impacts
                           BP 4.01                                          foreseen under the project. However, the project
                                                                            will trigger - Environmental Assessment OP/BP
                                                                            4.01, essentially due to the envisaged minor
                                                                            construction related to the installation of solar
                                                                            panels in the 146 villages. Impacts are likely to
                                                                            emerge from worker's health and safety
                                                                            construction risks, replacement and the disposal
                                                                            of diesel generators. The project will prepare an
                                                                            Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework (ESMF) and make it a public
                                                                            document after public consultations at appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No            The project's geographical areas is located far
                                                                            from the identified indigenous people in
                                                                            Tanzania; the IP policy will consequently not be
                                                                            triggered.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):          Name: Kristoffer Welsien,Zaruhi Tokhmakhyan
                           Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 13-Oct-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)                                Date: 17-Oct-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
