INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSCI 1748
3 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2015
0 I. BASIC INFORMATION
-9      A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Benin                      Project ID:   P154314
Project Name:     Benin Statistical Capacity Building
Team Leader(s): Felicien Donat Edgar Towenan Accrombessy
Estimated Date    31-May-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GPVDR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General public administration sector (40%), Information technology (30%),
Vocational training (30%)
Theme(s):         Analysis of economic growth (20%), Economic statistics, modeling and
forecasting (40%), Other economic management (10%), Other public sector
governance (10%), Managing for development results (20%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.24332              Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                0.24332
Environment       C-Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The objectives of the Benin TFSCB are the following:
(i)    support implementation of the new National Strategy for Development of Statistics
(NSDS-2);
(ii)   strengthen the socioeconomic modeling and forecast system by updating the Social Accounts
Matrix (SAM) and by providing equipment and software to the Macroeconomic Modeling Unit;
(iii)  strengthen the capacity of statistical staff in line ministries to reinforce the quality of data
production within the National Statistical System;
(iv)   reinforce the statistical culture in Benin;


﻿(v)    strengthen implementation of modem data collection systems such the CAPI surveys and the
mobile phone surveys.
C. Project Description
The project activities can be grouped into the following main components: Skills development and
training; light data production activity; statistical culture development and dissemination activities
and equipment and software purchase.
o      More particularly, the TFSCB will support the following activities:
(i) Training activities, including: (a) Training of two statistician cohorts (20 to 25 students for each);
and (b) training of staff within the National statistical system. This capacity building will assist them
in strengthening their knowledge and skills in innovative fields such as Computer Assisted Personal
Interviews (WBCAPI), Poverty measurement and analysis tools (ADePT), and Poverty mapping
with PovMap.
(ii) Strengthening of capacity in the Economic Modeling Unit in order to improve economic
statistics production, including an update of the Social Account Matrix.
(iii) Support to the development of a statistical culture in Benin, through dissemination of statistical
products, training of journalists, outreach, and competitions for students.
(iv) Comprehensive Poverty Mapping using the 2013 population census and 2014/15 Household and
DHS surveys.
(v) Mobile phone surveys using the Listen to Africa methodology to collect data on a sub-sample
drawn from the 2014/15 household survey.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will not involve any activities that are likely to have adverse environmental or social
impacts.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No


﻿Physical Cultural Resources OP/ No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   No
0
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
O
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No
Projects on International       No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):         Name: Felicien Donat Edgar Towenan Accrombessy
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                 Date: 21-Jan-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/       Name: Andrew L. Dabalen (PMGR)                  Date: 17-Mar-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


