INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12035
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                Project ID:  P154327
Parent       P133327
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing for Tajikistan PAMP II (P 154327)
Parent Project TAJIKISTAN SECOND PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE
Name:           AGRICULTURE AND WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PROJECT
(P133327)
Task Team       Bobojon Yatimov,Jeren Kabayeva
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Apr-2015               Estimated     18-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Irrigation and drainage (89%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
forestry (8%), Public administration- Other social se rvices (3%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Rural policies and institutions (19%),
Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care S ervices (3%), Improving
labor markets (3%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     12.00            Total Bank Financing:    12.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               12.00
Total                                                                     12.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 8


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objectives are to (i) provide employment to food insecure people
through the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, (ii) increase crop production in
response to improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and (iii) support the development of
improved policies and institutions for water resource management, as a means to improve food
availabilityand food access for low-income people in poor rural areas supported by the project.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The project development objectives for PAMP II are to: (i) provide access to temporary
employment to food-insecure people through the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure, (ii) increase yields of selected crops in response to improved irrigation and
infrastructure, and (iii) strengthen the capacity of government to introduce integrated water
resource management. By improving food access and food availability these measures improve
the food security of low-income people in the poor rural areas supported by the project.
3. Project Description
The proposed AF will be used to finance the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure
and to support Water User Associations in four additional districts in Khatlon Region (Shahrtuz,
Qabodiyon, Vakhsh and Qumsangir) and one district in the Region of Republican Subordination
(Vahdat) and will support the following activities specified under the first component of the parent
project:
The project has three main components:
Component I: Public Works and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (total Bank
funding of USD 34.71 million, from USD 20.74 million GAFSP funds and USD 13.97 million IDA
funds).
Sub-component la: Employment Generation for Food Insecure Households through Public Works:
Food insecure people from the project districts will be employed for manual cleaning of secondary
and tertiary irrigation canals. Expenditure will include payments to beneficiaries, employer
contributions to beneficiary social security taxes, social mobilization and labor force administration
costs, and the procurement of low-cost tools for manual labor.
Sub-component Ib: Mechanized and Other Works: In addition to manual works, rehabilitation will
require: the rental and purchase of machinery (excavators, bulldozers and closed drain flushing
equipment), the purchase and installation of irrigation gates, irrigation canal and structure repair
works, pipeline network repairs and strategic pump station and vertical drainage well repairs.
Sub-component Ic: Flood Channel Emergency Works: The project will finance the emergency
restoration of a flood channel that traverses and protects the city of Kulyab as well as reduces risks
for agriculture land and irrigation systems supported through the project down in Vose district.
Page 2 of 8


﻿Component II: Assistance in the water resources management, including technical assistance for
policy and institutional reform.
Sub-Component IIa: National level Policy, Legislative and Institutional Formulation: The project
will assist the government to: (i) further develop the legal basis for integrated water resource
management and water sector reform, (ii) prepare a national IWRM strategy to identify priorities for
improving water resource management in Tajikistan, and (iii) establish a national Water Information
System (WIS).
All references to MAWRM and Mirobs in the relevant descriptions of sub-component IIa in the
PAD are replaced with MEWR and ALRI, respectively. The original task to support transformation
of the MAWR into a Ministry of Water Resources has been dropped as government opted to
establish the MEWR instead. The original proposal to establish a centralized Water Resource
Information Center (WRIC) has also been replaced with the establishment of a more decentralized
Water Information System (WIS) in response to the new institutional structure for water resource
management, as described below.
Sub-Component IIb: River Basin Planning: The project will assist the government to establish River
Basin Management (RBM) in the Kofarnihon River basin. The description of activities remains the
same, but the project will no longer establish Mirobs.
Subcomponent IIc. Develop and Strengthen Irrigation and Drainage Institutions: This component
was originally intended to assist the government to: (i) build independent, financially-autonomous
irrigation and drainage service providers at theoff-farm level; (ii) support the transformation of
existing region and district level institutions into a new framework based on system-level hydraulic
boundaries; and (iii) establish and strengthen the capacity of these institutions through provision of
technical assistance, goods, works and training. These activities must now be modified in response to
the new institutional structure.
Component III: Project Management: A project management unit (PMU) to be managed under the
World Bank-financed Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management project will be the mai n
implementation agency. It will be responsible for: implementation and coordination, financial
management and procurement, communication and awareness programs, environmental management
and safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the following districts in Khatlon Region (Shahrtuz, Qabodiyon,
Vakhsh and Qumsangir) and in one district in the Region of Republican Subordination (Vahdat).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          This OP is triggered as the project activities (small-scale
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                earth moving, concrete works, cleaning up existing
drainage channel structures; rehabilitation/replacement of
Page 3 of 8


﻿pumps), might generate some environmental impacts:
water and air pollution; noise, soil erosion; dumping of
excavated sediments and other materials from irrigation
and drainage channels, structures; occupational hazards,
etc. To address these issues, the borrower will use the
Generic Environmental Management Plan prepared for
the initial project. Based on the EMP, the borrower will
prepare site-specific EMPs for each selected irrigation
scheme and pumping station in accordance with WB and
national EA rules and procedures, and will then disclose
and publicly consult them in the participating raions.
These EMPs will be used for project implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           No. As the proposed activities will be located in the
4.04                                 existing irrigation areas, none of them will have impacts
on protected areas or important nature habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No. The project activities will be implemented in
irrigation areas with no impacts on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           No. OP 4.09 on Pest Management is not triggered as the
project does not require the purchase and/or use of
pesticides, and based on previous experience in the
region, the improved irrigation infrastructure will not lead
to changes in the crops production which would require
usage of more pesticides. The main crop will remain
cotton with a limited application of pesticides due to their
high costs. However, the project in view of longer term
considerations and changes in demand and supply trends
will allocate resources within its public outreach
campaign to carry out information dissemination activities
in support to Integrated Pest Management in the project
area.
Physical Cultural       No           No. As the proposed activities will be located in the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 existing irrigation areas, none of them will have impacts
on physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           No indigenous peoples as per OP 4.10 are present in the
BP 4.10                              project area.
Involuntary Resettlement No          No. The policy is not triggered because: (i) rehabilitation
OP/BP 4.12                           works will be done on existing irrigation/drainage canals
and collectors; (ii) rehabilitation works related to upgrade
of the pumping station buildings including replacement of
pumps, when necessary, will be done only on the
footprints of existing facilities. The will be no civil works
related to construction of new pumping stations. In order
to avoid any tree cutting during rehabilitation works,
while preparing a site specific EMP, the borrower will
analyze this issue and in such cases those canals/
collectors will be excluded from the project activities.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Similarly to the practice of the original project, tree
cutting along the canals will be avoided.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           No
4.37
Projects on International  Yes        The project area covers irrigation network which draws
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  water from the Amu Darya River through Tajikistan's
territory and then flows into the Aral Sea. Thus the project
triggers OP 7.50. At the same time, the proposed
investments under the project are only for renovation of
irrigation canals and improvements of drainage
infrastructure along with the purchasing agricultural
machinery, which are not expected to change the volume
of extraction/discharge water or quality of water of these
rivers, but rather will lead to more effective irrigation and
drainage of the water. Under the first PAMP, an exception
to the notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of
OP 7.50 was granted. Such exception was also received
under PAMP II.
Projects in Disputed     No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project AF will support same project activities as the parent project (small scale earth moving,
concrete works, cleaning up existing drainage channel structures; rehabilitation/replacement of
pumps as well as rehabilitation of pumping stations). Although most of these works are fairly
small scale and will be done manually, they might generate some adverse environmental impacts:
water and air pollution; noise, soil erosion; dumping of excavated sediments and other materials
from irrigation and drainage channels, structures; occupational hazards, etc. At the same time, the
project will bring several positive environmental and social impacts, and in particular, reduction
in: water logging, salinization and water losses; improved irrigation distribution; reduction in
seepage losses from main canal and over-supply of irrigation, with a beneficial effect for the area -
a lower water table, a lower risk of salinity, and less stagnant water pools in the village causing
health problems. Direct positive impacts will be also generated by increased production, more
employment and increased income.
As the project activities will be implemented on existing irrigation schemes, no impacts on natural
habitats, forests and/or physical cultural resources are expected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long term and indirect project impacts are positive and associated with: (a) Improved
agricultural productivity; (b) Increased Farm Income, Alleviation of Poverty; (c) Reduction in
Water Losses; (d) Improved Water Resources Management; (e) Increased employment.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Page 5 of 8


﻿impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address potential adverse impacts the client will apply the Generic Environmental Management
Plan (GEMP) which was prepared and applied for the initial project. Based on the GEMP site-
specific EMPs will be prepared, taking into account the specific conditions of the selected
irrigation scheme and/or drainage network as well as for the pumping stations, after the detailed
design of each sub-project will be completed. The GEMP ensures that the proposed prevention/
mitigation measures and monitoring activities identified during the subprojects EA will be
properly undertaken during the project implementation. The GEMP includes the following: (a)
short description of applicable laws, policies on environment procedures for EA as well as EA
institutions and responsibilities; (b) Environmental Guidelines (EG) specifying: (i) potential
environmental and social impacts of the rehabilitation of irrigation canals, improvements of
drainage infrastructure activities; (ii) proposed mitigation and monitoring measures to be applied
during the project implementation; (iii) description of the EMP Checklist which will be applied for
activities related to pumping stations and flood channel repairing; (c) description of implementing
arrangements, including supervision and monitoring, as well as reporting; and (d) analysis of the
EA institutional capacity of the implementing agencies along with the proposed technical
assistance to adequately implement the EA requirements for the subprojects to be supported. The
GEMP also specifies necessary steps for preparing site-specific EMP of the selected Irrigation
Schemes (ISs) and/or of the Drainage Canals (DCs) as well as for EMP Checklist for mentioned
above activities.
The overall management responsibility for the project will rest with the Ferghana Water Resource
Management Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be the leading operational institution
for the implementation of the proposed project and carry out all project implementation in
accordance with the Operations Manual (OM). The PMU also will ensure that the EMP provisions
are fully integrated into implementation of the project, including monitoring and reporting
required by the World Bank. Proper implementation of the EMP provisions and field monitoring
are the main responsibilities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the regional level.
Contractors will be responsible for implementation of the rehabilitation works in accordance with
environmental requirements specified in the bidding documents and the EMP. PIU will work
closely with CEP in implementing the EMPs. The existing PMU has previous experience in
dealing with safeguards issues as it implemented several WB including the first PAMP project.
The WB implementation support missions conducted in December 2013, June 2014 and January
2015 showed that the GEMP implementation is being carried out at satisfactory level. All project
activities up to now are being implemented in full compliance with the GEMP. Before any
activities on the ground have been started the PMC prepared site specific EMPs for participating in
the project districts which have been presented to all interested parties (NGOs involved in
environmental protection and agriculture, government and local public authorities, farmers etc.).
After EMPs disclosure the PMC Environmental Specialist and the local company "Dusti" have
organized their public consultation. The final version of the documents have been approved by the
oblast environmental authorities and currently are used for the project implementation. The main
provisions of the EMPs are included in the contracts for conducting drainage canals cleaning up
activities. Furthermore, PMC and "Dusti" have undertaken a series of environmental capacity
building and information dissemination activities which have been highly appreciated by the
Page 6 of 8


﻿project beneficiaries. The PMC jointly with local irrigation engineers conduct periodical
monitoring on the project activities and until now no complaints on environmental non-
compliance have been reported.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The GEMP was consulted with all involved stakeholders. Similarly, the site specific EMPs for all
participating project raions and pumping stations have been prepared/will be prepared and per
GEMP stipulations have been/will be disclosed and consulted on the ground prior any civil works
will start.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               30-Aug-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                            13-Sep-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tajikistan                                                30-Aug-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ]  No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Bobojon Yatimov,Jeren Kabayeva
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)           Date: 02-May-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


