INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12150
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kazakhstan                 Project ID:   P153497
Project Name:    Center West Regional Development Corridor (P153497)
Task Team        Jacques Bure
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-Sep-2015                Estimated     28-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Rural services and
infrastructure (25%), Export development and competitiveness (25%), Regional
integration (25%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1320.00             Total Bank Financing:  1000.00
Financing Gap:          100.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        220.00
0          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          1000.00
Total                                                          1220.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
22.   The Project Development Objective is to increase transport connectivity and efficiency within
the regions along the Center-West corridor and to stimulate provision of access to basic services in
less developed, remote, and sparsely populated regions.
C. Project Description


﻿1.     The proposed Centre-West road project is part of transit corridor "Baku-Astrakhan-Atyrau-
Aktobe-Aktau-Turkmenistan border", which connects Kazakhstan with Azerbaijan and Europe in the
west, with Russia in the north, through Iran with countries of the Persian Gulf, and Uzbekistan and
Turkmenistan in the south. Estimated 2,000 km Center-West project will start in Astana and pass
through Akmola, Kostanai, Aktobe, Atyrau, and Mangistau oblasts, thus linking two of four
identified "urban agglomerations", and two of the identified "second-tier" towns. The project is
expected to contribute to the local development of the regions through which it passes and promote
pro-poor growth by overcoming the spatial mismatch between the location of jobs and settlements
for low-income residents.
2. It is intended to be mainly of a two lane standard (which indicates a well-grounded consideration
of standards and costs), and expand to four lanes through some critical urban locations. Tolling is
also to be considered along some sections consistent with a broader tolling plan. The Centre-West
corridor will be part of an overall network upgrade program that will also enhance existing links
between Astana and Almaty (Centre South from Astana - Pavlodar - Semei - Kalbatau - Ust-
Kamenogorsk) and between Astana and Ust-Kamenogorsk (Centre East from Astana - Pavlodar -
Semei - Kalbatau - Ust-Kamenogorsk). The Government is aiming for completion of all the corridors
by 2020.
3.      Out of seven options identified at the pre-feasibility stage, the Government has chosen to
study feasibility of the following three routes. The three routes follow only limited sections of
existing main highways, with most of its route currently consisting of either local roads or, in the
western end, tracks in the desert.
Route 1 traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egyndykol, Arkalyk, Torgay, Akshiganak, Yrgyz, Shalkar,
Kandyagash, Dossor, Beyneu to Aktau (total of 1,997km).
Route 2 traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk, Torgay, Akshiganak, Yrgyz, Aktobe,
Dossor, Beyneu to Aktau (total of 2,097 km).
Route 3, proposed by CR, traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk, Torgay, Karabutak,
O
Aktobe, Dossor, Beyneu to Aktau (total of 1,936 km).
4. At this stage, if one of the above option is adopted, the section proposed for the Bank to finance
will remain unchangeable in all the options, it starts from Astana and traverses Zhanteke, Egindykol,
Arkalyk to Torgay. All the roads of this proposed section, except for Astana-Zhanteke part, are
currently local, or secondary, gravel roads in poor condition ineffectively managed by Akimats. After
reconstruction the road will be converted into the republican roads network. But the World Bank and
the Government are contemplating an "option zero" by which the exiting main road (Astana, Zhaksy,
Kostanay, Karabutak and further West-called "Route 0") is upgraded. This solution may have a
larger economical impact and larger rate of return on the investment.
5.      Table 1 gives the current traffic volumes on the Astana-Torgay section in case route 1, 2 or
3 is selected. No origin-destination data is available but, based on experience on other countries, it
will be very small compared to the other flows using the roads. The traffic forecasts have therefore
been done in two stages:
*      Forecasts of total traffic on each road section, allowing for traffic generation as a result of
the road improvement but ignoring any impact from long-distance traffic diverting from alternative
routes
*      Forecasts of long-distance flows which could divert from their current routes as a result of an


﻿alternative route becoming preferable
Although this approach could result in an element of double-counting, this will be very small
compared to the overall traffic volumes.
O
Q)      Table 1 - Route Section with Traffic Volume and Condition Data
Astana-Korgalzhin Arkalyk   Road   Dist (km)
Surface
(a)    Condition     AADT
P-2 Astana Korgalzhin (to Zhanteke)  100  a / b  Satisfactory  2100
Local road Zhanteke-Egindykol 67   h / u  Unsatisfactory 1000
Local road Egindykol-Arkalyk 134   Macadam       Unsatisfactory 500
Arkalyk-Torgay       Local road Arkalyk - Torgau  40    a/ b   Good   1000
Local road Arkalyk-Torgau   250    Part macadam  Satisfactory - 100km
Unsatisfactory - 150km 1000
6.     The Project will be a Class 11 (2-lane) highway between Astana and Torgay with alignment
within Akmola and Kostanay oblasts. The project is being prepared based on 6 different road
sections of about 100km length each. If the "Route 0" option is adopted later on during the
preparation of the project, the road will still remain a Class II road, this time along an existing
alignment, therefore at this point in time the ISDS is developed using the options that are currently
debated by the Government, i.e., Route 1, 2 and 3.
Section 1 (170 km) starts from about 10 km west from the city center of Astana in suburban Astana,
runs in a north-westerly direction toward Zhanteke and further West. This section consists primarily
of reconstruction of an existing although very poorly maintained road. The portion of this section that
is close to Astana is expected to carry a traffic of about 7,000 vehicles per day. It may be tolled to
introduce concession for operation and maintenance of 2 lane road infrastructure. The Western end
of the route passes the UNESCO World Heritage-listed Korgalzhyn State Nature reserve, which
contains substantial undisturbed areas of Central Asian steppe and lakes, a home for more than 60
rare species of animals and plants, listed in the Red Data Books. The Zhanteke - Egindokyl section
of the proposed route passes some distance to the north of Lake Tengiz- Korghalzhyn, a Ramsar
wetland that has been protected for nearly 50 years because of the location of the most Northern
nesting population of Flamingo (its population in some years may reach 50,000-60,000 birds).
Section 2 (220km) continues West after Zhanteke to Arkalyk. This section will be a green field
project as there is no existing roads at present. The new road would go through a semi desert with
scattered wetlands and mostly flat terrain with some agriculture land on the last 10 km towards
Arkalyk.
Section 3 (290 km) uses the existing road that connects Arkalyk to Turgay. The road also connects
settlements in between, all of them being modest in size. The road often runs in parallel to an
hydrographic complex made of medium size rivers and their associated tributaries and wetlands.
Project Components
Component 1 (US$1,208 million): Civil works and Supervision. The component will finance the
construction of road sections between Astana and Turgay (or Astana and Kostanay if "Route 0"
becomes the preferred option), estimated at a total cost of US$  million equivalent. This


﻿component will allow the construction of about 750 km of road sections between Astana and Turgay
(or Kostanay) based on arrangements identical to the ones already in place under the ongoing SWRP
financed by the World Bank. The component includes consulting services for supervision of civil
works. Land acquisition and road design costs will be financed through the Borrower's own funds.
0
Component 2 (US$ 10 million): Regional Development. The component will finance the preparation
of a regional development framework focused on transport and connectivity interventions to address
lagging areas along the Center West corridor in Akmola, Kostanay, Aktobe, Atyrau, and Mangistau
oblasts that are economically disadvantaged. The aim of the framework will be (a) to make basic
services accessible to as much of the population as possible along the corridor, thus moderating the
exodus to the cities; and (b) to provide infrastructure to increase density and reduce distances, thus
increase what is known as the economic mass of the growth centers. A contribution of transport will
be to ensure that sparsely-populated and remote areas are provided with reasonable access to basic
services, such as education and health. The framework will identify a range of basic services,
including access to health, education, and water/sanitation. In terms of transport there could be a
criteria developed based on the size and distance of a community from defined services centers (e.g.:
all communities over x thousand will be provided with a paved road; all communities over y
thousand will be provided with an unpaved road; all communities over z hundred and >300 kms from
service center will be provided with a weekly transport service.).
The component will help Astana, Aktobe and Aktau, and their surrounding regions to develop their
regional road networks to facilitate easy access between them and their hinterlands, particularly
nearby urban centers. This will facilitate the realization of agglomeration benefits. As well as intra-
regional links, growth centers, which by definition are expected to create new jobs, also need good
links with the areas from which they expect to attract their new workforces. Many of these links have
been covered in the individual modal discussions but one objective could be to ensure that each
lagging area is connected to at least one, and preferably two, growth centers by transport links of
reasonable standard. These networks are currently the responsibility of municipal, oblast, and
national authorities, but the component will look into the planning and investment in a coordinated
O
U       way.
1.     Component 3 (US$ 2 million): Road Safety. The component will finance the implementation
of high priority road safety measures studied and agreed upon under the South West Road Project.
o       The activities will mainly focus on (i) presentation of the road safety strategy during public
consultations; (ii) review of designs; (iii) supervision of safety for users and workers on the
construction sites; and (iv) infrastructure safety inspection prior to the opening of the new
infrastructure.
2.     Component 4 (US$2 million): Project Management. The component will finance Project
Management Consultants (PMC) which will assist the CR on management of all activities associated
with the project, including supervision of all safeguards and fiduciary aspects. This component also
covers TA to support project management capacity of the CR, including training for financial
management, procurement, project supervision, and project financial audits. Those arrangements are
identical to the ones in place under the ongoing SWRP and EWRP.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The section of about 680km proposed for the Bank to finance starts from Astana and traverses
Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk to Torgay in Akmola and Kostanay oblasts. All the roads of this


﻿proposed section, except for Astana-Zhanteke part, are currently local, or secondary, gravel roads in
poor condition ineffectively managed by Akimats. The project has all physical characteristics of a
large linear infrastructure project, with significant spatial extension, visible impact on landscape,
biosphere and land use patterns, strong dependence of its impacts on topography, climate, natural
O
U       conditions and anthropogenic activity.
The eastern end of the route passes through the area adjacent to the UNESCO World Heritage-listed
Korgalzhyn State Nature reserve, which contains undisturbed areas of Central Asian steppe and
lakes, a home for more than 60 rare species of animals and plants, listed in the Red Data Books. The
Zhanteke - Egindokyl section of the proposed route passes some distance to the north of Lake
Tengiz- Korghalzhyn, a Ramsar wetland which is the location of the most Northern nesting
population of Flamingo (its population in some years may reach 50,000-60,000 birds).
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented by the Roads Committee (RC) of the Ministry of Investments and
Development (Ministry) through its national road operator, JSC KazAvtoZhol (KAZ). Kazakhstan
has made good progress with reforming and strengthening its road sector institutions. The Bank
supported the Government in the reform aimed to introduce more efficient and commercially
oriented management practices. In 2013 creation of the KAZ aimed at the following results, which
were aligned with best global practices and supported by the Bank through the ongoing SWRP and
EWRP:
*      Improved institutional structure with decision making level and sector policy at the Ministry,
road sub-sector policy management at the RC, and operational implementation of the road policy at
KAZ
*      Separation of the client and supplier functions/organizations
*      Better management of road assets by a new commercialized organization KAZ
KAZ has built its capacity through implementing projects financed by the World Bank and other
international development institutions such as ADB and EBRD. In particular, environmental and
social safeguards has become an integral part of the requirements stipulated in the tender
documentation for the civil works contractors. Each contractor employs environmental specialists
responsible for environmental control, monitoring and reporting. There are two people in KAZ
Department for Roads Network Development and Investment Projects responsible for the
implementation of the environmental safeguards. KAZ has also benefitted from the safeguards
trainings provided by the ADB and the World Bank during last 2 years. Significant progress is
observed in relation to the public participation and consultation regarding the road construction
works during the project preparation as well as the project implementation and completion.
Safeguards related documents are publically disclosed on the existing projects website with the
opportunity for the public feedback and discussion.
Nonetheless, the capacity -building efforts will still be required, particularly with regards to the
implementation of the land acquisition and the robust grievance redress and monitoring of social
impacts around resettlement and land acquisition practices of the client. This is due to the recent the
land code changes introduced in 2011, designating the responsibility for resettlement and land
acquisition implementation to the local authorities. The local administration has limited knowledge
and skills around application of international practices for resettlement and land acquisition
KAZ is now operational with local departments in 14 oblasts, and as a result of their work in


﻿2013-2014 the overall institutional set up and local technical capacity has improved. However,
changes in the Government of Kazakhstan structure in autumn of 2014, including in the top
positions, led to a lack of coordination and overall understanding between the RC and KAZ. The
transfer of implementation of construction and maintenance projects from RC to KAZ, as planned
U       earlier by end 2014, so that the company becomes an operator for the entire republican roads
network, has not yet materialized.
As of February 2014, the KAZ has become a part of the JSC Kazakhstan Temir Zholy, a national
railway company. At the same time the Ministry remains to be a sole shareholder of the KAZ, which
gives grounds for solid involvement of KAZ in the project implementation. TBC
Institutional Framework: The current institutional capacity of the borrower to implement the
described measures relies on four main entities currently in charge of country based environmental
and social safeguards. Those entities are responsible for: (a) environment; (b) water resources; (c)
forestry and hunting; and (d) land management. Construction works are supervised by the Ministry
for Environmental Protection (MoEP) and its subordinate agencies. Local units of the MoEP,
Environmental Expertise and Nature Use Regulation Department are structured into thematic groups,
which at Oblast level include among others (i) environmental expertise, (ii) permitting, (iii)
supervision and monitoring, (iv) environmental laboratories. At the Rayon level each of these
thematic units is represented by one inspector. The capacity of KAZ to supervise and monitor social
impacts is moderate and will require additional capacity building measures.
Projects and operations where negative impacts may occur are usually inspected once per year and
carried out by the MoEP staff and/or Oblast and Rayon representatives. During construction works
Oblast and Rayon level staff monitor the sites and play a key role in commissioning the finalized
project, thereby checking environmental compliance with design and final implementation of all
required environmental restoration and recultivation measures. The MoEP regional staff usually
contacts the project developers, the contractor#s environmental staff and the unit on site, which is a
mandatory requirement (called "production control" under the Kazakh legislation).
0
At the same time, the MoEP and other regulatory bodies have limited resources for the permanent
inspections and monitoring of the civil contractors and, in particular, small size limited duration
works subcontractors. The capacity of the KAZ, therefore, should be strengthened in order to
a       monitor day to day environmental and health and safety performance of the subcontractors.
The EIA process in Kazakhstan is described in the Environmental code (2007) and a set of detailed
implementation instructions. It foresees 4 stages, which correlate with the respective design activities
and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and (iii) a detailed
("full") EIA for the detailed design stage and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the design
documentation. In this respect the EIA process is both logical and deemed compatible with
international good practice.
There have been changes to the expropriation laws in the country. Particularly, the land code
introduced in March 2011, introduced new changes around methodology and the compensation rates
in addition to designating local administration to be responsible for the land acquisition process.
Various legal clarifications have also been issued to date. The Bank will conduct a gap analysis as
part of the due diligence process, prior to the project appraisal.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment   Yes         A safeguards category of A is proposed. This is
OP/BP 4.01                               justified by the extensive new road sections planned
under the project. The alignment will run through a
variety of areas with different safeguards
implications: (i) in zones of intense agricultural use
existing irrigation systems will have to be preserved,
(ii) where the road would cross rangeland under use
for animal husbandry animal underpasses will have
to be planned to guarantee the safety of drivers and
animals, (iii) in sections through fragile habitats
which will have to be protected.
There may be cultural sites, human activities or
environmentally sensitive habitats along the
proposed corridor, such as patches of forest,
wetlands, river ecosystems or fragile habitats in
desert / semi-desert areas, which may warrant an
adjustment or re-routing of the road alignment. This
will be presented in the ESIA sections on the
description of baseline conditions, potential impacts
and analysis of project alternatives, which will
review the criteria for alignment selection, review if
environmentally friendlier options can be envisaged
Q)                                                and will also consider the option of not executing the
project.
The main envisaged negative impacts during
construction is the operation of borrow areas,
generation of waste (construction materials, spent
consumables, household waste and wastewater from
camps), excessive land use, topsoil destruction and
erosion. There is also a potential impact on
groundwater and surface water from excessive
turbidity and siltation, washing equipment in rivers
(e.g. cement trucks) and accidental spills involving
fuels and lubricants. During operation of the road
storm drainage management, soils, ground and
surface water contamination by heavy metals, soot
and organic compounds (e.g. PAH), noise, dust, air
pollution will be the main issues. There is a potential
risk of destruction or disruption of natural habitats
and ecosystems by poor construction management.


﻿The Borrower will prepare the ESIA and EMP which
will be reviewed by the Bank team, disclosed and
consulted upon by the Borrower.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD           The road alignment will pass through the area
adjacent to the UNESCO World Heritage-listed
Korgalzhyn State Nature reserve. The alignment will
be checked regarding potential negative impacts on
this and other protected areas or natural habitats
during project preparation to avoid or mitigate them.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            Project does not involve forestry operations.
Potential impacts on natural forests will be assessed
under OP 4.04. Policy OP 0.36 Forests in not
triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No            The use of pesticides or herbicides is not foreseen
under the project. The policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD           Kazakhstan is a country rich in cultural heritage,
OP/BP 4.11                                  especially along the historic silk road corridor.
During project preparation the project team will
determine with the Borrower whether there are
known cultural/historic sites along the alignment,
which would trigger the Policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No            No indigenous peoples live in the project area or will
4.10                                        directly or indirectly be affected by the project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           The project is expected to have land acquisition and
BP 4.12                                     resettlement impacts due to construction works
associated with expansion to four lanes from the
existing two. The RPF is expected to be prepared by
the client. In case the detailed designs will be
clarified at the project preparation, the client will
also prepare RAP(s).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     TBD
Projects on International     No            None of the potentially affected water bodies are
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international. Hence, there are no grounds to trigger
OP7.50.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           The project is not located in or near disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The team will assist the Borrower to prepare TOR for a Consultancy to prepare the ESIA in a form
and standard that can be presented to Bank safeguards for review and approval.
The goal is to have the ESIAs for the project properly formatted, with consistent quality,
containing a baseline analysis (incl. special vulnerabilities), a clear impact analysis, a
comprehensive discussion of mitigation measures, an analysis of alternative project design
0
options, and a meaningful EMP and monitoring plan, by early September 2015.
For activities under Component 2 the Borrower will be encouraged to prepare the Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for Regional Development Framework (RDF). The
SESA will address environmental and social aspects of regional development and identify
potential risks/sensitivities to be taken into account in the RDF.
It is expected that a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared for the project, based on the
ESIA outcomes and the results of the preliminary design options. The RPF is expected to be
prepared and disclosed by September 2015. Site-specific RAPs will be prepared for any section
where the design would be sufficiently advanced.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jacques Bure
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Nina Chee (SA)                         Date: 08-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                    Date: 08-Apr-2015
Manager:


