                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA8096
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uganda                           Project ID:    P133312
                            Project Name:     Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation III (P133312)
                            Task Team         Mitsunori Motohashi,Mbuso Gwafila
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         25-Mar-2015                      Estimated   05-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEDR                            Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        143.90                 Total Bank Financing: 125.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                  10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                        125.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                    8.90
                              Total                                                                              143.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)




                                                                    Page 1 of 13
                              A. Project Development Objective(s)
                              The Project Development is to increase access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                              The Global Environmental Objective is to increase access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda.

                         3. Project Description
                         A.           Project Components

                         The proposed project is designed in line with the 2001 description of the ERT program as approved
                         by the World Bank and the GEF Council with some adjustments needed to better reflect the current
                         country and sector context and requirements and building on achievements and taking into account
                         lessons learned under the previous operations in the series. The brief description of the proposed
                         project components is presented below with preliminary cost estimates and an indicative financing
                         plan.

                         Component 1: Rural Energy Infrastructure and Connection (US$111.6 million: US$101.6 million
                         IDA, US$10.0 million GoU)

                         This component covers on-grid investments and off-grid activities to be implemented by REA. On-
                         grid investments will finance all on-grid activities including grid system expansion/intensification
                         and on-grid household connections. Off-grid activities will support market development for modern
                         lighting solutions such as solar home systems (SHS) and mobile solar systems (MSS) to dispersed
                         households that are uneconomic to connect to the grid. Technical assistance will be provided to
                         support capacity building activities. This component will be mostly implemented by REA, with the
                         sub-component 1-5 implemented by REA in close collaboration with the Uganda National Bureau of
                         Standards (UNBS).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1-1. Grid Extension (US$70 million: US$65.1 million IDA, US$4.9 million GoU). This sub-
                         component includes the construction of 21 distribution grid extension projects that span over 1,800
                         km (Annex 2). These lines have been identified as priority investment for expanding rural access by
                         the Government and are selected based on the Indicative Rural Electrification Master Plan (IREMP)
                         prepared in 2009, which employed surveys and consultations to identify lines that would serve areas
                         with high economic development and access potential. The list of distribution lines is indicative and
                         it may change during project implementation. The feasibility studies of all 21 lines as well as the
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                         are funded by the GoU as well as the on-going ERT-2 project and are being prepared.

                         1-2. System Intensification (US$30.1 million: US$25 million IDA, US$5.1 million GoU). This sub-
                         component includes short extensions to the existing grid infrastructure to reach potential customers
                         who are relatively close to the existing grid. IDA will support connections for rural households while
                         SPs will connect commercial and industrial customers.

                         1-3. Household Connection to the National Grid (US$10 million IDA). This sub-component will
                         finance connection drops and internal wiring. Connection drop will be implemented as part of the
                         extension and intensification of distribution network. House wiring will be the asset that belongs to
                         the households and will be financed through a short-term loan to be repaid over two years as needed.
                         Financing for on-grid connection will be provided under this sub-component.


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         1-4. Technical Assistance for REA and Service Providers (US$1.5 million IDA). This sub-
                         component will support capacity development for REA to strengthen its coordination and oversight
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roles as well as for technical assistance through REA to SPs with inadequate capacity during the
                         initial stages of project implementation. Capacity assessment of SPs will be completed before
                         commencing the proposed activities in their STs.

                         Component 2: Off-grid Energy Access (US$15.3 million: US$6.4 million IDA, US$8.9 million GEF)

                         This component covers off-grid energy access, including the installation of solar PV systems for
                         public institutions in rural areas; and provision of credit facilities to enhance electricity access.
                         Technical assistance provided under this component will finance necessary consultancy services,
                         capacity building activities, and operations costs. This component will be implemented by several
                         implementing agencies—Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Water and Environment (MoWE),
                         Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) and UECCC—under the coordination of the Project
                         Coordination Unit (PCU).

                         2-1. Institutional Solar PV Systems (US$10 million: US$1.1 million IDA, US$8.9 million GEF).
                         This sub-component will support provision of solar PV systems to public institutions offering health
                         services, and water for rural growth centers. This sub-component will be implemented by MoH,
                         MoWE, and MoES.

                         2-2. Off-grid Energy Access Financing (US$3.3 million IDA). This sub-component will provide
                         demand-side and supply-side financing necessary to facilitate consumers’ connection to off-grid
                         supply of electricity. It also includes technical assistance to strengthen UECCC, the implement
                         agency of this sub-component. UECCC is expected to provide solar refinance facility to Participating
                         Financial Institutions (PFIs) for on-lending to both end users and solar companies and partial
                         guarantee to PFIs for covering their credit risk related to their lending to solar companies. In order to
                         ensure compliance with the eligibility criteria, a due diligence assessment of the UECCC has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conducted during the project preparation for ERT-3.

                         2-3. Market Development for Solar Home Systems (US$2 million IDA). This sub-component aims to
                         accelerate access to high-quality, modern energy services in rural areas through market development.
                         Support will be provided to complement market activities such as: (i) public awareness campaigns to
                         inform consumers of the benefits of solar lighting products and to educate consumers on the
                         characteristics of good quality products; and (ii) quality assurance to strengthen the Ugandan
                         National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and the National Quality Assurance framework for PV
                         systems in order to curtail the inflow of cheap, low quality systems. The component is aligned with
                         the approach of the World Bank Group’s Lighting Africa program.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Development for Energy Access (US$4.5 million
                         IDA)

                         This component will finance technical assistance and capacity development required to accelerate
                         electricity access. It will also support the Government to carry out an Impact Monitoring and
                         Evaluation of the ERT-2. Technical assistance provided under this component will finance the
                         necessary consultancy services, capacity building activities, and operations costs. This component
                         will be implemented by MEMD and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
                         (MoFPED).

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         3-1. Technical Assistance and Associated Equipment (US$3.3 million IDA). This activity will
                         support technical assistance and studies in relation to rural access. Indicative areas include consumer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sensitization and mobilization, review of construction and technical standards for distribution
                         network infrastructure and connection, assessment of consumer’s affordability for energy including
                         connection fees, independent verification of connections, master plans in STs, and feasibility studies
                         for priority projects. A systematic review of the project implementation will be undertaken that
                         includes examination of various aspects of the implementation arrangements including, among
                         others, on-the ground process of consumer applications, connection works, functioning of the
                         proposed financing mechanisms, implementation capacity of SPs, the planning and coordination role
                         of REA, and contractual management by REA and SPs This sub-component will also support
                         preparatory studies to review existing geothermal-related information, as well as legal, regulatory,
                         and institutional framework.

                         3-2. Capacity Development of MEMD and ERA (US$0.5 million IDA). This activity will support
                         capacity development of the public sector entities required to coordinate and facilitate achievement
                         of the RESP-2 targets for connection to electricity supply. The target institutions under the sub-
                         component are MEMD and ERA.

                         3-3. Impacts Monitoring (US$0.7 million IDA). MoFPED will undertake project impact evaluation
                         of ERT-2.

                         B.      Project Financing

                         The project will include two main financing instruments: (i) an IDA credit of US$125 million
                         equivalent; and (ii) GEF grant of US$8.9 million.

                         Proposed IDA credit: Financing support from IDA is expected to be US$125 million (eq.). The
                         amount will be used for financing project components described above. Part of the ERT-2 financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is being utilized for carrying out the preparatory studies for the proposed project, however there is no
                         duplication of funding between ERT-2 and ERT-3 activities during implementation. In addition, the
                         Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) and the Carbon Initiative for
                         Development (CiDeV) are providing additional support.

                         Proposed GEF grant: Based on a decision of the GEF Council (endorsement of December 2001), an
                         amount of US$8.9 million will be made available by GEF in support of project activities related to
                         increasing electricity access and energy efficiency measures. GEF jointly co-finances IDA-funded
                         ERT-2. The GEF triggers (as revised during processing of ERT-2 AF) pertaining to CO2 emission
                         reduction have been met. Under the proposed project, GEF financing will be utilized to support
                         Component 2-1 (Institutional Solar PV Systems) as outlined above.

                         C.      Project Cost and Financing

                         The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) that builds on the earlier ERT
                         Program aimed at increasing access to electricity in rural areas of Uganda. A programmatic approach
                         was adopted in view of the need to engage with electricity sector stakeholders over the long term to
                         create environment for private sector participation. The long-term engagement was aimed at building
                         institutional capacity, creating and testing viable service delivery models, and subsequently
                         expanding access to energy for poor rural communities in a sustainable manner. The first phase of

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         the program (ERT-1) covered the period 2001 through 2009 and was followed by a second phase of
                         the program (ERT-2) that initially covered the period from 2009 through 2013, but has been
                         extended until 2016. While the implementation period of ERT-2 and ERT-3 will overlap, funding
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will remain dedicated to the respective components and activities as described in each project
                         document. The ERT-2 funds are already committed and largely disbursed. To support further
                         expansion of electricity access, a new project is needed.

                         The total program amount initially approved was US$165.15 million, of which the first phase
                         (ERT-1) was US$49.15 million, and the second phase (ERT-2) was US$75 million. The remaining
                         US$41 million was earmarked for ERT-3. In order to meet the connection targets of the ERT-2, an
                         additional financing for ERT-2 (ERT-2 AF) was approved in the amount of US$12 million on May
                         22, 2013. To support the Government to achieve targets stipulated in the RESP-2, the IDA allocation
                         for the proposed project is US$125 million, thereby raising the total IDA support for the Program to
                         US$261.15 million. Along with co-financing (joint) from GEF in the amount of US$30.02 million
                         (US$12.12 for Phase I, US$9.0 million for Phase II, and US$8.9 million for Phase III), total World
                         Bank Group support for the ERT Program currently stands at US$291.17 million.

                         Parallel financing in the amount of US$22.9 million (eq.) has also been provided from several other
                         agencies, including the GPOBA (US$5.5 million), KfW (Euro 5 million), the European Union (EU)
                         (Euro 3.95 million) and the GoU (US$4 million). More recently, the Agence Française de
                         Développement (AFD) approved financing of about US$55.1 million (eq.) towards cost of service
                         connections materials and technical assistance.

                         The development of the rural electrification program has several key milestones and activities that
                         were accomplished over the last 14 years. Figure 5 shows the sequence of various related activities
                         including the RESP-1 (2001-2012), the ERT-1 (2001-2009), the ERT-2 (2009-2016), the OBA
                         (2013-2017), the RESP-2 (2013-2022), the ERT-2 AF (2013-2016), and the proposed ERT-3
                         (2015-2020). Building on the institutional framework developed under the RESP-1 and ERT-1,
                         ERT-2 continues to increase access to electricity primarily by supporting the expansion of necessary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure into rural areas. The additional financing (ERT-2 AF) and the GPOBA supplement to
                         ERT-2 provided connection materials and results-based connection subsidies for the poor to enhance
                         access to electricity. The RESP-2, which was informed by the UAREP study supported by the Bank,
                         proposes new implementation models for rural electrification. The proposed ERT-3 will support the
                         GoU to implement the new arrangements for electricity access and mobilize the additional resources
                         required to achieve the connection targets.

                         D.      Less ons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                         The RESP-2 incorporates lessons learned from the earlier implementation of the RESP-1 (described
                         in para 21). Moreover, the Bank has been engaging in policy discussion with the GoU, building on
                         lessons extracted from global practices. The Bank co-hosted a policy workshop on electrification
                         with GoU in February 2015, which examined planning, technical, financing, regulatory, and
                         institutional aspects of electricity access in order to accelerate the achievement of universal access in
                         Uganda. The experiences of countries with successful rural electrification, including Ghana, Peru,
                         and Vietnam, were presented to inform the discussion. The proposed design incorporates the key
                         outcomes of the workshop. The project also builds on the implementation experience of ERT-1, for
                         which an impact evaluation was completed in June 2011, and ERT-2 currently under
                         implementation. Some of the key lessons are discussed below.



                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                         Affordability barriers will be alleviated through a public financial mechanism. Accelerating
                         connections encountered difficulties due in large part to affordability constraints, which is also a key
                         barrier identified in the ERT-1 impact evaluation. Similar to many other countries in Sub-Saharan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Africa, connection charges and internal wiring costs are key impediments for rural households to
                         access electricity. Many of the successful cases of rural electrification have relied on governments
                         funding upfront connection costs, with part of the connection costs being recouped through retail
                         tariff and/or public finance, and with new customers paying discounted or in some cases no
                         connection fees. Based on the lessons learned elsewhere, a proposal to establish a public financial
                         mechanism is under discussion that would fund part of the connection costs in conjunction with the
                         project.

                         The incentives of private concessions to expand electricity access require separate policy measures.
                         In the past, private SPs who operated concessioned distribution lines had limited incentives to
                         connect households. The proposed project takes into consideration their incentives by (i) REA
                         absorbing the cost pressure of serving the areas with relatively low electricity consumption by
                         providing capital for expanding distribution lines; (ii) establishing customer connection targets for
                         households under the project for the SPs (project will not finance connections for commercial and
                         industrial customers, which will be financed by Umeme’s regular arrangements); (iii) to allow a
                         separate capital expenditures and O&M expenses for project-related activities from the existing
                         revenue requirement for tariff calculation for the SPs; (iv) allowing flexibility in planning the
                         network expansion by SPs within their STs through master plans, which would give them the
                         opportunity to connect new customers; (v) increases in areas of operation which would allow
                         enlarged customer base; (vi) additional bonuses in case they exceed connection targets under the
                         Lease Agreements with REA. In addition, ERA will ensure that adequate tariff will be approved for
                         the SPs to cover operating costs.

                         Mechanisms for increasing access to off-grid electricity should be aligned to and implemented in
                         partnership with the existing market platforms. For off-grid electrification, implementation of the
                         SHS under the ERT-2 through the PVTMA model had a less than satisfactory outcome. So far,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during 2009-2014, under the ERT-2, about 14,000 SHS have been installed against a target of
                         20,000, on a generously subsidized basis. The pace of implementation was constrained by major
                         problems related to inadequacies with the subsidy mechanism and in the verification process of the
                         PVTMA (inadequate targeting of lower income households and fraudulent practices in verification
                         and slow pace of verification), coupled with general constraints within the sub-sector. Based on the
                         Solar PV Options Study that examined key constraints in the solar PV market as well as various
                         alternative delivery models, the project would focus on enforcement of product standards and
                         working capital support for solar companies. These areas are identified as key barriers for solar
                         companies to penetrate the market and sustain their operations.

                         Reduced number of implementing agencies and simpler project design would reduce implementation
                         delays. Under the overall coordination by the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), implementation of
                         ERT-2 is being carried out by 11 implementing agencies: seven line ministries and four agencies.
                         While the implementation arrangements for on-grid electrification managed by REA and the TAs
                         managed by MEMD/MoFPED are relatively straightforward, some complexities arose with the off-
                         grid electrification activities. The GoU has addressed the issue by reducing the number of off-grid
                         component by three, and limiting the total number of implementing agencies to eight: five line
                         ministries and three agencies. The selection is based on the past project implementation performance
                         and the expected contribution towards achievement of the access goals. While the number of
                         implementing agencies is still large, the remaining agencies have strengthened their implementation

                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                         capacity over the course of the program, and have demonstrated solid results. One exception is the
                         solar PV systems installed in post-primary schools that were affected by vandalism. However, MoES
                         has strengthened project oversight and taken remedial measures to make headmasters accountable for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the systems installed. Moreover, the PCU for the project as a whole has been strengthened over the
                         course of implementation, and will be the Bank’s key counterpart for the activities managed by the
                         line ministries and agencies. Therefore, on a day-to-day basis, the Bank will be interacting mostly
                         with the PCU and REA. The simplification is expected to lead to improved coordination and
                         monitoring of project activities as well as smoother project implementation.

                         To further mitigate risks of implementation delays, preparatory studies are front loaded. Delays in
                         selection of consultants and procurement of goods and services have adversely affected project
                         implementation of the on-going activities supported under ERT-2. To minimize potential delays
                         under the scaled-up activities to be supported under the proposed project, necessary preparatory
                         studies, including feasibility studies, ESIAs, and RAPs are being prepared upfront. The bidding
                         documents for the first three lines are expected to be ready before project effectiveness.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to be implemented in selected areas across the country. The salient physical
                         characteristics are prominent in the power-line construction sub-components which shall involve
                         excavations and earthworks, vegetation clearance of both grass andtrees, formation of murram bunds
                         for pole structures in wetland areas, creation of wetland access paths, establishment of equipment
                         storage areas, land take/ displacement of land-uses and thus associated compensation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
                         Herbert Oule (GENDR)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Triggered because the program will support investments
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     with potential negative environmental and social impacts
                                                                    arising mostly from the construction of the 33/11 kv
                                                                    power distribution lines. The specific locations of all the
                                                                    physical components have not yet been determined and
                                                                    therefore ESMF has been prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                    disclosed before appraisal. Once specific project sites
                                                                    have been identified, site specific ESIAs and ESMPs shall
                                                                    be prepared. However, ESIAs for the first two lines of
                                                                    Kiganda Mile 16 and Ruhumba – Kashwa whose
                                                                    feasibility has been completed have been prepared and
                                                                    disclosed prior to appraisal.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            Triggered because some power lines may pass through
                          4.04                                      and affect natural habitats such as forests, and wetlands.
                                                                    Any likely impacts shall be assessed and addressed
                                                                    through the guidance provided in the ESMF, specific
                                                                    ESIAs and ESMPs.



                                                                     Page 7 of 13
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes        Triggered because some power lines may pass through
                                                                   forest areas with a potential of causing negative impacts.
                                                                   Any likely impacts shall be assessed and addressed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   through guidance provided in the ESMF, specific ESIAs
                                                                   and ESMPs.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No             Not triggered because the project will not involve use of
                                                                   pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes        Triggered because of the civil and earthworks during
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   construction of the power lines which may affect the
                                                                   known or un-known PCRs. A chance finds procedure has
                                                                   been developed as part of the ESMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            The project does not fall under any Indigenous People’s
                            BP 4.10                                areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Triggered because the project will involve land take and
                            OP/BP 4.12                             displacement of land-uses, limiting access and
                                                                   livelihoods. An RPF has was prepared and disclosed on
                                                                   July 29, 2014 in-country and on September 8, 2014, 2014
                                                                   at InfoShop. This will guide preparation of the RAPs for
                                                                   distribution lines when specific locations are known. Two
                                                                   RAPs for Kiganda Mile 16 and Ruhumba – Kashwa have
                                                                   been prepared in a consultative process and will be
                                                                   disclosed prior to appraisal. RAPS for all other lines will
                                                                   be prepared during implementation but will need to be
                                                                   disclosed prior to start of line construction works.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         This Policy is not triggered because the project will not
                            4.37                                   involve construction of a dam or involve interaction with
                                                                   a dam under construction. It will only support studies
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   (TA) for development of mini-and small hydropower sub-
                                                                   projects that may involve use of small dams of less than
                                                                   15meters height. However, Component 2 includes inter
                                                                   alia: the development of three pico hydros (5 kW each)
                                                                   and three micros (16 kW, 20 kW and 45 kW) hydropower
                                                                   plants and will require construction of weirs. The
                                                                   Environmental, Health and Safety impacts of Pico and
                                                                   Micro HPPs are minimal and insignificant to warrant
                                                                   trigger of this policy. The Pico & Micro HPPs shall be
                                                                   screened and if necessary, ESMP developed to guide their
                                                                   implementation.
                            Projects on International   No         This Policy is not triggered because the project will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   support projects on international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         This policy is not triggered because the project will not be
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                       implemented in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify

                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The proposed project will support interventions designed to increase access to electricity and
                           expected to have positive overall environmental impact through promoting renewable energy
Public Disclosure Copy




                           development and energy efficiency measures. Based on the generic environmental aspects,
                           impacts of the proposed subprojects will be of small scale, localized and hence be short-term in
                           nature. These impacts can be readily mitigated through implementation of applicable mitigation
                           measures that will be proposed. The project is expected to be implemented in selected areas across
                           the Country. All project components have environmental aspects that will be addressed through
                           proper environmental assessment. The salient physical characteristics are prominent in the power-
                           distribution lines construction sub-component, which shall involve excavations and earthworks,
                           vegetation clearance of both grass and trees, formation of murram bunds for pole structures in
                           wetland areas, creation of wetland access paths, establishment of equipment storage areas, land
                           take/ displacement of land-uses and thus associated compensation. Other aspects relate to the
                           management of residual waste from the solar PV systems, once they reach their end-of-life time.
                           Component 2 includes inter alia: the development of three pico hydros (5 kW each) and three
                           micros (16 kW, 20 kW and 45 kW) hydropower plants which are community based initiatives and
                           will require construction of weirs; these will be implemented by the PSFU through financing to be
                           shared with private developers – in this case, the user communities. Component 3 includes
                           preparatory studies for the development of geothermal energy and feasibility studies for seven
                           small hydropower projects (SHPP) – all less than 15m in dam height. These studies will facilitate
                           the development of SHPP at a later date by the private sector. The proposed Project will not
                           finance construction of any SHPP. The feasibility studies will include environmental scoping to
                           establish key environmental aspects that may be of concern.

                           By nature of the project activities, there are no large scale or irreversible impacts associated with
                           the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To manage any likely environmental and social impacts of the proposed project, Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed both in-Country on July
                           29, 2014 and at the Infoshop on September 8, 2014. The ESMF took into consideration the
                           implementation lessons of the predecessor projects, in building mechanisms to continuously
                           improve the processes of identifying environmental and social impacts of planned activities,
                           planning and implementing mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting. Consultations with the
                           various stakeholders were adequately conducted and this facilitated the project design. The ESMF
                           provides a step-by-step guidance on how to identify potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts from project activities, and how to plan, implement and monitor measures to mitigate
                           them. Site specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) shall be undertaken
                           and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) developed during project
                           implementation. The ESMF provides generic TORs for ESIA and guidance for development of
                           ESMPs. In addition, ESIAs for the first two lines of Kiganda Mile 16 and Ruhumba – Kashwa


                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                         whose feasibility has been completed have been prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.

                         The proposed Project will result in limited land acquisition for construction of distribution lines,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which potentially will affect the livelihoods and access to common assets and resources along the
                         distribution corridors. This triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlements. The potential impacts
                         are being addressed through a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which has been prepared in
                         a consultative manner and disclosed. The RPF includes detailed guidelines for developing and
                         implementing subsequent RAPs for each of the sub-projects/lines. The RPF includes: (i) an
                         assessment of the regulatory and institutional framework for land acquisition and compensation in
                         Uganda; (ii) likely categories of affected assets and parties, as well as the scope of impacts; (iii) a
                         gap analysis and a compensation framework consistent with OP 4.12 and the national legislation;
                         (iv) measures to assist vulnerable groups; (v) a consultation framework to enable the participation
                         of affected populations in the preparation of specific resettlement plans; (vi) an institutional
                         framework to implement the resettlement policy framework; (vii) a grievance redress mechanism;
                         and (vii) monitoring and evaluation framework and budget. In terms of grievance redress
                         mechanisms, it prioritizes utilizing the existing systems and structures. Grievance management
                         will aim at providing a two-way channel for the project to receive and respond to grievances from
                         PAPs, stakeholders or other interested parties. Two RAPs for Kiganda Mile 16 and Ruhumba –
                         Kashwa have been prepared in a consultative process and will be disclosed prior to appraisal.

                         In order to minimize most of the impacts associated with the major sub-component of the
                         distribution line construction, it is recommended that these be restricted to road reserves to the
                         extent possible. Any trees and crops that may be cut down shall be compensated for or replaced.
                         Continuous public awareness and engagement is also recommended to manage social impacts.
                         Furthermore, grid extension and intensification works will involve erection of distribution lines
                         across wetlands and protected areas. Such ecosystems are habitats of birds and associated
                         biodiversity. Instances of bird collision with power lines are reportedly common across such
                         ecosystems. Therefore, horizontal alignment of conductors in wetland areas to reduce bird
                         electrocution is recommended, especially the crested crane, which is an important national symbol
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Uganda. Health and safety of the workers shall be emphasized during erection and operation of
                         the power distribution lines, including public safety.

                         A concern regarding Solar PV accessories (batteries, lamps) relates to their disposal since they are
                         hazardous. Under the project, two options are provided: (i) the suppliers of these accessories shall
                         be required to take them back after their useful life as a contractual obligation. Alternatively, (ii)
                         the project (through the implementing agencies) will contract NEMA licensed waste handlers to
                         collect, transport and hand them over to recycling facilities for batteries or to approved disposal
                         facilities for hazardous wastes, at the cost of the respective line Ministries. Therefore, MoES,
                         MoH and MoWE shall undertake to budget for operational and maintenance costs of all the solar
                         PV installations.

                         The World Bank Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines, and Electric Power
                         Transmission Distribution guidelines and applicable Ugandan laws such as the Occupational
                         Health and Safety Act, shall be used to guide implementation of all related Environmental Health
                         & Safety aspects of ERT-3 project.

                         The pico and micro hydropower projects to be supported shall be subjected to environmental
                         screening following the guidance provided in the ESMF and ESMPs developed where necessary.
                         The pico and micro HPPs shall be run-of-river system requiring no dam structures. Therefore, the

                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           ecological and social impact including health and safety concerns are minimal.

                           Currently, there is adequate environmental safeguards capacity at the implementing agencies to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           oversee implementation of the ESMF, most notable the MEMD, REA, ERA, NEMA, and MoWE.
                           Overall, coordination of implementation of environmental and social aspects of the Project shall
                           be undertaken by Environmental Safeguards Officer of Electricity Support Development Project
                           (ESDP) which is also financed by IDA.

                           REA has two Environmental Safeguards Officers to lead the implementation of the ESMF/ESIA
                           and associated environmental requirements of their project component. NEMA and ERA will play
                           their respective regulatory roles and their capacity is deemed adequate in terms of personnel
                           availability and institutional set up. In addition, the respective project beneficiary/host District
                           Local Governments shall be involved in monitoring implementation of the environmental and
                           social aspects of the project through their District Environment Officers and the Community
                           Development Officers. The participation of the DEOs and CDOs shall be facilitated by the project.

                           REA expects to recruit a Social Development Specialist in the next financial year (2014/15) to
                           fully address all social issues including compensation and resettlement including vulnerability
                           issues projects including ERT III. The Social Development Specialist will train and guide the
                           CDOs at the district level on all social issues including issues of vulnerable groups.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consistent with best practice in developing ESMFs, consultations were held with relevant
                           stakeholders. The stakeholders and beneficiaries of the project were identified after undertaking
                           literature review and preliminary consultations at project inception. The stakeholders consulted
                           during preparation of the ESMF included District Local Government Officials (District
                           Environment Officers, District Production Officers, District Engineers, Chief Administrative
                           Officers, District Planners and District Engineers) and local communities among others. At the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           national level, the following were consulted: officials from MEMD, MWE, NEMA, MoES, MoH,
                           UNRA, UCC, NFA and UWA. The stakeholders raised some concerns which are reflected in the
                           ESMF and mechanisms to address them suggested therein. In general, they were in agreement
                           with the project and looked forward to its implementation.

                           The Consultations were carried out using group discussions, community meetings, and individual
                           appointments with government officials. Disclosure in-country was and has been done through the
                           daily English newspaper, websites of the participating institutions, and display of copies of the
                           safeguard documents in regional districts.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              08-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                      29-Jul-2014
                           Comments: This was disclosed in the Monitor and and New Vision newspapers.


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           29-Jul-2014
                           Comments: This was disclosed in the Monitor and and New Vision newspapers.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mitsunori Motohashi,Mbuso Gwafila
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                               Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
