INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 3 1-Jul-2015
6               ~Report No.: JSDSC 14624
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P150571
Project Name:    Uttar Pradesh Solid Waste Management Project (P1 5057 1)
Task Team        Shenhua Wang,RaJesh Balasubramanian
Leader(s):
Estimated        22-Jun-2016                Estimated      13-Dec-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSUl2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Solid waste management (100%,)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (15%), City-wide
Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Land administrati on and
management (20%), Pollution management and environmental health (15%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     120.00             Total Bank Financing:    85.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         35.00
T     (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development        85.00
Total                                                           120.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve solid waste management in selected urban
local bodies in Uttar Pradesh.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will finance the first phase of the SWM improvement program ofGoUP, which


will comprise development of 3 to 5 regional landfills to serve up to about 60 ULBs. Inclusion of
ULBs with large waste generation will be given priority to assure efficient and viable waste
management operations. The project will comprise the following two components.
O
U       Component 1. Solid Waste Collection, Processing and Disposal comprising:
(a)    Waste Collection and Transport: including: (i) door-to-door collection including waste
separation at source, recovery of recyclable wastes, and transport to processing plants; (ii) separate
collection of inert fraction of street sweepings;
(b)    Waste Processing Plants: including: (i) secondary separation; (ii) composting biodegradable
waste; and (iii) separation of combustible waste;
(c)    Regional Sanitary Landfills: Collection of inert waste, including inert street sweepings from
processing plants; treatment and disposal of inert non-combustible fraction of solid wastes in sanitary
landfills, including leachate and boreholes for monitoring groundwater quality.
Component 2: Monitoring and Management Support:
(a)    Design and implementation of an intensive IEC campaign to achieve behavioral change in
citizens;
(b)    Technical assistance to SWOM to monitor and manage performance of service providers,
administer contracts on behalf of ULBs;
(c)    Development of proposals for enhancing ULB revenues to meet O&M obligations to service
providers;
(d)    On-the-job training for ULB officials on management and monitoring of solid waste
operations working with SWOM Cell.
Tentative Cost Estimate and Financing Plan. The tentative project cost estimate is about US$120
million. The preliminary financing plan for the proposed UP-SWMP is for 70% Bank loan and 30%
counterpart funding, i.e., World Bank: US$85 million (IBRD loan) and GoUP/Gol: US$35 million.
Proposed Strategy for the UP-SWMP. The primary goal of the project is to improve solid waste
management in ULBs, and avoid service interruptions due to defaults by ULBs or operators. Key
features of the strategy include: (i) selection of regional landfills owned and managed by the State
that can serve clusters of ULBs within a 50 km radius, with each cluster having about 15 ULBs, on
average; (ii) selection of 3 to 5 clusters each with total waste generation exceeding 250 tons/day, for
a      financing under the proposed project; (iii) introduction of door-to-door collection, incorporating
waste separation at source, complemented with an intensive and continuous IEC campaign; (iv)
secondary waste separation done at the processing plant or transfer station to: remove more
recyclables; separation of organic wastes for composting, and combustible wastes for RDF or waste
to energy; and non-combustible inert waste for disposal at landfills; (iv) individual or decentralized
waste processing, depending upon economies of scale; (v) use of existing informal sector marketing
systems for recycled waste and inputs for refuse derived fuel production; (vi) retention of the current
livelihoods of informal sector waste pickers (of recycling activities) without change, and exploration
of workable options to incorporate them in waste collection; (vii) earmarking Central and State
Government transfers to ULBs, to meet payment obligations to operators; (viii) establishment of
solid waste operations management (SWOM) unit in C&DS, to monitor performance of service
providers and administer contracts, on behalf of ULBs; and (vi) revenue enhancement in ULBs to
meet O&M payment obligations to operators.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


The Project is expected to improve solid waste management in about 60 ULBs in the state of Uttar
Pradesh in India, through development of appropriate waste collection, transportation, processing and
disposal arrangements. This also includes development of regional waste disposal facilities by
clustering ULBs. Based on the initial work done by UP Jal Nigaam, about 9 clusters have been
identified and these are located near Ghaziabad, Bijnor, Hardoi, Kanpur, Mirzapur, Rampur and
Gazipur cities of the state.
Considering the varied distribution of these cities across the state, the project is expected to
*       encounter diverse socio-economic and environmental features that are present in Uttar Pradesh (UP).
UP is India's most populous state and has number of environmental, religious, cultural, historical
features of significance. Important of these features include, the River Ganga, iconic Taj Mahal,
Dudhwa National Park, about 5 wild life sanctuaries and over 14000 sq.km (6% of the total area of
the state) of forest area. Depending on the actual location of various facilities of the project, the
impacts (if any) on these features will have to be assessed and appropriate avoidance / mitigation /
management will have to be integrated in the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The overall management of the project will be carried out by the Construction &Design Services
Unit of Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam (UPJN). This unit will be strengthened with appropriate technical
and safeguard specialists, to facilitate the preparation of the project. The agency has never
implemented investment projects supported by the World Bank and hence their capacity in the
implementation of safeguard policies is weak. However, UPJN as an executing agency of the
ongoing Ganga Project supported by the Bank, is exposed to the safeguard policies of The World
Bank. The project proposes build on this experience and strengthen the capacity during project
preparation and implementation through orientation programs and deployment of qualified Safeguard
Specialists. In addition appropriate staffing and capacity will also be ensured at the local agencies,
depending on the overall institutional design of the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
U5      Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
Mridula Singh (GSURR)
O
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         OP 4.01 is triggered as the project will support
OP/BP 4.01                              construction of waste processing and disposal
facilities, which could involve significant
environmental impacts, if not designed and
developed with suitable avoidance / management and
mitigation measures.
The project hence has been identified as 'Category
A' and Environmental Assessment will be carried
out, for each of the sub-project in compliance to the
safeguard policies of The World Bank. A project
level Environmental and Social Management
Framework will also be prepared to guide the


implementing agency in the overall design and
implementation of the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           Based on the available information on the initial sites
identified for the clusters, no impacts on natural
habitats is envisaged. The project will ensure this
during the preparation and implementation and will
not support any activities that require triggering OP
4.04. This will be included as part of the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           Based on the available information on the initial sites
identified for the clusters, the project activities does
not require triggering OP 4.36. The project will
ensure this during the preparation and
implementation and will not support any activities
that require triggering OP 4.36. This will be included
as part of the ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           Based on the available information on the initial sites
identified for the clusters, the project activities does
not require triggering OP 4.09. The project will
ensure this during the preparation and
implementation and will not support any activities
that require triggering OP 4.09. This will be included
as part of the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Based on the available information on the initial sites
OP/BP 4.11                                 identified for the clusters, the project activities does
not require triggering OP 4.11. Depending on the
location of the project facilities, possible discovery
of archeological sites or random findings during the
execution of works, can't be ruled out. This will be
carefully assessed during preparation and
applicability of this policy will be confirmed prior to
appraisal.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           OP 4.10 is not triggered. The geographical location
4.10                                       does not cover settlements within Scheduled area V
and VI. The project will be in Urban and Peri-Urban
areas and none of the characteristics stated in OP4. 10
to trigger the policy is prevalent in the proposed
project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          OP 4.12 is triggered. The project design is such that
BP 4.12                                    it may lead to adverse impact on people as a result of
either private/ government land required for disposal
of waste. The project does not envisage economic
displacement of primary stakeholders such as rag-
pickers, rather it will provide opportunities to
enhance the working environment of the affected.
Whichever land may be used for disposal of waste, it
is likely that there may be resistance to the site from


neighboring settlements. There could be numerous
causes for such resistance such as, local community
may perceive it as a health hazard, adversely impact
land prices, etc.
The project will carry out Social Assessment to
prepare ESMF, appropriate mitigation plans
including community engagement plan to comply
with World Bank's Policy OP 4.12. For identified
sub-projects, social impact assessment will be carried
out to prepare Resettlement Action Plan in
consultation with the directly and indirectly affected
communities. The need for RPF may arise if the
project will displace (Physically or economically)
people who are dependent on government land,
identified for the facilities. The project proposes to
use only encumbrance free government land and not
acquire private land. Under such circumstances,
standalone RFP may not be essential.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            Project Activities does not involve any activities
relating to dams and their safety and hence not
triggered.
Projects on International     No           Project activities are not located / does not involve
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       the international waterways and hence not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          Project activities are not located in disputed areas
BP 7.60                                    and hence not triggered.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
o
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Jun-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Considering the magnitude and significance of the project activities, the project is categorized
"Category is A". The safeguard preparation plan includes development of an 'Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF)' for the overall project and carrying out specific
'Environmental and Social Assessments' including Resettlement Action Plan for the sub- projects
that will be implemented in the first year of the project. These documents will be prepared and
finalized by appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shenhua Wang,Rajesh Balasubramanian
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 21-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                         Date: 22-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


