                                  The World Bank
                                  Mauritania Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Consolidation Project




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2017 | Report No: ISDSC23770




                         Dec 19, 2017                                                                                             Page 1 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mauritania Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Consolidation Project



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                      Project Name                   Environmental Category     Country
                                                           Mauritania Extractive
                                                           Industries Transparency
                           P166307                                                        C - Not Required           Mauritania
                                                           Initiative Consolidation
                                                           Project
                           Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit              Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Morten Larsen                                                  GEEX2
                                                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the National EITI Committee in making satisfactory progress of
                           implementing the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. This will be achieved through support to administration
                           of the national EITI Committee and automated publication of revenue data and sector statistics from the oil, gas and
                           mining industries.

                           C. Project Description
                           The national EITI Committee has approved a Work Plan for the three years 2017 to 2019. It is expected that
                           this three-year Work Plan will be updated in early 2018 in line with the existing structure. The Work Plan
                           contains eight objectives which can be grouped under the following themes: (a) sustainable administration
                           and capacity building of the national EITI process, (b) expansion of the scope of EITI reporting, (c) effective
                           communication and awareness-building among stakeholders and the wider public. The proposed grant
                           intends to support specific components under each of the three themes.



                         Dec 19, 2017                                                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mauritania Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Consolidation Project




                           Automated reporting of production and revenue data will be an essential activity of the proposed grant. The
                           EITI Committee intends to move from annual data compilation and reporting exercises to an automated
                           reporting system by which operators and government representatives will generate automatic data logs of
                           payment transfers. GIZ is already assessing the feasibility of developing a Data Warehouse and portal for
                           compilation of essential revenue data and sector statistics. This activity is expected to require extensive
                           technical assistance on the input side to re-engineer and consolidate existing declaration templates as well
                           as the output side in terms of accessible web portal design and model reports. The outputs are expected to
                           be (i) standardized EITI reporting templates as well as (ii) a “proto-type” EITI Reconciliation Report for 2018.

                           Strategic communication and awareness-raising will form the second pillar of the grant support. This
                           component will cover various dimensions of communication including (i) impact/perception surveys to
                           understand the impacts of EITI implementation to date in terms of increased awareness of the extractive
                           industries among stakeholders from local community representatives to media and political representatives;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (ii) modernization of communication tool-kits such as the EITI web-site, printed hand-outs as well as other
                           audio-visual tools which can benefit the illiterate parts of the population; (iii) support to information
                           campaigns and outreach events to ensure that report findings and sector debate are widely disseminated
                           across the country, especially in communities which are affected by mining but isolated from urban centers.

                           EITI Secretariat business planning will be an important third grant component which is intended to address
                           the challenge of the financial viability of the National EITI Committee and the EITI Secretariat even after the
                           closure of the current grant financing. Consultancy services, in combination with self-assessments, will assess
                           the long-term staffing needs and the resulting budget estimates for continued EITI reporting, dissemination
                           and stakeholder participation. It is the objective to identify potential financing sources which can be
                           sustained in the absence of continued donor contributions. Financial independence of the MSG and the
                           Secretariat will depend on securing a stable cash flow from domestic or government revenue.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will provide institutional capacity building to the National EITI Committee, which is based in
                          Nouakchott. Awareness campaigns will be rolled out across the country




                         Dec 19, 2017                                                                                              Page 3 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Mauritania Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Consolidation Project




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Ministry of Petroleum, Energy and Mines and the Ministry of Environment have a long history of
                          monitoring and enforcing environmental and social performance of operators in the extractive industries.
                          Notwithstanding, high staff turn-over and limited resources mean that capacities at both ministries are
                          moderate. On the other hand, the National EITI Committee has extensive experience in the area of public
                          consultations and inclusion of marginalized groups given its 12 years of experience in conducting roadshows
                          and consultations related to EITI.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Salamata Bal, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Melissa C. Landesz, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Public Disclosure Copy




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                     Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                       This is a technical assistance project
                                                                                                       focused on improving the institutional
                                                                                                       capacity of revenue collection and
                                                                                                       transparency in sector management. There
                                                                                                       are no physical investments supported
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 No                       under the grant. The grant will not finance
                                                                                                       studies or assessments linked to potential
                                                                                                       mineral extraction. Since none of the
                                                                                                       project activities have any impact on the
                                                                                                       ground nor any derived down-stream
                                                                                                       impacts, the category is proposed to be C.
                                                                                                       This policy is not triggered as project
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No                       activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                       impacts on natural habitats.
                                                                                                       This policy is not triggered as project
                                                                                                       activities are not expected to have any
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                                                                                                       impacts on or infringe into designated
                                                                                                       forests.
                                                                                                       This policy is not triggered as the project
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No                       will not finance the procurement or use of
                                                                                                       pesticides.
                                                                                                       This policy is not triggered as project
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No                       activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                       impact on physical cultural resources.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No                       This policy is not triggered given that
                                                                                                       project activities are not expected to cause


                         Dec 19, 2017                                                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Mauritania Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Consolidation Project



                                                                                                                      any impacts on indigenous peoples.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that
                                                                                                                      project activities are not expected to cause
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No                            any physical or economic displacement, nor
                                                                                                                      any restriction in access to natural
                                                                                                                      resources.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any dam construction or
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                                                                                                                      rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on
                                                                                                                      the operations of existing dams.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any activities in
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                                                                                                                      international waterways as defined by the
                                                                                                                      policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No                            is not financing any activities in disputed
                                                                                                                      areas as defined by the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Morten Larsen

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:

                              Practice Manager/Manager:


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Dec 19, 2017                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5
