INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12629
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P122383
Project Name: Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conservation in Northeast China (P122383)
Task Team       Garo J. Batmanian
Leader(s):
Estimated       19-Jun-2015                Estimated    22-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal
AEFa:          Biodiversity
Area:
Sector(s):      Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):       Biodiversity (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     20.58             Total Bank Financing:    0.00
O
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   17.58
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           3.00
Total                                                                      20.58
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The proposed project's Project Development Objective (PDO) and its Global Environmental
Objective (GEO) is to help create the ecological conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in
priority ecological landscapes in the far northeast of China, using the Amur Tiger as a flagship
Page 1 of 12


﻿species.
15.    The Project will do this through: (a) integrating wildlife conservation considerations into
economic development planning and sectoral policies and planning frameworks in targeted
landscapes; (b) enhancing the effectiveness of protected area/network management; (c) increasing
O
U         wildlife carrying capacity through restoration, expansion and connectivity of critical habitats,
including the expansion of biodiversity-friendly landscapes adjacent to protected areas; (d)
promoting more effective law enforcement and monitoring in both protected areas and the greater
landscape to reduce mortality of flagship species; and (e) reducing human/wildlife conflict by
increasing benefits to and buy-in from local communities for wildlife conservation.
3. Project Description
Project Components
Component 1: Institutional coordination to mainstream wildlife conservation across sectors.
(Estimated at US $1.73 million, including US$0.72 million from GEF). This component would
support:
?      Policy and planning (identification of priority habitat areas for tiger protection, provincial
conservation and restoration plans, development/updating policies and regulations to reduce human/
tiger conflicts (e.g., through e.g., compensation mechanisms); and
Institutional arrangements (establishing a Northeast wildlife conservation panel); promoting
increased Sino-Russian cooperation for tiger conservation (e.g., promoting joint anti-poaching
activities, staff training and consolidation of statistics).
The expected Intermediate Results are: (a) an update and new provincial-wide tiger conservation
management plans submitted to the DRC for Jilin and Heilongjiang Provinces, respectively; (b)
establishment of a NE China Advisory Tiger Landscape Conservation Committee; and (c) closer
cross-provincial collaboration with Russian counterparts.
Component 2: conservation of priority ecosystems and increased effectiveness of habitat protection
in the Changbaishan Landscape. (Estimated at US$ 9.18 million, including US$ 1.57 million from
GEF). This component would support:
Increased management effectiveness in 4 existing NRs (equipment, NR management plans
and plan regulation plans and training);
?      Creation of 3 new NRs (support for preparation & application materials and processes and
limited investment in 2 of the 3 reserves);
Habitat restoration ( increase prey population, reforestation, snare removal); and
Technical monitoring (wildlife/cats/prey, habitat).
The expected Intermediate Results under this component are: (a) increased management
effectiveness among project supported NRs measured by NR specific METT scorecards (target to be
defined during preparation), (b) 3 new NRs established creating 866 km2 of new protected area for
tiger and other wildlife, (c) 296 NR staff trained, (d) decreased incidence of snares in project area
and (e) an integrated cross-provincial ecological monitoring program established.
Component 3: Reducing human wildlife conflict in priority forest landscapes (Estimated at US$9.01
million, including US$0.56 million from GEF). This component would support:
Improved patrolling and enforcement through the implementation of SMART patrolling for
Page 2 of 12


﻿wildlife conservation in priority sites in Jilin and Heilongjiang provinces (with phased adoption
throughout the PA network of the target area), and Training of forestry staff outside of NRs focused
on local community participation and promoting tiger friendly land use;;
Pilot mitigation measures (e.g. compensation, tiger-friendly forestry production through
)         reforestation, forest thinning and forest diversification); and
Increased public awareness
The expected Intermediate Results under this component are: (a) 26 Construction and equipping of
new and upgrading and equipping of existing wildlife monitoring stations outside of project
supported protected areas (nature reserves); (b) 274 forestry staff trained and (c) people participation
in public awareness events and other related activities over LOP.
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimated at US$0.66 million,
including US$0.15 million from GEF). This component would support project management activities
to be carried out by the implementing agencies and coordination between provinces and across
international boundaries.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will extend or strengthen the existing restriction of access in some existing wildlife
protection areas in eastern Jilin Province and southeastern Heilongjiang Province. Forests cover
about 55% of the region. Coniferous-broadleaf mixed forests is the primary forest cover with Korean
pine and Manchurian Fir the dominant species intermixed with over 600 species of plants. It also
provides habitat for more than 300 species of wildlife, among them are 44 species of China??s
national protected wildlife, including the Amur tiger (Panthera tigris altaica), Amur leopard
(Panthera pardus orientalis), Siberian musk deer (Moschus moschiferus), Sika deer (Cervus nippon),
the Japanese sable (Martes zibellina), Asiatic black bear (Ursus thibetanus), and Red deer (Cervus
elaphus).
As a result of long-time logging, the original forest is almost completely gone, replaced by secondary
growth, with remnant patches scattered along the Heilongjiang and Jilin border. The remaining forest
is in good condition after years of protection and restoration. These are traditional forestry areas in
China and currently covered by forest with low population density. There are totally 6 distribution
areas for the Amur Tiger in Heilongjiang and Jilin Provinces but these distribution areas are isolated
from each other. The project will use a landscape approach focusing on: (i) supporting core areas for
protection through the strengthening of existing or the creation of new nature reserves; (b) areas
outside nature reserves with some level of forest cover which can serve as corridors to ensure
connectivity between nature reserves; and, (c) an area that encompasses those two other zones (a
and b above) where environmental monitoring and enforcement would take place to ensure
compatible conservation measures are implemented and enforced.
There are 25 forest farms and 14 villages in the project area, including three minority villages.
Household income in the forest farms is mainly from salary. Only in four of the 25 farms income rely
relatively more on other sources, mainly mushroom production, fungus production, herbs production,
bee farming, and NTFP. The average annual income of the staff is about RMB 29,000. Regarding the
affected 14 local communities, the income sources ranked by order of importance are; farming,
NTFP, animal grazing and others (including eco-tourism and seasonal migration). Only two villages
rely about 30 percent of their income on NTFP. The average annual income of those village
households is about RMB 15,000.
Page 3 of 12


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Songling Yao (GSURR)
Yiren Feng (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes          The proposed project includes improve management
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 effectiveness of 4 existing protected areas (nature
reserves), create 3 protected areas, increase population of
prey to improve tiger habitat, Restore vegetation (forest
enriching, planting cut areas) to improve tiger habitat,
improve monitoring and enforcement outside protected
areas, increase awareness of local communities (Envt.
Education) etc. The OP4.01 is triggered due to the
potential impacts on natural habitats and social issues
such as potential access restrictions to protection and
conservation areas etc., The EA reports include an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Report and
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which has been
prepared for the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          The project includes the improvement of the management
4.04                                  effectiveness of existing and creation of new ones, all on
critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
The project also includes e potential impacts of increasing
prey population on the ecological balance of the protected
areas. The monitoring plan including the threshold levels
for introduction of prey, and the quarantine plan for the
preys to be introduced have been developed to mitigate
the potential impacts on the ecological balance of the
protected areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          The project will include limited reforestation with local
indigenous species in areas which originally had higher
forest cover/ tree density. Those actions will not entail
conversion of natural forests, commercial harvesting
operation or the introduction of any invasive species.
However, the project has the potential to have impacts on
the rights and welfare of people and their level of
dependence upon or interaction with forests, therefore the
policy is triggered. The livelihood recovery measures for
the people whose income will be reduced by the impact
on their reliance level on the forests are included in the
RPF.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           The project will include vegetation restoration, tending,
and nursery management etc. A stand-alone Pest
Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared to guide the
application of pesticides for the forest activities.
Physical Cultural                     Initial screening indicated that project sites are not located
Page 4 of 12


﻿Resources OP/BP 4.11                 in or next to any known areas with physical, cultural, or
natural relics. The chance findings procedure has been
included in the EMP and the bidding document and
contract.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          Three ethnic minority villages were identified to be
BP 4.10                              affected by the project. The main impact would be mainly
related to strengthening restriction of access, and wildlife-
human conflicts. Therefore, the proposed project triggered
the World Bank Policy on Indigenous People, OP 4.10.
An EMDP and social action plan were prepared which
include detailed and specific measures to help affected
indigenous people on restoring their incomes and develop
alternative livelihoods.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Livelihood of people on 14 villages and 25 forest farms
OP/BP 4.12                           will be potentially affected, mainly due to loss of income
relate to strengthening restriction of access to certain
areas/ resources. There is no physical relocation planned,
however, the possibility of potential land acquisition
cannot excluded in the implementation stage. Therefore,
the proposed project triggered the World Bank Policy on
Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12. A resettlement policy
framework (RPF), a process framework (PF), and SA
including social management plan were prepared. A RP
has not been prepared because there are no identified
activities related to land acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance nor are any of its activities
4.37                                 dependent on a dam as defined the Safety of Dams policy.
Projects on International  No        The project is not located in any international waterways
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 as defined under the policy. No action is required under
this policy.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     defined under the policy. No action is required under this
policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Environmental Assessment (EA) conducted during the project preparation has not identified
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The works to be constructed
under the Project are classified into small civil works, which will not cause significant conversion
or degradation of the significant natural habitats. The project is to help create the ecological
conditions for recovery of threatened biodiversity in priority ecological landscapes in the far
northeast of China and it will bring significant net positive environmental and ecological benefits
in the project area. At the same time, strengthening the existing restriction of access in seven forest
areas will affect livelihood/income of 14 villages and 25 forest farms, including three minority
Page 5 of 12


﻿villages.
OP4.04 Natural Habitats. The project includes the improvement of the management effectiveness
of existing protected areas, and creation of new protection areas, which are both critical natural
O
)           habitats as defined under the policy, and the project also includes the potential impacts of
increasing prey population on the ecological balance of the protected areas. The monitoring plan
and the quarantine plan for the preys to be introduced have been developed to mitigate the
potential impacts on the ecological balance of the protected area.
OP4.36 Forests. The project will include limited reforestation with local indigenous species. It
will not entail conversion of natural forests, commercial harvesting operation or the introduction
of any invasive species. However, the project has the potential to have impacts on the rights and
welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests, therefore the
policy is triggered. The livelihood recovery measures for the people whose income will be reduced
by the impact on their reliance level on the forests.
OP 4.09 Pest Management. The project will include vegetation restoration, tending, and nursery
management etc. It may potentially increase the use of the pesticides within the project areas, the
policy is therefore triggered. A Pest Management Plan has been prepared to guide the application
of the pesticide for this project.
Social Side. The project will strengthen the existing restriction of access in seven forest areas,
among which there are 14 villages and 25 forest farms to be affected, mainly on income. At the
same time three ethnic minority villages were recognized in the project area. Therefore, the
proposed activities trigger the World Bank Policies: Indigenous People, OP 4.10 and Involuntary
Resettlement, OP 4.12. The potential impacts on local communities mainly relate to strengthening
restriction of access, land reclamation, and wildlife-human conflicts, etc.
The major impacts the project will bring to livelihood (income) of forest farm staff include: 1)
banned logging, 2) decreased materials for fungus production due to ban of logging, 3) restriction
of cattle grazing in the NRs, 4) restrictions of collection of NTFP within the core and the buffer
zones. Project impacts to livelihood (income) of local villagers include: 1) the NRs will claim back
the farmland leased to local farmers, 2) higher risks of wild animal ? human conflict, 3) banned
logging will increase cost on fungus production, 4) restricted access to collect NTFP products, 5)
0           restricted access of grazing in NRs. The impacts are listed upon their importance on livelihood.
As defined by the SA and Process Framework, the safeguard issues may include: 1) enhanced NR
management may increase the conflict between patrolling and using of natural resources; 2) results
of the livelihood restoration and alternative livelihood activities may not be successful enough to
meet local people??s expectation; 3) governmental led capacity buildings and income generation
activities may not adequate for meeting needs of local women; 4) increased vulnerability of those
who are already vulnerable including the elderly, the sick, female-headed households and the
poorest households; 5) strengthen of wild animal protection will increase the risks of wild animal /
human conflict and hence increase risks for NR management; 6) no high risk but still possible, the
risk of poaching.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project will bring significant net positive environmental and ecological benefits in the project
area. Through tiger-friendly forest tending activities, the habitat quality of the Amur tiger in the
project area will be significantly recovered and improved, and population of main prey (wild boar,
Page 6 of 12


﻿red deer, roe deer and sika deer) will rebound significantly. Key habitats will be recovered and
expanded, and the establishment of new protected areas will increase the area under protection. All
these will increase the area of suitable habitat for the Amur tiger and its prey population. Thus the
current isolated distributional areas of the Amur tiger will connect with each other, extend and
O
expand in stretches to the deep forest of China.
While generating significant environmental and ecological benefits, the project will have impacts
on livelihood and production patterns of both local villagers and staff of related forest farms. In
fact, although various measures were adopted in the preliminary design for the establishment or
extension of NRs in this project in order to avoid land acquisition and house demolishing, it is
inevitable that the strict management and protection of natural habitats in this project will
influence the surrounding rural communities and the living of those in state-owned forest farms. If
these influences are not properly solved or alleviated, they will bring long-lasting pressure and
conflicts to the management of reserve, posing a threat to the success of the project.
So far in China, co-management is not commonly used owing to constraints on the conventional
management practice. The Bank??s support on adopting social safeguard instruments including
co-management plans and VDPs (including EMDP) which are based on participation, consultation
and mutual understanding among players are expected to be effective ways to ease tension
between the reserve and the surrounding communities.
The effect of the project on the local population (including the surrounding villagers, forest farm
workers and their families,) is mainly on people's livelihood activities due to strengthening the
protection and management of reserves, access restrictions, logging ban and other measures. It is
expected that with implementation of the project safeguard instruments, the alternative livelihood
mode and pattern could be established and practiced that allow local people to co-exist in an
sustainable manner with the NRs.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During the project preparation, the design of the protected areas has been carefully defined
through comparison of several alternatives so as to avoid the need for relocation of people and
minimize the impacts on the livelihood of the people.
O
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A partial environmental assessment report has been prepared by Planning and Design Institute of
Forest Products Industry of the State Forestry Administration. The EA reports include an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Report and Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
A stand-alone EMP has been developed based on the findings of the EIA report. It contains
Environmental Protection Guidelines (EPG) for plantation to be followed during preparation and
implementation of forests related interventions, Pest Management Plan (PMP), and Environmental
Code of Practice (ECOP) for small civil works. The EMP detailed the environmental management
and supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring
plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation. EPG, PMP, and ECOP were prepared as a
standalone annex to the EMP. To address the potential adverse environmental impacts of the
plantation activities under the project, EPG was prepared. To address the potential impacts caused
by small construction activities, an ECOP was prepared. Environmental mitigation measures
developed in EMP will be fully incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts of
Contractors.
Page 7 of 12


﻿A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was also prepared to guide the application of pesticides for the
forest activities. The PMP covers preface, major pest issues, pesticides management methods and
their scope of application, and provided recommendations for different situations. It summarizes
the IPM approaches adopted by the project, and lists all chemicals that might be potentially needed
O
Q)          for the project, which fulfill the Bank??s requirement and within the World Health Organization??
s recommended categories. It describes pesticides management organizations in project areas and
their respective responsibilities. It includes a training program, monitoring program and cost
estimation for project implementation.
To address the social impacts, a social assessment (SA), a resettlement policy framework (RPF),
an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) and a Process Framework (PF) were prepared by
SFA. These documents were reviewed by the Bank??s Task Team including the social specialist
and were found satisfactory and in compliant with the World Bank policies.
The SA survey identified and investigated possible impacts by the proposed activities in the
project area of both provinces, and found that 8903 persons in 39 communities, including 4559
persons in 14 villages and 4344 persons in 25 forest farms, will be affected mainly on
strengthening restriction of access, etc. The main impacts are from prohibiting grazing, collection,
cutting, etc. in the NRs. The main measures to minimize and compensate the impacts consist of:
income-generated training, greenhouse, ecotourism, study tour, etc. and the total cost is US
$313,000. With the designed measures, the income of the affected would be fully restored.
With extensive consultation among affected villages, forest farms, and forest bureaus, the PF
identified the possible impacts by the planned strengthening restriction of access to the protected
areas (nature reserves- NR) in the two provinces, and concluded that the above mentioned persons
will be affected mainly on income decrease from the strengthening of restriction of access. The PF
established a framework to further identify the affected villager/individual, as well as potential
impacts and possible measures in the project implementation stage. Further, the PF recommended
the preparation of a NR Co-management Plan together by village and forest authority, as well as
Village Development Plan in the project implementation stage, to achieve the win-win between
the communities and authorities.
The EMDP identified three ethnic minority villages, two are Korean villages and one is Korean
and Manchu village. A series of consultations campaigns were carried out and found that the three
villages broadly supported the project. The potential impacts and their measures were separately
0           identified and explored through participatory planning. The critical impacts relate to the
strengthening of access restriction which results to prohibiting grazing, collection, cutting, etc. in
the NRs, and their measures mainly rely on: income-generated training, greenhouse, ecotourism,
study tours, etc.
Monitoring Arrangement. Internal and external monitoring on implementing the RPF/PF/EMDP
were designed and agreed in the relevant documents, including institutional and financial measures
to ensure the proper implementation of the documents. Experienced external monitor will be
contractually engaged to conduct semiannual monitoring in the project areas and the report should
be submitted to the Bank periodically.
The SFA is responsible for ensuring that the three PPMUs implement the institutional and
financial arrangement in the documents, and to on time engage qualified external monitor to
conduct monitoring work and submit the Bank the semiannual monitoring reports. The SFA is
responsible for enabling preparation and submission of semiannual progress reports on the
implementation of the social documents.
The National PCU is located within the State Forest Administration and the three PPMUs are the
Page 8 of 12


﻿Jilin Provincial Forest Department and Heilongjiang Provincial Forest Department, which have no
enough capacity for WB safeguard policies. During project implementation, the team will have
their capacity strengthened to prepare and implement the project in line with World Bank
environmental and social safeguard policies. The PCU and each PPMU will assign a specific staff
O
to take charge safeguard issues and experienced environment and social consultants will be
entrusted to assist preparation work related to the safeguard instruments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders are SFA, Jilin Provincial Forest Department and Heilongjiang Provincial
Forest Department, Heilongjiang Forest Industry Group, experts, individual rural residents
(households), village groups and communities as well as active NGOs in the project areas. In
addition, the existing coordination mechanism (cooperation agreement for the conservation of the
Amur tiger) between China and Russia will be supported to help the planning and management of
the nature reserves in China and Russia. Through this coordination mechanism, Russian side was
consulted in June 2014. The Russian side had no objection regarding the project.
Public consultations and information disclosure have been carried out during the preparation of the
environmental assessment documents. A combination of expert consultations, questionnaires, and
interviews in the project area of influence has been implemented during EA preparation. The
consulted people cover different gender, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds, and
occupations. The majority of those consulted people expressed strong support to the project. The
public concerns have been incorporated either in the project design or in the environmental
management or resettlement plan. The full draft EIA/EMP was disclosed locally on March 30,
2015 and is publically available, and also disclosed at The World Bank Infoshop on April 1 2015.
Social Side
Apart from information distribution in the provinces and local communities by local governments
and forest authorities, the project preparation team also conducted extensive consultation among
the 39 project affected villages/communities in the process of impact investigation and measure
development. Further consultation with and participation by the affected communities will be
continuously implemented in the implementation of the RPF/PF/EMDP, as well as in the
development and implementation of the NR Co-management Plan, and Village Development Plan.
In the case that land acquisition would be needed as part of a project activity, the respective PPMU
should prepare a resettlement action plan satisfactory to the Bank.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           01-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Page 9 of 12


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           0 1-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
China                                                    30-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           01-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           0 1-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
0
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[     NA
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X]  No[    NA
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes[  ] No [x]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[X] No[      ]   NA [   ]
Page 10 of 12


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [    ]
.,          property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes   No  ]  NA[X
O
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes      No        NA    X
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes    No        NA    X
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Garo J. Batmanian
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                  Date: 07-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: lain G. Shuker (PMGR)               Date: 07-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


