INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13452
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kyrgyz Republic            Project ID:   P155412
Project Name:    Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
Task Team        Sandra Broka,Mai Nguyen,Serhiy Osavolyuk
Leader(s):
Estimated        14-Mar-2016                Estimated     02-Jun-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA03                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Animal production (60%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (20%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and institutions (25%),
Trade facilitation and market access (25%), Micro, S mall and Medium
Enterprise support (15%), Climate change (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.00             Total Bank Financing:     5.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                       5.00
Total                                                             5.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project it to contribute to achievement of the Dairy Sector
Development Program objectives by improving animal feeding, breeding and management practices
in the project area, as well as animal health care and veterinary services, through investments and
training support.


﻿The overall development objective of the Dairy Sector Development Project in the Kyrgyz Republic
is to improve export potential of Kyrgyz dairy products to neighboring countries (Russia and
Kazakhstan), increase incomes of dairy farmers, and create new jobs along the dairy supply chain.
o
C. Project Description
The project is composed of the following components:
o       Component 1: Fodder and Feed Development Program (tentatively US$1.5 million, all IDA)
The component will finance seeds, other inputs, equipment, and training and demonstrations to
support farmers in feed and fodder development program. The component will support activities
related to high quality fodder production, hay preparation, establishment of sites for silage
preparation, feeding practices (appropriate quantities, etc.). A number of demonstration farms/
household will be selected for practical training and dissemination of results of improved practices
where the project will support, on matching grant basis, demonstrations of sound practices.
Demonstration farm/households will share the results achieved with farmers and other interested
parties, to disseminate good practices.
Component 2: Veterinary Services and Animal Health (tentatively US$1.9 million, all IDA)
The component will focus on the following activities (i) animal identification and registration; (ii)
vaccinations of animals in the project area; (iii) upgrading the regional veterinary laboratory and
capacity building in disease control; (iv) establishment and maintenance of the veterinary posts; and
(v) training of farmers in sound manure management and animal husbandry practices.
This component will contribute to the PDO by improving the traceability and health of the animals as
well as by supporting the improvements in the breed stock of the dairy cows. Animal identification
and registration activities will build on the ongoing FAO Animal Identification Pilot Project that
aims to develop the software and registration procedures, which will then be tested out in the Issyk-
Kul region. The IDA project will support the scaling up of the animal identification for cattle, such as
support the training of registrars and equipment for registration.
Support to vaccinations will target the cattle population of the Oblast for major diseases like FMD,
anthrax and brucellosis. This will include procurement of vaccines, training of private veterinarians,
and provision of basic veterinary equipment for eligible private veterinarians with contracts to serve
the targeted farmers.
The regional veterinary laboratory in Karakol, which is in very poor shape, will be supported with
upgrading of its facilities, equipment and staff qualifications to an acceptable level.
The component will help to set up the veterinary zoning with establishment of veterinary checkpoints
in the exit/entry sites to the region. There are 3 main entry/exit posts in the Issyk-kul Oblast, and
veterinary posts will be equipped and supported by the project.
The component will also train farmers in a minimum range of subjects, including farm hygiene,
animal health care, sound manure management, animal husbandry, on-farm quality standards for
high quality milk production, supported by demonstrations.


﻿Component 3: On-farm Investments (tentatively US$3.6 million, including US$1.0 million IDA, US
$2.0 million IFC, and US$0.6 million beneficiaries)
Farmers needs access to finance to invest in productivity improvements, quality measures, etc. A
O
U       credit line through participating financial institutions will support the farmer needs for investment
and working capital financing. The project is expected to work with one or two selected financial
institutions which have undergone due diligence and interested in supporting value chain
development in the agricultural sector. As appropriate, new tailored financing schemes will be
introduced (e.g. lending to group of farmers, or lending through processing companies, etc.), which
will be supported by PFI training in the new financial instruments.
Component 4: Project Management (tentatively US$0.6 million, all IDA)
The component will cover the costs associated with the project management, monitoring and
evaluation and impact assessment. It is expected that Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC)
and the Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) at the Ministry of Finance will implement the
technical assistance and credit line activities, respectively. In addition, as under the previous projects,
ABCC will be responsible for procurement activities under the project, and CLMU for financial
management of the project. ABCC will also open a regional office in Issyk-kul. The PMU will
closely liaise with the other projects under the program, to ensure that all necessary activities are
implemented, and no duplications/over-laps occur.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Most of the project activities (including all investments) will be done in Issyk-kul Oblast of the
country. Some activities, such as improving the regulatory framework for exports will be done at the
national level.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration and the Ministry of Finance will be the Implementing
Agencies for the project. Both Ministries have prior extensive experience with implementation of
Bank-financed projects.
The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) and the Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU)
at the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for implementation of the technical assistance and
credit line activities, respectively. Both implementing units have prior extensive experience in
implementing Bank-financed projects. Similar to the previous projects, ABCC will be responsible for
project-related procurement activities, and the CLMU for financial management for the entire
project. Both units have undergone regular financial management and procurement capacity reviews
by the Bank's specialists.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Alisher Khamidov (GSU03)
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This OP is triggered as a series of proposed project


﻿OP/BP 4.01                                activities and in particular those under the On-Farm
Investments component: upgrading of the veterinary
laboratory; investments in improving the animal
heard; inputs for pasture improvements; minor works
for rehabilitation of irrigation for forage production;
agricultural equipment; farm infrastructure
improvement including animal housing, waste
management, handling and storage, including
demonstration infrastructure in this regard;
purchasing of inputs and machinery for feed and
fodder production; animal shelter improvement;
agro-processing and milk collection and cooling
equipment; silage production; etc.) might generate a
series of various environmental and social impacts.
These impacts would be associated with biodiversity
degradation, noise, dust, air and water pollution,
health hazards and labor safety issues, etc.). In the
case the project will support large scale silage
production (to be decided during the project design)
this might generate significant soil and ground water
pollution. All these impacts are expected to be
typical for small scale construction/rehabilitation
works or for various agricultural and food processing
activities, temporary by nature and site specific and
can be easily mitigated by applying best construction
and/or agro-processing practices and relevant
mitigation measures. To address these impacts the
client will prepare an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) which will be
aimed at specifying the set of mitigation, monitoring,
and institutional responsibility measures to be taken
during the project implementation to eliminate
adverse environmental and social impacts, offset, or
reduce them to acceptable levels. The ESMF will
also identify environmental impacts and propose
measures for their management of any potential
livestock expansion, including the management of
cattle manure and increased pressure on grazing
lands; for potential expansions of dairy processing
capacities the related waste production and
management, including effluents and their treatment
will need to be assessed and managed.
The EMF will also would suggest a series of
environmental issues to be included in the proposed
project TA activities which would include training,
preparing and disseminating guidebooks and


﻿implementing demonstration activities on the
following: (a) education of veterinary specialists on
managing sector environmental and social impacts;
(b) sound manure management; (c) practicing large
and/or small scale silage production and measures to
ensure appropriate handling and disposal of the
"silage liquor", preventing soil and ground water
pollution; (d) preparation and implementation of
pasture management plans; and (e) TA activities for
the Participating Financial Intermediaries on
conducting EA of selected sub-projects.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD           The project might support pasture management
activities that can trigger this OP. The decision if this
OP is triggered or not will be done before Appraisal
during the project preparation. In the case proposed
activities will affect the NHs then the ESMF will
provide relevant advice on addressing the NHs issues
within the sub-project EA.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            The project will be implemented in non-afforested
areas and thus no impacts on the forests status are
expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD           At this stage of project design it is expected the
improved fodder production will not involve use of
pesticides and/or the proposed investments and TA
will support or promote use of insecticide/acaricide
livestock dips. These issues will be clarified during
the project design, agreed with the client and
reflected in the ESMF.
O
Physical Cultural Resources   No            The veterinary laboratory selected for rehabilitation
OP/BP 4.11                                  and/or agro-processing enterprises will be screened
0
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Feb-2016
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF will be drafted during October 2015-February 2016. Before Appraisal (March 2016),
the EMF will be disclosed and consulted in the country and in the WB Infoshop. The public
consultation will be done in the project oblast (most probably in Cholpon-Ata) andwill involve all
interested parties: veterinary/agricultural and environmental authorities at the local and national
levels; academia; design and research institutions; environmental NGOs, farmers and farmers
associations; involved private sector representatives. During the implementation all site specific
EMPs will be also disclosed and consulted with the key stakeholders and all interested parties and
broad public, including representatives from the local population.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sandra Broka,Mai Nguyen,Serhiy Osavolyuk
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                     Date: 04-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)            Date: 06-Aug-2015
Manager:


