INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8523
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                       Project ID:   P150288
Project Name:    IN: Strengthening Governance and Service Delivery in Karnataka Panchayats
(P150288)
Task Team        Farah Zahir
Leader(s):
Estimated        05-Jan-2016                 Estimated     10-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO18                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Sub-national government administration (100%)
Theme(s):        Decentralization (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     318.40             Total Bank Financing:   223.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                          95.40
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            223.00
0          Total                                                           318.40
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project is to improve the effectiveness, responsiveness and
accountability of the rural local governments, in particular, Gram Panchayats in delivering public
services prioritized by rural people. During project preparation a more operational PDO will be
developed that is amenable to measurement. It is important to note that this development objective is
institutional in nature as it focuses on the strengthening of local self-government to deliver relevant


﻿services better. This is an important change of emphasis from Phase I where the PDO was focused on
"improving the effectiveness of service delivery by Karnataka's Gram panchayats..."
C. Project Description
Applying lessons of experience from the first KPSP, the Bank team intends to propose several
modifications to the approach taken in Phase I. It is proposed that the project activities could be
organized under the following three components: (i) Local Government Block Grants ("window 1":
compliance-based; and "window 2": performance-based); (ii) Institutional Development (state-wide);
o      and (iii) project management support. A brief description of the components is as follows (see details
in Annex 3).
Component A - Local Government Block Grants (US$ 200 million)
Grants will finance activities and services listed in GP plans and budgets based on participatory
processes and sector-wide activity mapping. The grants for "more" and "most" backward" taluks
would follow a 80:20 ratio for a basic and performance grant. The parameters for the performance
grant would be discussed with GoK during preparation. For the basic grants there is an eligibility
criteria which emphasizes operationalization of FM and procurement systems acceptable to the Bank,
implementation of planning guidelines, regular Gram Sabha meetings with open participation and
public disclosure of FM and procurement information. The formula for the block grants gives weight
to poverty (SC/ST population), area (proxy for cost of service provision), illiteracy rate etc.
Component B - Institutional Development (US$ 16 million)
B. 1- Strengthening of Information Systems (US$ 2 million): This component will increase the ability
of rural people to voice their demand to local governments and elicit responses from them, in
particular for the poorest and excluded people such as women, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
This will include: (a) capacity building for organizations of the poor (SHGs, community-based
organizations, NGOs) to empower greater participation in the Panchayat planning and decision-
making process, and improve access to government services and programs; (b) re-activation of GP
Standing Committees on Production, Social Justice and Amenities; (c) improved GP linkages with
village-level committees such as School Development & Monitoring Committee (SDMC), Village
Health Nutrition & Sanitation Committee (VHNSC), Village Water & Sanitation Committee
(VWSC), and Joint Forest Managements (JFMs). In addition to this, the component would link
Panchatantra software to SAKALA and thus to Citizen-Government Interface Platform under 'The
Karnataka Guarantee of Services to Citizens Bill (2011)' and provide training in use of PLANPLUS
to support spatial planning. However, in the proposed project there will be a stronger focus on
empowering women and other disadvantage groups in the decision-making process by introducing a
performance allocation from the 3rd year based on earlier achievements in empowering these groups.
In addition, capacity building efforts will be targeted to a reduced number of prioritized civil society
actors.
B.2 - Building Capacity of Panchayats (US$ 14 million): Strengthen the capacity of all three levels of
Panchayats to manage the budget, augment own-source revenue, and upgrade/promote competent
staff for efficient monitoring of service delivery. Specifically it will include:
*      Strengthen Taluk Resource Centers (TRCs) to provide training programs locally, mentor GP
planning, and provide comprehensive monitoring of local development programs.
*      Support development and operation of "clusters" (a small set of GPs) to provide an effective
link between the GP and the Taluk.


﻿*      Support computerized financial management and generation of development indicators
through Panchatantra.
*      Capacity building and support (specifically for Panchayati Raj Engineering Dept.) to
mainstream environmental management into GP-level planning & design (following development of
O
U       general design guidelines for GP assets (e.g., roads, drains, etc).
Component C - Project Management Support (US$ 4 million)
This activity would put in place systems at the state level to enable it to oversee, facilitate and
manage the Panchayat system in general and this project in particular. The activity will include:
*      Upgrade PMU capacity in line with extended project coverage.
*      Incorporate DAC into the Rural Development and Panchayati Raj Department, GoK.
*      ANSSIRD to compete in open tendering to provide training funded under the project.
*      Develop a monitoring mechanism for effective management of the Project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be across the state of Karnataka and will cover a total number of 2,585 Gram
Panchayats, including the "more backward" taluks (with 1,244 GPs) and the "most backward."
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Gram Swaraj Phase II will be implemented by the Rural Development and Panchayat Raj
Department (RD&PRD) of the Government of Karnataka. The RD&PRD has had experience in
implementation of environmental and social safeguards for the Gram Swaraj Phase I, to ensure that
the activities financed under block grants would conform with OP 4.01. The environmental
safeguards consisted of a system for screening for potential negative impacts, procedures for
mitigation, plan for training, monitoring and institutional arrangements. The Mid-Term Review
(MTR) of the Phase I project, held in 2010, rated performance on the environmental safeguards as
'moderately unsatisfactory'. Recommendations on strengthening the institutional arrangements,
capacity building and monitoring were made along with institutionalizing screening procedures and
tools. Following action on these recommendations, in 2011, the environmental safeguards rating was
revised to 'moderately satisfactory' and has been maintained as such so far. The Phase II project
provides opportunity for further strengthening the capacity of the RD&PRD in environmental
management in order to support the Gram Panchayats in undertaking environmentally sustainable
and safe works.
Safeguard Policies that Might Apply
The project provides opportunity for strengthening the capacity of the Rural Development &
Panchayat Raj Department in environmental management in order to support the Gram Panchayats in
undertaking environmentally sustainable and safe works. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), that builds on the lessons from Phase I, and comprises the following elements
will be developed before Appraisal: (a) a simple safeguards system for GP works that will promote
good design as well as ensure compliance with legal and regulatory requirements - this will comprise
of good practice guidelines and a set of 'dos and don'ts' that the GPs will implement as an integral
part of the activities in their perspective plans and annual action plans, (b) capacity building of the
PRI staff and constituents focusing on selection of relevant works, implementation of the good
practice guidelines and 'dos and don'ts', technically sound designs, continued maintenance of assets,
and monitoring of outcomes on public health and environmental quality (c) focused technical support


﻿to GPs located in environmental 'hot spots' (areas with high biodiversity value, drought-prone areas,
areas with over-exploited groundwater, etc.), and (d) integration of environmental aspects into
performance indicators for GPs for block grants. The ESMF will be consulted with key stakeholders
and disclosed before finalization.
0
OP/BP 4.10 safeguards policies on Indigenous Peoples will be triggered. The project will be active in
areas that cover tribal groups and hence this policy is triggered. The Karnataka Panchayat system and
the project both include various pro-tribal measures. Therefore, a separate Tribal Development Plan
would not be developed. However, small plots of private land may be required for certain small
infrastructure sub-projects to be taken up with grant funds such as check dams, culverts, bore wells,
pump houses and drains. These lands will be acquired through voluntary donations or purchase,
provided they are legally available, litigation free, and under the legal guidelines of the State of
Karnataka. Similar approaches are already in place for the State's rural water and sanitation services
project and these would be adopted for the proposed project. The policy on involuntary resettlement
is currently being triggered and shall be confirmed again at appraisal stage based on the review of the
application of voluntary donation/ purchase approach during Phase I. During project preparation, a
Social Management Framework (SMF) shall be prepared drawing on lessons from Phase I.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project scope covers a range of activities which
OP/BP 4.01                              will be funded by provision of small grants. These
activities include construction of toilets, drains,
village roads, etc. Drinking water sources need to be
tested and safety measures need to be instituted
during constructions. These works, due to their
nature, limited number, and micro-scale, do not have
the potential to cause significant negative
environmental impacts. If well designed, executed
and managed, these works can have positive impacts
on the local environment including on human health
(through improved sanitation, improved access to
clean water, etc.).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The small sub-projects will be implemented within
the villages and are not expected to have any impacts
on natural habitats
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The small sub-projects will be implemented within
the villages and are not expected to have any impacts
on forests
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          No pesticides will be utilized or procured under the
project
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The small sub-projects will be implemented within
OP/BP 4.11


﻿the villages and are not expected to have any impacts
on cultural property
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes           The project will be active in areas that contain tribal
4.10                                         groups and hence this policy is triggered. Both the
Karnataka Panchayat system and the project include
various pro-tribal measures. A quick assessment
based on the review of relevant literature and
guidelines supplemented by community
consultations will be carried out to identify the need
of additional measures to ensure access of project
benefits to SC and ST in culturally appropriate way.
A separate TDP shall be prepared if needed or a
SMF shall be prepared to mainstream the process
needed to meet the policy requirement into the
project design.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes           Small plots of private land may be required for
BP 4.12                                      certain small infrastructure sub-projects to be taken
up with grant funds such as check dams, culverts,
bore wells, pump houses and drains. These lands is
proposed to be utilised through voluntary donations
or purchase, provided they are legally available,
litigation free and under the legal guidelines of the
State of Karnataka. The policy on involuntary
resettlement is currently being triggered and shall be
confirmed again at appraisal stage. If the policy is
not triggered at the later stage the provision of
avoiding involuntary resettlement and preconditions
for voluntary taking of land shall be made in the
EMF
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
a
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jul-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿An Environmental Management Framework, that builds on the lessons from Phase I, and
comprises the following elements will be developed before Appraisal: (a) a simple safeguards
system for GP works that will promote good design as well as ensure compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements, (b) capacity building of the PRI staff and constituents focusing on
selection of relevant works, technically sound designs, continued maintenance of assets, and
monitoring of outcomes on public health and environmental quality (c) focused technical support
to GPs located in environmental 'hotspots' (areas with high biodiversity value, drought-prone
areas, areas with over-exploited groundwater, etc.), and (d) integration of environmental aspects
into performance indicators for GPs for block grants.
Government of Karnataka has already taken several pro tribal measures in their Panchayat System.
Based on a quick social assessment and community consultations, a Social Management
Framework (SMF) shall be prepared to inform the project design and mainstream Bank's Policy
requirement on Indigenous people or a separate Tribal Development Plan shall be prepared. The
policy on involuntary resettlement currently being triggered shall be confirmed again at appraisal
stage. In case the policy on Involuntary resettlement is not triggered, the preconditions for
voluntary taking of land for building small infrastructure with block grants shall be laid out in the
ESMF.
The ESMF and other safeguard instruments as the case may be will be consulted with key
stakeholders and disclosed before finalization before Appraisal and Negotiations.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Farah Zahir
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                      Date: 11-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)               Date: 11-Dec-2015
Manager:
0


