                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA19630
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 05-Aug-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               07-Aug-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Tanzania                     Project ID:              P150523
    Project Name:                     Tanzania: Resilient Natural Resource Management for Tourism and Growth
                                      (P150523)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Daniel Mira-Salama
    Estimated Appraisal               31-Jul-2017                  Estimated Board          21-Sep-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GEN01                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                   Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           150.00                        Total Bank Financing: 150.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                150.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00
    Total                                                                                                      150.00
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve management of natural resources and tourism assets in
    priority areas of southern Tanzania, and to increase access to alternative livelihood activities for targeted
    communities
    3. Project Description
    The project will be implemented in and around four priority Protected Areas (referred to as priority PAs): the
    Mikumi National Park (MINAPA), Ruaha National Park (RUNAPA): Udzungwa Mountains National Park
    (UMNP), and the photographic section of the Selous Game Reserve (SGR).

    The PDO will be achieved through the following four project components:


                                                    Page 1 of 14
Component 1 – Strengthen capacity for management and development of priority Protected Areas (US$85
million). The objective of Component 1 is to improve the management and sustainability of natural resources
inside the four priority Protected Areas (PAs) in Southern Tanzania. This will be achieved through policy and
regulatory support, capacity/skills development activities and investments which are grouped under five sub-
components:
a) Sub-Component 1.1 – Improve knowledge, policy, institutional and operational frameworks for improved
Protected Area management. Strengthen the enabling environment for the activities to be implemented under
this component, by generating and managing knowledge, strengthening policy and enhancing capacity at
national, institutional, and PA level. Key activities include: (i) review PA General Management Plans, and
prepare a tourism development plan to guide future development of the southern part of RUNAPA; (ii) improve
payment systems to address delays entering PAs, and carry out sensitivity studies for entrance fees; and (iii)
improve existing policies and regulations to promote participation and benefit-sharing.
b) Sub-Component 1.2 – Improve PA infrastructure. Enhance accessibility and basic infrastructure of the
priority PAs to improve their management and the overall quality of the tourism products. Key investments
include, amongst others: (i) earthworks - construction of new and upgrade existing roads, trails, bridges and
upgrading of existing airstrips to improve connectivity and ability to patrol strategic locations; (ii) civil works -
construction and upgrading of ranger posts, tourist arrival amenities, entry/exit gates, visitor information centers,
youth hostels, rest houses, and “bandas” for official and educational/ research purposes, maintenance
workshops, and construction of research centers to strengthen monitoring efforts.
c) Sub-Component 1.3 – Strengthen management capacity and infrastructure maintenance of PAs. Activities
include: (i) upgrading of communications systems (radio repeaters, cellphone connectivity and others),
monitoring and patrolling equipment; (ii) infrastructure management tools and contingency plans; (iii) basic
light and heavy equipment; (iv) wildlife related research initiatives to inform policy dialogue and integrated
management; and (v) targeted training.
d) Sub-Component 1.4 – Strengthen “Destination Southern Tanzania”. Support activities that identify and build
linkages between the range of attractions – including the priority PAs – in southern Tanzania and increase
recognition of southern Tanzania as a destination. Among the activities included are: (i) an integrated tourism
product development and marketing strategy for southern Tanzania that includes wildlife, forests, beach,
cultural and historic products; (ii) implement marketing and branding strategies for the priority PAs; (iii)
supporting and developing capacity to drive destination development and management; and (iv) scoping studies
for Kitulo National Park, Katavi National Park and other southern destinations for possible future investment.
e) Sub-Component 1.5 – Tourism investment promotion. Identify, assess feasibility, promote and take to market
opportunities for private sector investment in and around the selected PAs. This activity will, among others: (i)
define opportunities for private sector investment in PAs and with communities; (ii) support the creation of a
conducive investment climate to facilitate investments; and (iii) support the processes of investment promotion
and facilitation.

Component 2 – Strengthen access to alternative livelihood activities for targeted communities in proximity to
the priority Protected Areas (total cost US$27 million). The overall objective of this component is to provide
access to improved economic opportunities within targeted communities living in the proximity of the priority
PAs in order to enhance livelihoods, reduce vulnerability to climate shocks, and reduce pressure on natural
resources and wildlife.
During preparation, an assessment of villages adjacent to the priority PAs was conducted. Villages were
characterized, through the identification of specific challenges (occurrence of human-wildlife conflict, illegal
wildlife poaching) and opportunities (potential to supply goods and services to the tourism industry,
accessibility, potential to enhance landscape-scale biodiversity conservation and connectivity). This exercise
resulted in the prioritization of 61 “hotspot villages” (with an estimated total of 34,000 households) that would
be eligible to receive technical and financial assistance from the project. These villages, hereafter referred to as
priority villages, include all those where human-wildlife conflicts, illegal wildlife poaching, or other unregulated
uses of resources were described. The project may expand its interventions to additional villages based on


                                                 Page 2 of 14
resources and identified impacts. Project sub-components are:
a) Sub-Component 2.1 - Improve the governance framework of conservation-related community-based
initiatives. The component will, amongst others: (i) strengthen the legal and institutional framework of
TANAPA’s and TAWA’s benefit sharing schemes; (ii) strengthen and/or develop the community outreach
structures of TANAPA and TAWA, through technical assistance, capacity building and equipment; and (iii)
develop a plan and/or strategy for development of cultural/historical tourism in the priority PAs.
b) Sub-Component 2.2 – Enhance alternative community livelihoods by improving economic opportunities and
linking them with conservation of wildlife and landscapes. Through a demand-driven approach, the
subcomponent would provide technical and financial assistance to support the creation, organization, training
and operation of groups of households in the priority villages focusing on supplying services and agricultural
products to tourism operators, promoting low-environmental impact agricultural micro-enterprises, and
establishing incentive-based, conservation-friendly crop, livestock and forestry-related initiatives.
c) Sub-Component 2.3 – Capacity building of communities and government authorities. The sub-component
will focus on targeted education and training to create new or strengthen existing mechanisms for improved
natural resources management. It will include, amongst others: (i) scholarships for community members in
tourism, wildlife, conservation, and facilitating access to vocational colleges (e.g., wildlife and tourism related
skills); (ii) sensitization and promotion of conservation activities at community level, including education
sessions, village game scout programs, joint community patrolling, and others; (iii) strengthening of eligible
WMAs, through equipment and targeted training, targeted towards increasing their wildlife management
effectiveness; (iv) targeted natural resources management training for local government authorities around the
priority PAs; and (v) support the development or improvement of Village Land Use Plans (VLUP) in the
priority villages targeted by sub-component 2.2.

Component 3 – Strengthen capacity for landscape management upstream of the Ruaha National Park (total cost
US$27 million). The overall objective for Component 3 is to protect RUNAPA’s water resources within the
social and climatic context of the area. These resources are critical for the subsistence and preservation of
wildlife and ecosystems, and for continued and expanded tourism in Tanzania’s Southern Circuit. Primarily, the
component will focus on short-term measures targeted towards the restoration of dry season flows in the Great
Ruaha River, and as a secondary focus, the component will lay the ground towards mitigating future degradation
of the RUNAPA resulting from climate change impacts, excessive abstraction of water upstream of the Park,
deteriorated water quality, and increased sediment in inflowing rivers. All project activities are in line and
follow the conclusions of the Rufiji Integrated Water Resources Management and Development Plan.
Improving land and water management in the Usangu plains and the upper catchments, (which feed into the
Ihefu wetland and the Great Ruaha River), is a long process, which will translate into improved quantity and
quality of flow only in the medium to long-term. Therefore, given the critical water emergency inside RUNAPA
(currently up to three-four consecutive months with zero river flow at the “Ngiriama” control point), the priority
of Component 3 is to implement structural solutions, inside RUNAPA, to improve water availability during the
dry season, ensuring sufficient, accessible water points for wildlife. These measures will provide results in the
short-term, temporarily mitigating the impacts caused by no-flow days. However, they will not address the
underlying causes for zero flows, and therefore, the second priority of the Component is to initiate a process to
improve land and water management in the upstream catchments in the Mbarali District (where most of the
cultivated land is located) through cross-sectoral coordination, efficient farming and irrigation procedures, and
conservation of upstream water sources, to demonstrate the benefits and methods for subsequent upscaling and
to promote climate change adaptation. The sub-components are:
a) Sub-Component 3.1 – Assess and implement measures to augment dry-season flows to the RUNAPA. Key
infrastructure investments inside RUNAPA, along the Great Ruaha River, will be implemented in order to: (i)
augment dry season flows to the river through storage of wet season flows; and (ii) generate water-stored areas,
along the river and tributaries, that ensure increased water availability during dry season.
b) Sub-Component 3.2 – Improve the irrigation efficiency and water savings in irrigation areas. This sub-
component will focus in the extensive irrigation lands upstream the Ihefu wetland, promoting water savings


                                                 Page 3 of 14
through: (i) Farmer’s Field Schools to raise awareness and knowledge of System Rice Intensification (SRI) as a
farming method for increasing crop yields and reducing water use; (ii) improvement of irrigation infrastructure
in selected irrigation areas to demonstrate water-efficient methods (water controlling structures, lining of canals
and drainage); and (iii) revisiting water use permits and assessing incentive mechanisms for controlling
excessive use of water or increase of irrigation areas utilizing drainage water.
c) Sub-Component 3.3 – Catchment conservation activities in selected sub-basins. This would include: (i)
surveying hotspots in the upper catchment areas where climate variability and change, together with present and
future human activities, comprise severe risks for water sources; (ii) integrated water and land-use planning
activities to reduce the risks in these hotspots; and (iii) implementation of selected watershed management
activities such as river boundary protection and sustainable agricultural land management practices.
d) Sub-Component 3.4 – Support the consensus-building process for land and water management and climate
change adaptation in the Usangu plains. The sub-component includes: (i) facilitating cross-sectoral interaction
and consultations at the district level, including social and physical surveillance studies when needed, for water
resources management; and (ii) strengthening the monitoring and management capacity of Irrigation
Organizations and Water Users Associations, including operation and maintenance training.

Component 4 – Project management, institutional strengthening, and monitoring and evaluation (US$11
million). This component will support the implementation of the project. It will facilitate the technical
management and coordination of the project, financial management (FM), procurement and safeguards
oversight. It also covers monitoring and evaluation of project implementation progress towards objectives,
preparation of regular monitoring, mid-term, and evaluation reports; procurement and FM including audits,
environmental and social safeguards. It will also provide for impact evaluation and adaptive improvement
activities.
a) Sub-Component 4.1 – Project Management and Institutional strengthening. This subcomponent will finance
project implementation, management, and coordination support, together with capacity-building initiatives to
benefit the various actors involved in project implementation (particularly government agencies and LGAs).
Specifically, this support includes: (i) project oversight and coordination costs; (ii) establishment and operation
of a Project Coordination Unit (PCU); (iii) fiduciary management, including external/internal audits and
accounting; (iv) performance monitoring and reporting; (v) environmental and social safeguards management,
including implementation of mitigation measures; (vi) development and implementation of a communication
plan; and (vii) short-term training, tailored towards project management.
b) Sub-Component 4.2 – Monitoring and Evaluation. A Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system will be
financed and operated to capture data on physical and financial progress, the performance of implementing
agencies and service providers, and the achievements of outcomes and impact vis-à-vis the PDO and associated
indicators. In addition, since REGROW would be implementing a development model for tourism promotion
and environmental protection, social inclusion and water resources management, it can potentially be scaled up
to other protected areas and to other basins. This sub-component will therefore finance a baseline study, the data
collection process, satisfaction surveys, extraction of lessons, knowledge generation and exchange, annual
networking among key project stakeholders (at local, regional and national level, including active involvement
from the private sector) and an impact evaluation.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Most of the project activities, in terms of number and financing amount, will take place inside four priority
Protected Areas (PAs). These are the Mikumi National Park (MINAPA), Ruaha National Park (RUNAPA),
Udzungwa National Park (UMNP), and Selous Game Reserve (SGR). The areas were selected after a strategic
tourism development study identified them as having the highest, most immediate potential for boosting tourism
in the South, increasing jobs and creating spill-over effects. The four are large and unique: RUNAPA
encompasses 13,000 km2, representing the largest National Park in East Africa. SGR is Africa’s largest Game
Reserve and a UNESCO World Heritage Site, it extends over 44,000 km2. MINAPA and UMNP cover an area


                                                 Page 4 of 14
of 3,230 km2 and 1,990 km2, respectively. Combined, they cover over 62,000 km2 (for reference, Switzerland
covers 41,285 km2). For the specific case of SGR, the project will be implemented solely in the photographic
area (Matambwe sector, as defined in SGR’s current General Management Plan).
RUNAPA, MINAPA, and UMNP are National Parks, within the National Parks system, and are managed by
TANAPA (Tanzania National Parks Authority), whereas SGR is managed by the recently-created TAWA
(Tanzania Wildlife Authority).
In addition to the four priority PAs, REGROW will work with priority villages around them in alternative
livelihoods (through component 2), and in the irrigation areas of the Usangu plains (mostly in Mbarali District),
upstream from the Ihefu wetlands, for improved water resources management in irrigation areas (through
component 3).

MINAPA: MINAPA is located approximately 300 km west of Dar es salaam in Southern Tanzania. It extends
from longitude 37o00’ to 37o30’E and latitude 7o00’ to 7o45’S. The area covered by MINAPA includes water
catchments for the Ruaha, Ruvu and Wami Rivers systems that provide significant water resources for eastern
Tanzania. MINAPA covers an area of 3,230 km2. It is known for its diverse habitats, fauna & flora. In 1951 the
area was awarded Game Reserve status to conserve the rich wildlife resources found in the area. In 1964 it was
gazetted as a National Park with initial area of 1070 km2. In 1975 MINAPA was extended to the north & south
by incorporating 2160 km2. The extension southwards covered the area between the park and Selous Game
Reserve (SGR). This was done to achieve ecological balance and diverse habitats to meet the needs of a wide
range of species requirements and ensure movement between the park, the SGR and adjacent protected areas in
the ecosystem.

UMNP: UMNP is found in Morogoro and Iringa regions at 36.35oE and 7.65oS. The park was gazetted in 1992
from the existing Forest Reserves of Mwanihana, Iwonde and parts of Matundu and the West Kilombero Scarp
forest. It covers an area of 1990 km2, a mere 20% of the whole of Udzungwa Mountains Ecosystem which is
nearly 10,000 km2. UMNP is the seventh largest National Park among the sixteen (16) National Parks after
Ruaha, Serengeti, Katavi, Mkomazi, Mikumi and Tarangire. A significant part of the foregoing beauty and
attractions remain untapped due to several challenges, notably accessibility. It is expected that with sustainable
investment aimed at unlocking UMNP’s full tourism and ecological potential, the park will, over time, be
transformed into a world-class destination.

SGR: SGR is the largest single PA in Africa covering an area of about 50,000 km2. It was established in
different phases from 1898 to its current boundaries that were created around 1970s. In 1982 the reserve was
inscribed in the list of UNESCO World Heritage Site due to its outstanding universal value. Due to its enormous
size, it is divided into eight (8) sectors/zones for management purposes. Two forms of wildlife utilization
characterize the reserve - consumptive (trophy hunting) that occupies about 90% and non-consumptive
(photographic tourism) that occupy the remaining 10%. The SGR Northern Sector-Matambwe covers an area of
about 4,741km2 and is the only area that practices non-consumptive tourism.

RUNAPA: RUNAPA is situated in South Central Tanzania between 7 and 8 degrees south, covering part of
Iringa and Mbeya Regions. It covers an area of 20,226 km2 to the West of the Southern highlands, between the
Great Ruaha River in the southeast and the Mzombe River in the north-west. Ecologically, RUNAPA is unique
because it covers a transition zone where East and South African species of both flora a nd fauna converge.
These zones together with the Usangu wetlands and the Great Ruaha River are among RUNAPA’s tourist
attractions. Due to climate variabilities potentially induced by development around the PA and movement of
wildlife, RUNAPA faces a number of challenges that include drying up of the Great Ruaha River and the
subsequent ecological effects in the Greater Ruaha Ecosystem. There is eminent loss of ecological connectivity
within the ecosystem, as a result of anthropogenic activities (agriculture & livestock keeping) in areas adjacent
to the park, sparking human-wildlife conflicts. Additional challenges include increased poaching in the entire
Ruaha-Rungwa ecosystem, poor visitor access to the park and inadequate visitor accommodation facilities that


                                                Page 5 of 14
TANAPA and RUNAPA Management are striving to address.
In 2008 GoT made a decision to annex the Usangu wetlands which contains the Ihefu swamp and some of its
surrounding catchment areas to RUNAPA as one of the measures to address water resource management and
associated challenges . Results from a simple hydrological model developed for the Ihefu swamp indicated that,
between 1958 and 2004, dry season inflows declined by approximately 60% and the dry season area of the
swamp decreased by approximately 40% (i.e. from 160 km2 to 93 km2). This was considered a sustainable
approach to ensuring conservation of natural resources and restoration of perennial flow of Great Ruaha River
and continued Hydro-power production at Mtera dam throughout the year.
RUNAPA has always been a High value, Low density destination that offers a unique wilderness experience for
visitors.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Jane A. N. Kibbassa, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Kristine Schwebach, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes            The objective of the project is to improve natural
                                                            resources management which is expected to result
                                                            in positive environmental and social benefits.
                                                            However, the EA policy has been triggered as the
                                                            expected investments in works and infrastructure
                                                            will likely result in environmental and social risks
                                                            which will need to be managed. The project is
                                                            envisioned to support investments of infrastructure,
                                                            including: low-volume roads, bridges and
                                                            improvements in airstrips within the priority PAs;
                                                            structures to augment dry season flow inside
                                                            RUNAPA; improvements in existing irrigation
                                                            infrastructure in selected areas; catchment
                                                            conservation activities and community based
                                                            activities. An ESMF has been prepared to provide
                                                            criteria and procedures for identifying, assessing,
                                                            and mitigating potential environmental and social
                                                            impacts of project investments.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  Yes            TThe project will support: watershed management
                                                            activities in the catchment of Great Ruaha River;
                                                            and construction of infrastructure and facilities in
                                                            Ruaha National Park, Mikumi National Park,
                                                            Udzungwa National Park, and Selous Game
                                                            Reserve. Natural habitat issues will be addressed as
                                                            part of the ESIA and the ESMP for specific project
                                                            investments.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                           Yes            Implementation of selected watershed management
                                                            activities may happen in forested areas, or may
                                                            promote the reforestation of some areas or planting
                                                            of woodlots as catchment protection measures for
                                                            erosion control. The ESIA and ESMP will provide
                                                            the analysis of potential impacts and define

                                              Page 6 of 14
                                                     mitigation measures to address any such adverse
                                                     impacts.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         The project is not expected to involve the purchase
                                                     nor the use of significant quantities of pesticides.
                                                     However, Component 3 includes activities to
                                                     improve the efficiency of agricultural practices and
                                                     water conservation in the Great Ruaha catchment,
                                                     and will include support through farmer's field
                                                     schools. In this regard, the project might involve or
                                                     inadvertently promote the use of pesticides during
                                                     the implementation of those activities. Therefore,
                                                     the policy is being triggered as a precaution, and
                                                     specific instructions will be included as part of the
                                                     ESMF to promote best practices in case of pesticide
                                                     use or handling in the project area.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         The project is not expected to affect or impact any
                                                     physical or cultural resource, or be conducted in the
                                                     vicinity of them. However, there will be some
                                                     infrastructure works, and therefore, as a precaution,
                                                     investigations, rescue, and chance finds Procedures
                                                     Plan will be required in cases when the Policy is
                                                     triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          There are no groups in the project area that meet the
                                                     criteria of OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes         Project activities related to construction are
                                                     expected to occur mainly within priority Protected
                                                     Areas’ boundaries, and therefore are unlikely to
                                                     trigger the Involuntary Resettlement Policy. If,
                                                     however, land acquisition is needed, the project will
                                                     follow the provisions set out in the Resettlement
                                                     Policy Framework (RPF) in the preparation of a
                                                     Resettlement Action Plan which will be
                                                     implemented prior to project activities impacting
                                                     the identified assets.
                                                     The project is not designed to enforce existing
                                                     boundaries or introduce new restriction of access to
                                                     the PAs. However, through the construction of
                                                     infrastructure such as additional ranger posts and
                                                     roads, and provision of equipment, the PA
                                                     authorities will have better ability to detect illegal
                                                     uses of resources (illegal tree logging, waste
                                                     dumping, illegal farming or grazing, etc). For this
                                                     reason, a Process Framework (PF) has been
                                                     prepared, and will be applied as a precautionary
                                                     measure to the extent surveillance activities would
                                                     marginally contribute to increasing existing
                                                     restrictions of access, with a focus on communities
                                                     where illegal activities (in particular poaching) are
                                                     prevalent, which are the ones most likely to be

                                          Page 7 of 14
                                                                  affected
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             The policy is not applicable in the project area. The
                                                                  irrigation schemes that will be improved through
                                                                  the project in the Usangu flats do not depend on any
                                                                  existing dam or dam under construction.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The policy is not applicable in the project area.
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             The policy is not applicable in the project area.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is not expected to have any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact. It has been designed
    with the double objective of improving environmental management of Protected Areas and improving access to
    sustainable livelihoods of communities around those Protected Areas. If successful, the project will facilitate the
    Tanzania National Parks Authority (TANAPA) and the Tanzania Wildlife Authority (TAWA) in their efforts to
    curve poaching and illegal extraction of PA resources, improve their ability to manage the extensive territory
    covered by those PAs, and increase the revenue collected by the increased tourism activity in order to properly
    cover the expenses incurred for said environmental management. The project is not anticipated to implement
    any type of complex infrastructure (the most complex will be one or two bridges across rivers, in points where
    bridges existed and collapsed due to poor design/maintenance). Temporary impacts, however, are expected,
    especially during construction. These impacts are well-known, and can be mitigated with appropriate measures.

    Some of the positive impacts that REGROW is expected to have include improved connectivity and
    accessibility of PAs, increased direct and indirect employment and business opportunities in priority villages
    and in tourism development inside the PAs, community education and awareness for the reduction of human-
    wildlife conflict, improved water use efficiency and improved crop yields.
    Some of the anticipated negative impacts from REGROW are expected to happen mostly during the construction
    phase, and include: noise pollution from operation of construction machinery; visual natural landscape
    interference from non-natural landscape developments such as accommodation facilities or workshops; pollution
    of land and water sources from mismanagement of solid waste resulting in an increase of rodents, flies,
    scavengers; soil contamination from mishandling of fuels at workshops; land destabilization and soil
    degradation (in form of erosion, compaction, sealing and/or waterlogging) from construction works (road
    grading, vegetation clearance and cut-and-fill); inadequate disposal of waste generated during construction,
    leading to habitat damage, land and water pollution, and visual impacts; occupational health, security and safety
    hazards to public and construction workers; fires leading to damaged property or injury (natural and manmade
    bush fires); ambient air pollution from operation of construction machinery; and disturbance of local
    community's social dynamics due to migrant work force.
    Most of the above negative impacts are well-known, and they can be minimized with appropriate mitigation
    measures, which are generically described in the ESMF that was prepared. Specific ESIAs and ESMPs, which
    will be prepared for sub-projects, will describe any additional mitigation measures needed.

    The four priority PAs, and their specific regulations on allowed and non-allowed activities, have been in place
    for many years - in some cases, for several decades. The REGROW project is not designed to enforce existing
    boundaries or introduce new restriction of access to the PAs. However, through the construction of infrastructure
    such as additional ranger posts and roads, and provision of equipment, the PA authorities will have better ability
    to detect illegal uses of resources (illegal tree logging, waste dumping, illegal farming or grazing, etc). For this

                                                     Page 8 of 14
reason, a Process Framework (PF) has been prepared, and will, in part, be applied as a precautionary measure to
the extent surveillance activities would marginally contribute to increasing existing restrictions of access, with a
focus on communities where illegal activities (in particular poaching) are prevalent, which are the ones most
likely to be affected. The PF details the participatory process by which stakeholders are involved and receive
benefits from the project. The framework identifies measures to be used in an effort to improve livelihoods of
priority villages living near the priority PAs while also maintaining the sustainability of the PAs. The PF also
identifies arrangements for implementing and monitoring the process by which priority villages benefit.

Component 3 will be working with farmers to improve agricultural output with improved water management. It
is expected that improved management will increase livelihood and standard of living through increased yields
and better use of water resources.

Component 1 of the project will support infrastructure investments inside the four priority PAs. These
investments vary, from resurfacing of low volume roads, to the upgrading of existing airstrips, to construction of
new airstrips, ranger posts and walking trails. Most of the infrastructure will be implemented in already-existing
trails, and none will consist of tarmac (National Parks and Game Reserves have both strict regulations on the
type of infrastructure that is allowed). All infrastructure will be preceded by a detailed ESIA, and contractors
will be required to follow the highest standards of environmental performance through cautiously-designed and
properly-costed ESMPs.

Through Component 3, the project will implement small-scale activities in the vicinity of the Great Ruaha River,
in order to mitigate the effects of upstream unregulated water extraction for agriculture, currently causing the
drop of river flow to zero for several months. The zero-flow days have significant impacts on wildlife, causing
stress in hyppo pools and widespread lack of water availability for drinking purposes. The Component will
tackle this issue by implementing emergency measures such as small (less than a meter) weirs to capture water
during wet season and maintain in during dry season, troughs, or sub-surface dams. All these investments will
be fully identified during project preparation, and detailed ESIAs will be carried out before commencement of
work.

Regarding infrastructure activities inside the priority PAs, each PA has a General Management Plan (GMP) in
place, which, through a comprehensive approach, guides the day-to-day management of the areas in view of
ecosystem and tourism management, park operations, and community outreach. The tourism strategies under the
GMPs aim at enhancing visitor access and use, while at the same time minimizing disturbance to key habitats
and wildlife populations. Ongoing tourist activities are, for example, regulated based on high, low, and
wilderness zones, to minimize negative impacts, and environmental impacts of tourism facilities are monitored
and regulated. For new tourism products, the GMP provides clear measures to mitigate any negative impacts.
The REGROW design follows the recommendations of the GMPs, which through the above described measures,
regulate and mitigate cumulative, indirect, and induced impacts from increased tourist arrivals and infrastructure
interventions. In addition, environmental assessments for the project will not be carried out for individual,
isolated pieces of infrastructure, but rather on infrastructure systems (for example, the road network inside each
PA). As such, the impact assessment will be able to provide insights on the consequences of the entire
investment.

Also through Component 3, selected existing irrigation schemes will be supported with infrastructure. The scope
of this is to improve the management of water inside paddy fields, so that farmers can regulate the amount that
enters and leaves the field. All these measures will be implemented in existing schemes, and are expected to
have positive impacts through improved water availability.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:


                                                 Page 9 of 14
The project is expected to have an overall positive impact in the short, medium and long terms. Some of these
expected positive impacts include: increased water availability in the Ruaha National Park during dry season,
allowing wildlife to survive; increased ability of TANAPA and TAWA to access remote areas of their territory,
and a likely reduction of illegal wildlife poaching; increased ability of the PAs to attract low volume, high value
tourism, with expected increases in revenue that in turn ensure long-term sustainability of the PA system; and
benefits for improved access to alternative livelihood activities of priority villages around PAs, with consequent
benefits to their economies and reduction of pressures to the PAs.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Project interventions will consider use of the most appropriate green technologies and approaches in the
implementation of the components. All activities implemented inside the four priority PAs will adhere to strict
codes and regulations, by TANAPA and TAWA, and to international standards. They will comply and
implement part of the General Management Plans of the areas.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As a result of a marginal increase in the restriction of access to the already existing priority PAs, a Process
Framework has been prepared to identify ways in which impacted communities can benefit from project
activities. Although the project does not expect toacquire land, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been
prepared. If, in the unlikely event, the project requires land acquisition, a Resettlement Action Plan will be
prepared, reviewed by World Bank, and implemented prior to acquiring land. Throughout the life of REGROW
project, the GoT has agreed that, for any action taken outside of the REGROW project but within the area of the
priority PAs in which REGROW will be working, which would result in economic or physical displacement
under OP4.12, GoT would voluntarily follow the Resettlement Policy Framework guidelines and standards. The
Ministry will assign a social specialist to assist in oversight of social issues throughout the project area. This will
include ensuring close consultations with stakeholders and ensuring a maximizing of benefits.
The borrower has also prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework. The ESMF was
prepared in close consultation with a wide variety of stakeholders, and provides clear guidance on how each
specific project investment needs to be prepared for adequate safeguards implementation. Most of the
anticipated negative impacts will take place during construction, and the borrower has committed to selecting
contractors with highest levels of environmental performance, through international bidding processes.
Environmental and social assessments in Tanzania are at present guided by the Environmental Management Act
of 2004 (EMA), which mandates the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) to ensure
compliance with laid down environmental and social impact assessment procedures in planning and execution of
development projects.
The borrower, through MNRT, TANAPA and TAWA, have significant experience in undertaking
environmental and social assessments, implementing mitigation measures and maintaining infrastructure inside
their PAs, and this experience is expected to be made available for project implementation. MNRT, TANAPA
and TAWA have significant experience with community engagement and development, which is usually
channeled through two main mechanisms: the Wildlife Management Areas (WMA), administered by MNRT,
and the Support for Community Initiated Project (SCIP), led by TANAPA. Since TAWA is a recently-created
institution, they lack a formal community outreach programme, but one is being prepared, and is expected to
have similar objectives to those implemented by TANAPA under the SCIP. The current and ongoing outreach
programmes have the purpose to create links with the local communities in conservation of wildlife, and share
benefits accrued from wildlife with the communities. The SCIP mechanism supports community needs, and is
sustained by mandatory contributions of 7.5% of revenue from each PA. In addition, each priority PA has
several community officers, tasked with community relations and implementation of community development
projects.
Protected Area ecologists, engineers, foresters, community outreach, and tourism specialists will all participate
in project implementation and supervision, and are expected to contribute to environmental and social
management of project impacts.

                                                 Page 10 of 14
The borrower, through the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, will appoint an overall environmental
and social safeguards coordinator, who will facilitate dialogue with the World Bank team, and ensure adequate
implementation of safeguards throughout all components and activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders for the REGROW project can be grouped into government, communities, private sector, civil
society organizations and development partners.
- Government. A number of ministries and government agencies are key stakeholders of REGROW, including:
MNRT (Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism); TANAPA (Tanzania National Parks Authority); TAWA
(Tanzania Wildlife Authority); TAWIRI (Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute); TTB (Tanzania Tourism
Board); TFS (Tanzania Forest Service Agency); MoWI (Ministry of Water and Irrigation); NIRC (National
Irrigation Commission); RBWB (Rufiji Basin Water Board); MALF (Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
Fisheries); PO-RALG (President's Office Regional Administration and Local Government). All these
institutions have important roles to play in the project. They have all been proactively engaged during the
preparation phase, and they all have clear mandates, responsibilities and specific skills to fulfill the tasks.
- Communities. It is estimated that the total population living around the boundaries of the priority PAs is
around 405,000 inhabitants (based on the 2012 National Census). During project preparation, comprehensive
surveys and assessments were conducted on all villages adjacent to the priority PAs. All villages were
characterized, through the identification of specific challenges (occurrence of human-wildlife conflict, poaching
and/or encroachment levels) and opportunities (potential to supply goods and services to the tourism industry,
accessibility, existence of WMAs). This exercise will result in the prioritization of a significant number of
villages (estimated to include around 25,000 households) for direct engagement through the project. Social
assessments of communities, and direct consultation with them, were carried out during the preparation of the
ESMF the PF and RPF.
- Private sector. The four PAs house a number of privately-owned lodges and safari companies. These
companies are all represented through an apex body, the Tourism Confederation of Tanzania. The Chief
Executive Secretary of the TCT is a member of the project preparation team, and private sector is regularly
invited to meetings, inception workshops and consultation events.
- Civil society organizations. The priority PAs selected by the project are renowned natural habitats, which have
attracted the attention and support from a number of national and international NGOs. Some of the most relevant
include WWF, IUCN, PAMS Foundation, Ruaha Carnivore Project, Frankfurt Zoological Society, Africa
Wildlife Foundation, and many others. Most of these organizations have similar goals to those of the project,
and some are partnering or are expected to partner with the project.
- Development partners include other bilateral and multilateral institutions, some of which (like USAID,
GIZ/KFW, UNDP, UNEP or DFID) have similar objectives and projects as REGROW in the area. These
institutions are regularly consulted through the Development Partners Group on Environment (DPG-E), of
which the World Bank is co-chair together with UNDP. Furthermore, DPG-E’s working group on wildlife is co-
chaired by the Bank and USAID.

Various consultations have been undertaken during preparation of safeguards documents. Finalized documents
will be disclosed in the WB InfoShop and in-country at the national, district and local government levels that
overlap with project protected areas. All impacted communities, especially with regards to Component 2, will be
provided with the safeguard documents (through Village Committees and District Councils) which will also
include an explanation of each document. A Stakeholder Consultation and Disclosure Plan has been prepared for
the project to enhance stakeholder engagement in planning and implementation of REGROW project activities.
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

                                               Page 11 of 14
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           04-Aug-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        04-Aug-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Tanzania                                                                   04-Aug-2017
    Comments: The ESMF, and the Stakeholder Consultation and Disclosure Plan, were disclosed in-country at the
    web pages of MNRT and TFS (Tanzania Forestry Service). In addition, the documents were sent to project
    parnters TANAPA, TAWA, RBWB, TAWIRI, TTB, and several of them are uploading in their web-pages.
    Documents will also be made available at the district and local government levels that overlap with project
    protected areas.

 http://www.mnrt.go.tz
 http://www.tfs.go.tz
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       04-Aug-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Aug-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Tanzania                                                                     04-Aug-2017
 Comments: Two documents were prepared and disclosed in-country and to InfoShop: A Resettlement Policy
Framework, and a Process Framework. Both documents were received on August 4, disclosed in-country on
August 4, and submitted to InfoShop on August 4.
The documents were disclosed at the web pages of MNRT and TFS (Tanzania Forestry Service). In addition,
document was sent to project parnters TANAPA, TAWA, RBWB, TAWIRI, TTB, and several of them are
uploading in their web-pages. Documents will also be made available at the district and local government levels
that overlap with project protected areas.

http://www.mnrt.go.tz
http://www.tfs.go.tz
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X]             No []        NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [X]             No []        NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes [X]             No []        NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?


                                                 Page 12 of 14
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          degradation of critical natural habitats?
          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




          OP 4.09 - Pest Management
          Does the EA adequately address the pest management               Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          issues?
          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
          included in project design?If yes, does the project team
          include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No [X]   TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes []    No []    TBD   [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          issues and constraints been carried out?
          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          overcome these constraints?
          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,       Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [X]   No []    NA    []

                                                         Page 13 of 14
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Daniel Mira-Salama
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)     Date: 05-Aug-2017
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)            Date: 07-Aug-2017




                                             Page 14 of 14
