                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC12673

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Vietnam                           Project ID:      P152851
                            Project Name:       Can Tho Urban Development and Resilience (P152851)
                            Task Team           Marc S. Forni,Hoa Thi Hoang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           26-Oct-2015                       Estimated        24-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSU08                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Sub-national government administration (10%), Information technology (5%),
                                                Urban Transport (30%), Sanitation (10%), Flood protection (45%)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (15%), Municipal governance and institution building (20%),
                                                Other urban development (25%), Natural disaster managemen t (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    310.00                       Total Bank Financing:         250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               60.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     250.00
                              Total                                                                           310.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project objective is to reduce flood risk and increase access to urban services in project areas of
                           Can Tho City.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project is part of the World Bank’s long-term engagement on the topics of urban
                         development, disaster risk management, and climate change in Can Tho over the last decade through
                         lending operations such as the Vietnam Urban Upgrading Program (VUUP1) (approved in 2004 with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         additional financing in 2009; US$ 50.7 million for Can Tho) and its successor the Mekong Delta
                         Region Urban Upgrading Project (VUUP2) (approved 2012; US$ 69.9 million for Can Tho) as well
                         as numerous studies and technical assistance initiatives. The project leverages capacity building
                         activities within areas of resilience planning (Local Resilience Action Plan, 2013), climate adaptation
                         (TA for Can Tho City Steering Committee on Climate Change, 2009) and natural disaster
                         management with focus on flooding (Integrated Flood Risk Management Plan for Can Tho, 2013).
                         To date, this bundle of activities has succeeded in constructing or rehabilitating over 50km of
                         primary, secondary, and tertiary drainage, dredged and upgraded over 8 km of canals, extended water
                         supply to 13,500 households, provided sewer connections to 84,000 households, and connected 7,000
                         households to the power grid. When completed in 2017, the two urban upgrading operations will
                         have addressed most of the large low-income areas (LIA) in the urban core.

                         While previous urban investments have focused exclusively on urban upgrading, the current project
                         will support resilient urban development by proactively guiding urban growth to low risk areas near
                         the heart of the city while improving connectivity in the city center, sanitation and the living and
                         working environment. Integrated flood risk management and compact urban development require a
                         balance of structural and non-structural interventions. Therefore, the proposed project is comprised
                         of two structural components (1 and 2) and an institutional strengthening component (3) which is
                         designed to support the implementation and operation of the structural components.

                         Any intervention made in Can Tho could impact other provinces and vice versa. Therefore, the flood
                         intervention approach for Can Tho must be in line with the Delta-wide approach. Given the potential
                         of specific investments in the Mekong to negatively impact other provinces, there are several flood
                         risk management plans that have been, or are being, developed for the Mekong Delta Region and
                         Can Tho City. Each of the Mekong Delta plans (MARD-developed Master Plan for Mekong Delta
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Irrigation and Flood Control (PM’s Decision 1397 dated Sep. 25, 2012), and Dutch-supported
                         Mekong Delta Plan (under the preparation)) converge on the priority to protect the developed urban
                         areas/cities in the Mekong Delta, including Can Tho, through a set of flood protection structures and
                         tidal gates. In addition, the flood risk management plans for Can Tho City (Master Plan for City’s
                         Irrigation and Flood Control (MARD’s decision 1721/QĐ-BNN-TCTL dated July 20, 2012), and
                         Comprehensive Resilience Planning for Integrated Flood Risk Management for Can Tho City
                         (supported by World Bank/GFDRR, 2013)) prioritizes protecting the core urban area of the city as a
                         necessary immediate action. This prioritization takes into consideration the importance of the urban
                         core to the economic growth and development of the City and the entire Mekong Delta Region.

                         A combination of “low-regret” engineering solutions, including surrounding embankment, tidal
                         gates/valves and improvement in the drainage system is the most appropriate and necessary solution
                         to address the flooding challenges in the urban core. (The “low-regret” solutions would maximize the
                         effectiveness of the urban flood and drainage system operation with low cost, while minimizing
                         negative impacts on flooding and environment to the adjacent areas. Moreover, it would also be built
                         to address the future uncertainties caused by climate change, land subsidence and fast urbanization
                         progress.) However, none of these interventions alone is sufficient to reduce the flood risk in the
                         City. It is necessary to complement the engineering interventions with sustainable non-structural
                         measures, including green structures, water retention areas, institutional capacity strengthening,
                         multi-stakeholder coordination, flood response standard operating procedures, and early warning
                         systems.

                         There are extensive needs and limited financial capacity to engage in the complex challenge of flood
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risk in the Mekong. Therefore, it was agreed by both the national entities and city authorities that a
                         phased approach to integrated flood risk management should be considered, with each phase having
                         clear targets for institutional development and infrastructure investments.


                         Component 1: Flood risk management, and environmental sanitation (Bank financing: US$130
                         million)

                         The objective of this component is to reduce flood and drought risk in the urban core of Can Tho.
                         This component would support the city in implementing structural measures for flood protection,
                         drainage and sanitation included in the Mekong Flood Control Plan, Can Tho Flood Control Master
                         Plan, and Drainage System Master Plan. A combination of “low-regret” engineering solution,
                         including surrounding embankment, tidal gates/valves and improvement in the drainage system is the
                         most appropriate and necessary solution to address the flooding challenges in the urban core.

                         Preliminary hydraulic model results have benefitted from extensive consultation with both policy
                         makers and urban flood risk management experts of the City and line ministries. The consensus was
                         confirmed that polder approach, including a set of flood protection structures and tidal prevention
                         gates, would be the most appropriate engineering solution as a short term solution to protect the core
                         urban area of the city. See Annex 1 for more information - Option 4 and 5 seems preferable because
                         of the reduction in population and assets exposed to the flood hazard, the complexity level of
                         operation and maintenance, the size of resettlement and relocation, and the financing constraints.
                         More importantly, those options would enable better flexibility in adapting to the future uncertainties
                         caused by climate change, rapid urbanization and land subsidence. Once the investment approach is
                         confirmed, an in-depth analysis, including detailed hydraulic modelling, as well as cost-benefit and
                         multi-criteria analyses is required to further analyze Options 4 and 5.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 1.1: Priority Flood Control Investments in Urban Core (Ninh Kieu and Binh Thuy
                         districts). A limited polder approach with combined-use road, allows for a flexible and cost effective
                         approach. The Hoang Na road, under Component 2, runs across the city, and aims to increase the
                         connectivity from the urban core in the east to the under-developed university area in the west. This
                         road system can function as a flood protection structure to prevent the overflow from Binh Thuy and
                         Cai Khe canals. As a result, the core urban area is completely protected from flooding, while the
                         impact of higher water levels outside the protected area is reduced. The design of the level of flood
                         protection, especially for the combined function Hoang Na road, needs to be considered. In addition,
                         two tidal sluice gates in Binh Thuy river and Cai Khe canal would better manage the water level in
                         both of Binh Thuy river and Cai Khe canal. As a result, the safety level of the combined flood
                         prevention – road function Hoang Na road would be smaller than the safety level of Hau and Can
                         Tho embankment systems.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Drainage and Waste Water Systems: Many parts of the existing sewer system in
                         the urban core is very old (over 40 years), and the capacity of the system has substantially reduced
                         over time. Moreover, the City faces challenges due to tidal intrusion in its canal network. In addition,
                         the City still faces serious issues with disposal of solid waste and industrial waste in its canal
                         network. The current proposed strategy for improvement of the drainage system is consistent with
                         the existing city Drainage Master Plan; however, the proposal is somewhat fragmented, and there is a
                         concern that the proposal will not realize the flood protection impacts the City desires. Therefore,
                         further analysis will be required to better identify the appropriate drainage investments to improve
                         drainage and increase environmental sanitation. The City is encouraged to further develop the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hydraulic model in order to identify the highest impact investments, and the team stands ready to
                         support this effort.

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Non-structural measures: It is necessary to complement the engineering
                         interventions with sustainable non-structural measures, including green structures, water retention
                         areas, institutional capacity strengthening, multi-stakeholder coordination, flood response standard
                         operating procedures, and early warning systems.


                         Component 2: Urban corridor development (Bank financing: US$110 million)

                         The objective of the transport investments are to increase regional connectivity and encourage new
                         urban development in the less flood prone area of Cai Rang, which will be dense and walkable. This
                         component will support the city in implementing priority transportation investments identified in the
                         city’s Transport Master Plan (2013) and approved SEDP (2013). Three road links will be financed,
                         including: i) the Quang Trung bridge crossing the Can Tho River; ii) the Tran Hoang Na Road,
                         including NH1 side roads from Tran Hoang Na to IC3 intersection ; and iii) the Cach Mang Thang
                         Tam to PR 918/Bui Huu Nghia road. The last of these road links will serve the dual purpose of
                         providing flood protection for the urban core.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Quang Trung bridge crossing from Ninh Kieu to Cai Rang: The rationale for
                         enhancing this urban corridor is to promote a strong link between the existing urban core and the Cai
                         Rang district, which is planned to be the biggest growth area between now and 2030 (growth from
                         current 80,000 population to 400,000). The project would support a doubling of the capacity of the
                         bridge (proposed bridge is a second unit of a twin bridge, of which the first unit of 11m width was
                         built in year 2005) and capacity to plan for higher density, inclusive development in Cai Rang (under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component 3). On the northern end of the corridor, the existing area in Ninh Kieu has a density of
                         25,000 – 35,000 people/km2. On the southern end, the corridor meets with National Road 1 (NH1) to
                         HCMC. The proposed bridge would be about 870m in length including the 480m of bridge and 390m
                         approaching road section. There is a bottle neck because the road has a width of 40m on one side and
                         56m on the other side that would need to be addressed. The bridge width would be 11m, consistent
                         with the existing bridge.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Tran Hoang Na road and bridge: The rationale for this link is to provide
                         connectivity from the new city bus terminal to the city center and is expected to share traffic with
                         other roads like Quang Trung bridge, NH91b. It is also expected to relieve the traffic jam that occurs
                         during flood episodes. Finally, the road would also help to reduce traffic at the IC3 intersection
                         where two existing bridges (Quang Trung and Hung Loi) are now joining to this intersection. This
                         corridor would connect the city center starting from Nguyen Van Cu, crossing 3/2 road, 30/4 road
                         and end at National Highway 1 near an inter-provincial bus terminal of about 10.3ha, which is under
                         construction. The proposed road would be 3.5 km long including a bridge of about 594m long
                         crossing the Can Tho river. Side roads along NH1A will facilitate the connection of Tran Hoang Na
                         road to bus terminal and to NH1A. The solutions for ensuring not only smooth traffic but also road
                         safety will be carefully studied and confirmed. The feasibility study and design will be financed by
                         city budget and is expected to be commenced by mid of June, 2015.
                         Sub-Component 2.3: Cach Mang Thang Tam- Nguyen Van Link link: The rationale for the proposed
                         road is to provide access to a planned university complex, sport center, new resettlement areas, and
                         LIA areas along the road to commercial areas of the city. In addition, it is expected to serve as a ring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road section to help the connection with other provinces like Hau Giang, Soc Trang, Bac Lieu, Ca
                         Mau, and HCMC so that traffic, especially freight traffic, can bypass the city without going through
                         the city center. The proposed 5.3 km road will start at Cach Mang Thang Tam road, crossing Vo Van
                         Kiet road, NH91B/Nguyen Van Linh and end at provincial road 918/Bui Huu Nghia road. This road
                         link would be dual purpose and serve as a key portion of the flood risk management investments to
                         protect the urban core. The width of the road is proposed to be 40m, pending the finalization of the
                         design.


                         Component 3: Infrastructure systems to improve spatial planning, flood risk management and
                         transport (Bank financing: US$10 million):

                         The objective of this component is to build management systems to improve spatial planning and
                         flood risk management, while also supporting the development of a transport management system.
                         This component would finance systems to improve management capacity of the city.

                         Sub-Component 3.1: Planning and operation of the city integrated flood risk management system.
                         Currently, there is significant fragmentation and overlap in managing and operating the flood risk
                         management system among the key authorities. This lack of clarity makes it challenging to
                         effectively plan, implement, and operate the flood risk management system in Can Tho. Flood risk
                         management systems will help the city develop: i) improved protocols in operating the city flood
                         control and drainage systems in case of emergency (high tide, river flood discharge, etc.); ii) clearer
                         responsibilities of the key agencies, including DARD, DoC and Water Drainage and Supply
                         Company, in managing and operating the city flood control and drainage systems; iii) an Operations
                         & Maintenance (O&M) funding framework for the systems; and iv) a coordination protocol between
                         the City and other Mekong provinces for integrated river basin management, and to share
Public Disclosure Copy




                         information and enhance flood early warning.

                         Sub-Component 3.2: City-Level Geospatial systems for urban development and flood risk
                         management. To provide support for the effective operation of the flood risk management protocols
                         and decisions, a City-Level Flood Risk Information Management System would need to be
                         established in the city. Currently, most information in the City is paper-based. Instead of creating a
                         new information system, the project will support the development of a common IT protocol and
                         platform (e.g. acquisition of hardware, software, equipment and surveying services necessary for
                         establishment of the GIS) to ensure all information sources managed by various agencies are
                         synchronized and accessible. The system will include data on public and private assets, technical
                         infrastructure (e.g., drainage/wastewater networks, flood control system, water utility infrastructure,
                         electricity supply lines, etc.), transportation and groundwater monitoring data as well as facilitate the
                         overlay of flood risk data. Support to IT skills development will be provided to all City agencies to
                         ensure the regular update and maintenance of information are put into place. This activity will
                         coordinate closely with the other World Bank-funded Mekong Adaptation Program, which is under
                         the preparation.

                         Sub-Component 3.3: Information system for planning and operational decisions: Two separate
                         monitoring networks will be established for canal water quality and land subsidence management
                         respectively. Support will also be provided to establish a risk sensitive spatial planning system,
                           including data collection, flood modelling, detailed flood hazard mapping, exposure data analysis,
                           and risk mapping. This platform will also be able to support post-flooding damage and loss
                           assessments. An information system for emergency response and early warning will help the city
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improve the operation of flood control and drainage systems. To ensure effectiveness and
                           sustainability, the involvement of community and local stakeholders will be central, particularly in
                           order to improve “last mile” early warning efficacy. The processed information would be accessible
                           by relevant agencies and the public to provide support to emergency and public early warning
                           operations. In addition, the system would be used as a media channel to raise public awareness on
                           flood risk and solid waste management.

                           Sub-Component 3.4: Transport systems management and feasibility: A study on establishment of
                           Public Transport Authority; and ii) preparation of a pilot bus rapid transit (BRT) corridor for the city.
                           This activity is a good opportunity for the city to utilize the concept of transit oriented development
                           (TOD) and pedestrian oriented design (POD) guiding land use planning and development along
                           integrated transport corridors. The proposed Quang Trung bridge could create an excellent candidate
                           for a mass transit corridor along Vo Van Kiet – Quang Trung bridge – Vo Nguyen Giap corridors.
                           The corridor will be about 20km long with good conditions for a BRT corridor as it is connecting the
                           international airport to the existing city core in the north to new development area in Cai Rang in the
                           south of Can Tho river, and it has appropriate physical features (width, median etc.) as required for a
                           BRT route.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in the urban core area of Can Tho city, Vietnam, and in the
                           immediate surroundings of Can Tho City in the case of component 2—urban corridor development.
                           The city of Can Tho is the 4th largest city in the country, with a populationof approximately 1.25
                           million, and an urban annual growth rate of 5.0 percent between 2005- 2012. Moreover, Can Tho is
                           becoming a hub for high-tech agro-industrial production and aquaculture, food processing, and
                           export, thereby becoming a major actor in promoting food security in the Mekong Delta. During the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           rainy season, 30%-50% of the city is flooded from 30-50 cm of water.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Can Tho city has experiences in working with the Bank in general and is familiar with the Bank’s
                           safeguards policies in particular. The PMU staff who worked on Bank-funded projects (VUUP and
                           MDR_UUP), have an understanding the Bank policies and requirements. However, close guidance
                           for the preparation of the relevant project safeguard documentation (e.g., good EIAs, RPs for
                           category A project) as well as oversight on the implementation of EMPs, RPs will be required. An
                           assessment of the Client capacity for safeguards implementation is required during project
                           preparation, and recommendations for training will be made as appropriate. A consultant would be
                           retained to assist in the preparation of safeguards TORs.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hoa Thi Mong Pham (GSURR)
                           Noreen Beg (GENDR)
                           Pierre Arnoux (GSU02)
                           Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment   Yes        OP 4.01 is triggered and the project is classified as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                            category A due to the potential significant
                                                               environmental and social impacts associated with the
                                                               projects investments and activities, specifically under
                                                               Components 1 and 2.

                                                               The project has numerous positive environmental
                                                               and social impacts. It will (under all technical
                                                               scenarios) reduce flooding in Can Tho’s urban core
                                                               and drainage and sanitation works, in addition to
                                                               reducing drain overflows, and improve public health,
                                                               improve the aesthetics of the city. It will also
                                                               enhance the welfare of the Project Affected Persons
                                                               who will be relocated to new sites with improved
                                                               amenities. Nevertheless, there are potential
                                                               significant adverse impacts during the project
                                                               construction and operation phases under component
                                                               1 – key among which will be changes in the
                                                               hydrology and ecological flow of the Can Tho and
                                                               Hau rivers. Thus, the project will be considered a
                                                               Category A project. The Component 2 involves
                                                               priority transport investments, under which about 3
                                                               urban roads and 2 bridges will be financed. These
                                                               potential impacts of these investments are site-
                                                               specific, can be managed by good construction
                                                               practices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               As the project is classified as a Category A, a full
                                                               scale Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                               (ESIA) is required to be prepared by Client. In
                                                               addition to other elements of EA documents, specific
                                                               requirements for category A ESIA would include the
                                                               preparation of an Executive Summary, a cumulative
                                                               or strategic impact assessment, alternatives analysis
                                                               and public consultation process (including at least
                                                               two rounds of public consultations on the ESIA). The
                                                               ESIA will comply with the Bank safeguard policies
                                                               and the Vietnamese regulations. The ESIA will apply
                                                               WBG Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines.
                                                               Social assessment will focus on project impact other
                                                               than involuntary resettlement, especially on the poor
                                                               and vulnerable people who likely suffer more from
                                                               flooding and environmental pollution. A Social
                                                               Management Plan (SMP) will be combined with
                                                               EMP to become ESMP with specific actions to be
                                                               implemented.
                                                             Civil works to expand and enhance existing roads
                                                             and bridges along existing transportation networks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             will necessitate the preparation of a plan to manage
                                                             occupational and commuter safety during the
                                                             construction period (to include appropriate road
                                                             signage and closings, use of Personal Protective
                                                             Equipment by construction workers, securing of
                                                             electricity cables and switchboxes, and netting to
                                                             prevent falling debris). Construction waste
                                                             management plans will also form part of the
                                                             Environmental Management Plans for all civil works
                                                             under the Project.

                                                             Given the existence of unexploded ordnances
                                                             throughout the Mekong Delta, a mine clearance
                                                             program must be undertaken prior to the start of civil
                                                             works, and all workers undertaking dredging must
                                                             operate with appropriate protective measures,
                                                             including sandbagging of cranes, etc. The Borrower
                                                             should also refer to the World Bank Group
                                                             Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines, which,
                                                             as well as sector-specific guidelines, provides
                                                             guidance on best practice occupational and
                                                             community health and safety procedures: Any
                                                             dredged material must be tested for Acid Sulfate
                                                             Soil, and be treated and safely disposed of.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Further, OP 4.01 applies also to component 3
                                                             investments linked to development of protocols for
                                                             operating the city flood control and drainage systems
                                                             in case of emergency; and technical studies on
                                                             transport management for which TOR will include
                                                             requirements to follow applicable safeguard
                                                             provisions.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project interventions under Component 1 include
                                                             strengthening and construction of river
                                                             embankments, construction of tidal sluice gates,
                                                             canal dredging and extension of the sewerage system.

                                                             The project interventions under Component 1 and 2
                                                             include strengthening and construction of river
                                                             embankments, construction of tidal sluice gates,
                                                             canal dredging and extension of the sewage system,
                                                             bridge construction. These project activities would
                                                             impact the ecological flow of the Can Tho and Hau
                                                             rivers, impacting aquatic flora and fauna, (although it
                                                              is worth noting that there is already a high level of
                                                              human intervention due to the urbanized nature of
                                                              the Project Area. Hydrological modeling will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              undertaken to limit seasonal impacts on aquatic
                                                              fauna as far as possible. Changes in the ecological
                                                              flow of the rivers may occur due to the installation of
                                                              sluice gates and other flood/salinity control
                                                              measures; leading to a reduction in the diversity and
                                                              quantity of fish populations. Efforts will be taken to
                                                              limit impacts on aquatic fauna, for example, through
                                                              the placement of fish ladders at the proposed sluice
                                                              gates. Therefore OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats - is
                                                              triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The project is implemented in the urban core and
                                                              will not impact forested areas or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project activities are not expected to use
                                                              pesticides, nor lead to increased usage of pesticides.
                                                              Manual clearing measures will be employed for civil
                                                              works.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   Preliminary site screening has not identified any
                         OP/BP 4.11                           PCRs in the project location that could be potentially
                                                              affected by the project.
                                                              However, the presence of any cultural, historic, or
                                                              religious monuments, or graves will be assessed
                                                              during project preparation as part of EA project.

                                                              The policy is triggered as the project includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              dredging and excavation activities under
                                                              Components 1 and 2, which may result in chance
                                                              finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    Screening on ethnic minorities was done by the PMU
                         4.10                                 and Bank social specialist, based on statistical data
                                                              and actual situation of the city. Ethnic minorities are
                                                              concentrated in areas that are not covered by the
                                                              proposed project. There are some ethnic minorities
                                                              scattered in the project area together with the Kinh
                                                              people, but they do not form a community. Therefore
                                                              OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People would not be
                                                              triggered for this project. The final screening results
                                                              will be incorporated in the ESIA report.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   According to the list of the proposed investments of
                         BP 4.12                              the project component 1 and 2, land acquisition
                                                              would cause about 3,300 households to be affected,
                                                              1,400 of which would need to be relocated. Impacts
                                                              on livelihoods are also anticipated due to the
                                                              important scope of relocation. Therefore, OP/BP
                                                                                                                        4.12 will be triggered for this project. A Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework will be prepared to comply with
                                                                                                                        the Bank OP4.12 to serve as a legal basis for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        compensation and resettlement activities of the
                                                                                                                        project (as required by the Land Law). As all the
                                                                                                                        project activities will be known during project
                                                                                                                        preparation, a Resettlement Plan (RP) will be
                                                                                                                        developed before the project appraisal to be in line
                                                                                                                        with the prepared RPF. The RP will have to be
                                                                                                                        updated if there will be substantial changes in the
                                                                                                                        project design and/or in the scope of the project
                                                                                                                        impact during project implementation.

                                                                                                                        Preliminary screening of linked activities showed
                                                                                                                        that there are three linked projects, two of which
                                                                                                                        were reviewed (in 2011-2012) during preparation of
                                                                                                                        the Bank-funded Mekong Delta Region Urban
                                                                                                                        Upgrading project (MDR-UUP) and the due
                                                                                                                        diligence review results had showed that there were
                                                                                                                        no outstanding issues and no further actions were
                                                                                                                        required. The third one is MDR-UUP itself, all land
                                                                                                                        acquisition activities of which have followed the
                                                                                                                        agreed RPF and RP of the project, so no further
                                                                                                                        action would be needed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance the construction/
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams nor will the project rely on
                                                                                                                        any existing dams. The project will only involve the
                                                                                                                        construction of new embankment and rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        of existing embankment. As a result, the policy is not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        The project triggers OP 7.50 as the interventions in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   Component 1 will impact the hydrological conditions
                                                                                                                        of Hau and Can Tho rivers, which are tributaries of
                                                                                                                        the Mekong River, an international waterway. As
                                                                                                                        such, other riparian states (Cambodia, Laos, and
                                                                                                                        Thailand) will be notified or a waiver of notification
                                                                                                                        will be sought from Bank management.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not implemented in disputed area.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             a.    ESIA TOR will be cleared by May 2015
                             b.    RPF for the whole project will be developed by June, 2015
                             c.    RP for the proposed project will be ready before project appraisal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             d.    Minimum two public consultations on the project social and environmental safeguard
                             documents will take place before appraisal.
                             e.    ESIA acceptable for the Bank will be ready by project appraisal.

                             The Environment and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared and made publicly available by
                             the end of October, 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marc S. Forni,Hoa Thi Hoang
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                              Date: 07-Jul-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                         Date: 07-Jul-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
