INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15389
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uzbekistan                 Project ID:  P151746
Project Name: Modernization of Real Property Registration and Cadastre (P151746)
Task Team       Mika-Petteri Torhonen,Anna Corsi
Leader(s):
Estimated       12-Oct-2015                Estimated    18-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSULN                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), Law and justice (15%),
Public administration- Information and communications (25%), Information
technology (50%)
Theme(s):       Land administration and management (40%), Personal and property rights
(20%), e-Government (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     25.00             Total Bank Financing:   20.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                20.00
Total                                                                      25.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project's Development Objective is to improve the efficiency and accessibility of the real
property registry and cadastre system as part of the national e-Government structure and services.
Page 1 of 6


﻿This objective will be achieved through: (i) improving business processes and customer orientation
in the real property registry and cadastre; (ii) creating a fully digital real property registry and
cadastre system (i.e. IISRPRC) accessible online to the public; (iii) improving the regulatory and
policy environment of the real property registry and cadastercadastre; (iv) facilitating spatial data
O
U         access, exchange and sharing at national level; and (v) raising awareness on the importance of real
property rights.
O
3. Project Description
a        The proposed project would focus on establishing an electronic and unified real property register and
cadastre in GKZGDK and enhance its operations through improved regulatory and operational
framework and capacities, and expanding spatial data exchange and dissemination. The proposed
project would have four main components:
*      Component A - Real Property Registration and Cadastre System Development;
*      Component B - Digitization of Real Property and Cadastre Records and Maps;
*      Component C - Use of Real Property Register and Cadastre Data; and
*      Component D - Regulatory Development, Institutional Development, Capacity Building,
Technical Assistance and Project Management.
Component A - Real Property Registration and Cadastre System Development (IDA 12.5 million
USD)
The objective of this component would be to develop and roll-out the new Integrated Information
System for Real Property Registration and Cadastre (IISRPRC), including the development of
IISRPRC's infrastructure and the revision and improvement of the operational environment,
procedures, service standards and applications. Initially, the component will support a business
process and performance standard review and identify the changes needed to improve GKZGDK's
real property registration and cadastre maintenance functions. Based on the results of this review, the
component will support the development of a modern Web-based real property registry and cadastre
application with improved performance and functionalities, one-stop-shop client interface, and
integrated map solutions. This new IISRPRC application will be rolled out in GKZGDK's Oblast
offices (as the system's production offices) and one stop shops front-end desks (integrated to the
eGovemment structure) supported by appropriate hardware and communications infrastructure. The
component will further finance the renovation of the GKZGDK's main data processing center's
premises and provide the needed engineering systems equipment according to the industrial design
specifications. Finally, the component will improve GKZGDK's Oblast production offices general
working conditions through office design and renovations and provision of furniture and equipment.
Component B - Digitization of Real Property and Cadastre Records and Maps, (IDA 8.2 million
USD)
This component will support the provision of the digital attribute and spatial data that will enable the
IISRPRC operationalization by: mass digitizing of the essential registration and cadastre documents,
prioritizing current versus archive records; compiling uniform countrywide digital datasets for
basemap, registered tenure rights with cadastre index map, and land-use cadastre for land and real
property valuation; and harmonizing these datasets and populating the IISRPRC unified central
database. Most of the current and archive records are paper-based. Given the classified nature of the
information, the mass digitization and digital data processing will have to be carried out in-house by
staff and local consultants with clearance to work with classified information. The component will
support building up the in-house GKZGDK capacity to plan, manage, monitor the implementation,
Page 2 of 6


﻿assure the quality, and carry out the data development campaign; a mass digitizing technology,
including the design of a transitional data model, work processes and tools, quality control, and
transitional storage and updating procedures prior for IISRPRC population and roll out.
O
U         Component C - Use of Real Property Register and Cadastre Data, (IDA 0.8 million USD)
This component will support activities aimed at enhancing public on-line use of IISRPRC data,
which form the core dataset of the geospatial data framework and the geospatial base for a variety of
market economy services and fiscal purposes. The component will support enhanced interoperability
and efficient data sharing and exchange with other governmental stakeholders, such us the State Tax
Committee, the Census Registry, line Ministries and Regional and District Governments, City
administrations, etc. Specifically, the component will support: (i) the development of a strategy and
technical guidelines for its implementation; (ii) the development of a technological framework for
implementation; and (iii) the establishment of an e-GeoPortal that will provide the "one-stop-shop"
for all geospatial information and related online services. The component will further support the
creation of a new non-classified coordinate reference system (CRS) in the country, and the expansion
of the country's Continuously Operating Reference Stations (CORS) network.
Component D - Regulatory Development, Institutional Development, Capacity Building, Technical
Assistance and Project Management, (IDA 3.5 million USD)
The objective of this component would be to ensure effective management of the project and
sustainability of its results. This component would support the improvement of legislative and
regulatory environment of real property registration and real property market. In parallel, this
component would focus on institutional development of the real property register and cadastre
addressing challenges of financing, and staff policies and retention. The component would develop
new business plans to the real property register and cadastre aiming to full cost recovery and/or self-
financing. In addition, the component would support sectorial (law, surveying, cadastre, valuation,
land management, GIS/SDI) education reforms and curriculum development. Also, broad training
programs would be provided to GKZGDK and to other public sector and private sector personnel in
real property registration, cadastre services and real property market. Also, the component would
facilitate international and local technical assistance to enhance various stages of project
implementation and transfer best practice knowledge to Uzbekistan. Finally, this component would
a        support a Project Management Unit (PMU) under GKZGDK responsible for project management and
project's fiduciary functions and monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project activities are focused on real property registration and cadaster offices in all
regions, districts and cities of Uzbekistan.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Substantial number of real property registration and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               cadaster offices and a training center would be renovated.
Potential environmental impacts associated with the
Page 3 of 6


﻿above interventions are minor, short-lived, and primarily
limited to the project sites (except for movement of
equipment and materials to/from the site). These issues
are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of waste material and/
or older equipment, some traffic disruption (depending
upon specific location), worker safety (e.g. works at
height) etc. All these impacts are addressed with good
engineering and construction practices and with
mitigation measures specified in the project
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be applied by
contractors with close supervision of compliance by the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
0
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Substantial number of real property registration and cadaster offices and a training center would be
renovated. Potential environmental impacts associated with the above interventions are minor,
short-lived, and primarily limited to the project sites (except for movement of equipment and
materials to/from the site). These issues are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of waste material and/
or older equipment, some traffic disruption (depending upon specific location), worker safety (e.g.
works at height) etc. All these impacts are addressed with good engineering and construction
practices and with mitigation measures specified in the project Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) to be applied by contractors with close supervision of compliance by the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU). No potential large scale, significant or irreversible impact expected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Page 4 of 6


﻿in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
*           Since the scope and locations of the project interventions are not known before the Appraisal, the
Borrower has developed an Environmental Management Framework that describes screening
procedure and typical environmental mitigation measures for activities that involve civil works. It
also includes a template for Environmental Management Plan (EMP) or EMP checklist
specifically suggested by the World Bank for small scale refurbishment activities.
The Borrower will have a dedicated staff unit responsible for environmental issues. Staff hours
and a part-time salary was calculated and allocated for such purpose. A dedicated person has an
engineering degree and is familiar with construction norms and regulations. The World Bank staff
has provided an initial training on the Wold Bank Safeguards Policies and implementation of the
EMF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project involves various stakeholders including the employees of cadaster offices,
communities that live in the vicinity of the sites to be renovated and customers of the cadastre
system. The EMF is to be disclosed at the web-site of State Committee for Land Resources,
Geodesy, Cartography and State Cadastre, (Goskomzemgeodescadastre), a project implementing
agency, by September 23d withan invitation for project affected parties to participate in a
consultation meeting. The document will then be re-disclosed by October 12 incorporating
suggestions by the project affected groups where possible.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                02-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             09-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tajikistan                                                 08-Oct-2015
Comments: The EMF and the announcement were disclosed at the website of the Uzbekistan
Cadastre Committe at the follwing link http://ygk.uz/ru/pages/main. All interested
parties were invited to provide their comments. Public consultation meeting is
planned for Oct 15th, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 5 of 6


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mika-Petteri Torhonen,Anna Corsi
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                Date: 13-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


