                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA17439

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Kenya                            Project ID:   P153179
                                                      Parent        P103037
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing: Kenya Electricity Expansion Project (P153179)
   Parent Project    Electricity Expansion (P103037)
   Name:
   Task Team         Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee,Laurencia Karimi Njagi
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         11-Apr-2016                      Estimated   15-Jun-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GEE01                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (10%), Other Renewable Energy
                     (90%)
   Theme(s):         Other rural development (90%), Other urban development (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        71.00           Total Bank Financing:  68.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                             68.00
     Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                   3.00
     Total                                                                                   71.00
   Environmental A - Full Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?


                                            Page 1 of 8
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project has two development objectives:
   (a) increase the capacity, efficiency, and quality of electricity supply; and
   (b) expand access to electricity in urban, peri-urban, and rural areas
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would enhance and maximize the development impact of
KEEP by supporting: (1) cost overruns related to the expansion of low-cost base load geothermal
resources in Kenya’s energy mix; (2) scale-up of slum electrification across the country; and (3)
technical assistance and capacity building for sector entities.

The project has three components and majority of resources will be allocated to component A. The
components are aligned with KEEP.

Component A - Geothermal Generation - Support the cost increase in the contract for Olkaria I and
IV steam gathering and distribution system works. The contract is between the implementing agency,
KenGen, and the contractor “Sinopec International Petroleum Service Corporation” (SINOPEC) of
Beijing China.

Component C – Distribution (Slum Electrification). Support the financing, through an output-based
mechanism, the connection of an additional 54,000 low-income households in Kenya’s slums; and

Component D - Sector Institutional Development and Operational Support. This component includes
four major activities: i) Capacity building on environmental and social safeguards; ii) Capacity
building on health and safety; (iii) monitoring and evaluation for slum electrification; and iv)
Feasibility Study for Olkaria VII geothermal project
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Component A: The AF is not financing any new exploration or investments. The existing geothermal
generation investments (Olkaria I and Olkaria IV Domes) for which the additional funds are sought
are located in and adjacent to the Hell's Gate National Park in the greater Rift Valley about 120 km
from Nairobi, and mitigation measures are addressed in the EIAs prepared for the Parent Project in
January 2010. Quarterly environmental progress reports are prepared by the Borrower, as well as
monthly supervision reports prepared by the consulting engineer.

Component C: The Slum electrification component will target counties throughout Kenya. KPLC
will apply the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the ongoing
Kenya Electricity Modernization Project (KEMP) Peri-Urban Electrification component, given that
the nature of the investment works is similar, the only significant difference being that the slum
electrification takes place in informal settlements, and the method of metering employed is different.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)


                                              Page 2 of 8
Yasmin Tayyab (GSU07)

6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes        The Parent Project was classified as a Category A: Full
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Assessment, largely due to the location of the geothermal
                                    facilities: The Olkaria I extension is situated in Hell’s
                                    Gate National Park whereas Olkaria IV is located just
                                    outside the borders of the Park. Secondly, both Olkaria I
                                    and IV relied on water from Lake Naivasha for the
                                    drilling of wells, although drilling of wells will wind
                                    down by 2019. Finally, accidental discharges of brine
                                    were anticipated to be a concern, and accidental
                                    discharges did occur. EIAs were prepared in January
                                    2010, and regular monitoring reports are provided to the
                                    Bank.
                                    The feasibility study for Olkaria VII will include a full
                                    ESIA.
                                    The feasibility study for Olkaria VII will include a full
                                    ESIA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        The protection of biodiversity and wildlife corridors is
4.04                                essential to comply with Vision 2030, with Bank
                                    requirements and to address stakeholder concerns.
                                    Although the Olkaria area does not contain any wildlife in
                                    the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, it is associated
                                    with a number of important wildlife corridors.
                                    The two key biodiversity corridors / dispersion areas
                                    identified in the area around Olkaria are north to south to
                                    the west of Lake Naivasha and east to west to the south of
                                    Olkaria. Hell’s
                                    Gate National Park connects to the east with Mount
                                    Longonot, and the corridor continues to the South
                                    connecting with the mentioned east-west corridor.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

Pest Management OP 4.09 No

Physical Cultural        Yes        This policy is triggered as a precaution for the slum
Resources OP/BP 4.11                electrification component, although the sub-projects are
                                    not expected to traverse areas of cultural or historical
                                    importance. The ESMF provides chance find procedures
                                    to be included in contracts and EMPs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No         The original project triggered this policy for hunter-
BP 4.10                             gatherers, but it has since been determined that they are
                                    not in the project area, nor are they in the area financed by
                                    the AF.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The AF is not expected to involve land acquisition leading



                                      Page 3 of 8
   OP/BP 4.12                                 to economic or physical displacement of PAPs. There is
                                              ongoing resettlement in the project, and should the AF
                                              financed activities require a RAP, they will be guided by
                                              the RPF for the original project. The ESMF includes
                                              measures for compensating for lost trees (where there is
                                              no land acquisition).
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     There are no additional potential large scale environmental and social impacts anticipated for the
     activities funded through the AF. The infrastructure to be funded by Component A (geothermal
     development) is already built and commissioned and new assets to be funded by Component C
     (distribution – slum electrification) have limited social and environmental impacts.

     The electricity infrastructure works are of similar nature to those prepared under the Parent
     project. A review of EIAs prepared by KPLC was undertaken as part of the Kenya Electricity
     Modernization Project (KEMP). These EIAs were prepared as per Kenyan environmental
     regulations and the Bank Operational Policies, which were used as a guideline in assessing
     environmental compliance and screening of sub-projects. The EIAs were generally of good
     quality. KPLC will need to ensure, as a standard practice, that timely and informed consultation
     with stakeholders during implementation to seek citizen feedback at regular intervals. The
     consultations should be adequately documented and KPLC responses should be publicly available.
     Any grievances from stakeholders should be recorded and responded to in a timely manner. The
     Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) associated with slum electrification and
     prepared for the KEMP project has been re-disclosed in Kenya and in the Info-shop and will guide
     the mitigation measures, in case there are any adverse impacts on the environment or the
     population. There is ongoing resettlement in the project, and should the AF financed activities
     require a RAP, they will be guided by the RPF for the original project.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The horticultural greenhouses, agricultural areas, residential areas and tourism lodges developed
     south of Lake Naivasha are significant barriers to wildlife movements, and the existing geothermal
     developments (up to Olkaria IV) also limit wildlife movements.

    An SEA was prepared for the Olkaria Geothermal Field as one of the conditions for the approval
    of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for drilling additional geothermal
    steam production wells in Olkaria (per a letter from NEMA dated 24th of July 2012). This SEA,
    completed in 2014, recommended that the high use non concession area, the closed area and the


                                               Page 4 of 8
  low use area of Hell’s Gate National Park and the Gorge south of the National Park should be
  protected. The aim is to prevent any further impacts on the scenery or the wildlife by future
  geothermal developments, thereby complying with the Memorandum of Understanding between
  KenGen and Kenya Wildlife Service.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Given the scale-up of energy sector investments in Kenya, the sector entities need to manage
  safeguard issues in an appropriate and timely manner.

 First, the recent inspection panel case in KEEP (http://ewebapps.worldbank.org/apps/ip/Pages/
 ViewCase.aspx?CaseId=102) highlighted the resettlement challenges in geothermal fields. The
 Inspection Panel report and Management Response were discussed by the World Bank Board on
 October 21, 2015. The Management Report and Recommendation identifies proposed actions to
 address the Panel’s findings around four specific themes: identification of project affected people;
 consultation, participation, and grievance redress; adequacy of resettlement site, infrastructure, and
 amenities; and livelihood restoration. The European Investment Bank (EIB), a co-financier of the
 project, received a similar complaint to its Complaints Mechanism as the World Bank’s Inspection
 Panel. As a result, EIB is leading a mediation process with the Requesters and KenGen, and the
 World Bank has joined the process as co-facilitator. The mediation process is expected to shape
 the remedial actions in a more specific manner, and to result in the Requesters’ endorsement of the
 proposed actions. The next session of the mediation is expected by May 2016, when the Action
 Plan will be presented by KenGen to the community. If the mediation outcomes are acceptable to
 KenGen and the Requesters, the process can move to implementation of the Action Plan. The
 implementing agency KenGen therefore has to satisfactorily implement the action plan to emerge
 from the mediation process.

 Second, the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP 4.10) was triggered under the KEEP because of the
 possible presence of hunter-gather groups, such as the Sengwer, Ogiek, Waata, and Boni. These
 groups are not in the project area, including the area financed by the AF. There are Maasai in the
 project area, but not in the area where the AF will be providing support. At the time the parent
 project was prepared, OP 4.10 was not triggered for the Maasai due to then-prevailing
 interpretations of the scope of OP 4.10 to hunter-gatherer groups only. Management maintains that
 the parent project design and implementation have been guided throughout by key principles that
 are embedded in OP 4.10, including informed and culturally-appropriate consultation; culturally-
 appropriate design of resettlement; and, security of community land rights. Since early 2013, OP
 4.10 is being triggered for the Maasai in Kenya, but would only be applied retroactively in projects
 financing new activities in areas outside the boundaries of the original project. This is not the case
 with the AF.

 Third, another issue that has been important is occupational health and safety in the management
 of geothermal fields. KenGen has a highly experienced and well qualified Environmental and
 Safety Team, both at Nairobi headquarters and at Olkaria. Senior environmental staff hold
 advanced environmental engineering or science degrees from top universities in the developed
 world. Nevertheless, capacity is strained and opportunities for refresher courses are limited. The
 area has witnessed increased activities of drilling from a low activity phase and increased

                                            Page 5 of 8
  construction of power stations which has resulted in an increased work population of about 3000
  people.

  The AF, therefore, will provide extensive capacity building support to sector entities. They would
  benefit from an opportunity to enhance their skills and gain in-depth training at other utilities and
  specialized courses related to environmental and social safeguards as well as for health and safety.
  The entities—KETRACO, KenGen, KPLC, and REA— will be provided with an opportunity to
  enhance their skills and gain in-depth training at utilities with good environmental, and social risk
  management practices, and would have access to specialized courses related to safeguards,
  occupational health, and safety.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  In Component C (Distribution – Slum Electrification), KPLC will need to ensure, as a standard
  practice, that timely and informed consultation with stakeholders during implementation to seek
  citizen feedback at regular intervals. The consultations should be adequately documented and
  KPLC responses should be publicly available. Any grievances from stakeholders should be
  recorded and responded to in a timely manner. The Environment and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) associated with slum electrification and prepared for the KEMP project will
  be re-disclosed in Kenya and in the Info-shop is disclosed in Nairobi and will guide the mitigation
  measures, in case there are any adverse impacts on the environment or the population.
  In Component D (Technical Assistance), the feasibility studies for Olkaria VII will conduct
  extensive consultations and engage with the directly and indirectly affected communities. The
  consultation reports will be included in the ESIA and disclosed when available locally and at the
  InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Apr-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Apr-2016
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            18-Apr-2016
  Comments: The ESMF has been updated to include slum electrification.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Jan-2010
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            06-Jan-2010
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                             Page 6 of 8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
 assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
 livelihoods)

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?


                                             Page 7 of 8
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee,Laurencia Karimi Njagi
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 18-Apr-2016
   Practice Manager/    Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                  Date: 18-Apr-2016
   Manager:




                                             Page 8 of 8
