                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA20097
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Indonesia                          Project ID:   P154948
                            Project Name:     National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)
                            Task Team         Taimur Samad
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         14-Nov-2016               Estimated     30-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSU08                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1207.00           Total Bank Financing:    450.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                757.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   450.00
                              Total                                                                                  1207.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the Program is to improve access to affordable housing for lower
                           income households
                            3. Project Description
                           2.      Overall Program Scope and Targeting. This Program aims to improve access to affordable
                           housing through a mix of demand and supply side interventions targeting both lower-middle income
                           and lower-income households. Component 1 targets lower middle income households that are unable
                           to access commercial mortgage finance for home purchase without public assistance. Component 2


                                                                      Page 1 of 18
                         targets poor the bottom 40 percent of Indonesian households that require home improvement rather
                         than home purchase solutions and for whom the market for commercial mortgage finance is
                         unaffordable even with deep assistance enhancements. Given the complex nature of housing policy,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Program through Component 3 will support five key policy reform and capacity building
                         activities. Further detail on each component is provided below.

                         Component 1: Mortgage-Linked Down Payment Assistance (USD 512.0 million of which USD
                         215.0 million of Bank Financing)

                         3.      Subcomponent 1.1: Mortgage-Linked Down Payment Assistance (BP2BT). The Program
                         will support provision of mortgage-linked down payment assistance to lower income first time home-
                         owners through Participating Lending Institutions for the purchase or construction of a residential
                         property. Specifically, the mortgage-linked down payment assistance scheme (Bantuan Pembiayaan
                         Perumahan Berbasis Tabungan ➢❨ BP2BT) targets aspiring lower income first time home-owners
                         by providing down payment assistance support to match beneficiary savings and a market rate
                         mortgage from a participating lending institution for the purchase of: (i) a new or existing landed
                         house ; (ii) a new or existing multi-story house/apartment; or (iii) a new or existing low-rise vertical
                         house/apartment, and similar housing prototypes. The Program aims to support both salaried and
                         non-salaried households. The specific household income segments targeted by the component are
                         between the 30 and 60 percentiles of all household income. The Program will be administered
                         through a working unit (Satuan Kerja or Satker) established in MPWH and in partnership with
                         participating mortgage lenders (banks and financial institutions).

                         4.      This section briefly describes the core elements of the BP2BT Program including; (i) core
                         design principle; (ii) target geographic markets; (iii) income definition, eligibility and assessment;
                         (iv) property eligibility and maximum property value; (v) assistance model; (vi) assistance-linked
                         mortgage product parameters; and (vii) control and supervision.

                         5.      Core Design Principles. The BP2BT Program is structured around a set of core design
Public Disclosure Copy




                         principles including: (i) the total loan to value ratio for mortgages provided under the scheme should
                         be between 50 and 80 percent; (ii) households must provide a minimum down payment of 5 percent
                         of property value; (iii) households must demonstrate savings capacity for 6 months at 10 percent of
                         monthly household income; (iv) all properties financed under the scheme must have formalized title;
                         and (v) participating lending institutions establish the interest rate for the housing loan based on their
                         respective risk assessments, costs of funds, and margin requirements.

                         6.       Target Geographic Markets. The BP2BT Program will operate nationally with prospective
                         beneficiaries from all 34 provinces eligible to apply for the down payment assistance. In order to
                         facilitate implementation and Program administration, a provinces and/or local governments have
                         been clustered into nine administrative zones. These zones are based on a zone classification system
                         developed by MoF regulations for VAT exemption on the purchase of low income housing units.
                         Adjustments to the MoF zone classification system were made in consultation with MPWH based on
                         an assessment of housing market conditions. The zone classification system is the basis on which two
                         key BP2BT Program variables are set: (i) maximum household income eligibility; and (ii) maximum
                         eligible property value.

                         7.      Income Definition, Eligibility and Assessment. Income eligibility for the BP2BT Program
                         has been clearly defined to prevent leakage of assistance funds to non-target beneficiaries. The
                         BP2BT Program will target low-income households with both fixed income (salaried) and non-fixed

                                                                       Page 2 of 18
                         income (non-salaried) earners. A qualifying maximum Eligible Monthly Household Income has been
                         defined and by each of the grouped into nine distinct geographical zones.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8.        Property Types and Maximum Property Value. The BP2BT Program has defined property
                         eligibility parameters to ensure that beneficiaries attain basic minimum standards for a secure and
                         safe house with access to amenities and basic services and with secure title. Additionally, the
                         Program specifies a maximum property value for each type of eligible unit (i.e. multi-story
                         apartment, low-rise apartment, landed house and self-construction/rehabilitation) in each of the nine
                         geographic zones.

                         9.        Assistance Model. The BP2BT Program has developed an assistance model which specifies
                         the maximum assistance levels for beneficiary households. The Program assistance model is scaled
                         progressively to income, i.e. lower income households receive a higher absolute assistance amount
                         and are similarly permitted to apply the assistance to a greater percentage of the full property value.
                         Assessed monthly household income by lenders will be used as the basis for determining assistance
                         eligibility. Assistance will be the lower of: (i) assistance amount linked to the assessed monthly
                         household income or (ii) assistance amount derived from Assistance Index multiplied by Assessed
                         Property Value/Cost.

                         10.      Assistance-Linked Mortgage Product Parameters. The BP2BT Program has specified a series
                         of parameters for the assistance-linked mortgage product related to the interest rate, loan term, LTV,
                         transaction costs and prepayment charges. Key characteristics of the mortgage product include: (i) a
                         market rate of interest set by Banks to ensure scheme sustainability (in contrast to current regime of
                         interest rate subsidies); and (ii) maximum LTV to mitigate the possible higher risk related to
                         informal income.

                         11.     The Program also specifies a series of additional measures related to the mortgage product to
                         ensure or define: (i) consumer protection against interest rate and affordability risk; (ii) disbursement
                         arrangements; (iii) consumer eligibility verification procedures by lenders; (iv) mortgage guarantee
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coverage parameters for salaried and non-salaried; and (v) lender reporting requirements on
                         mortgage performance.

                         12.      Control and Supervision. The BP2BT Program incorporates a framework of procedures and
                         oversight to ensure adequate Program control and supervision. The framework specifies the terms for
                         Operational Cooperation Agreements (PKOs) to be entered into between MPWH and participating
                         lenders, monitoring and evaluation procedures and, amongst others, recourse mechanisms in the case
                         of consumer fraud.

                         13.     Subcomponent 1.2: Technical Assistance for Mortgage-Linked Down Payment Assistance.
                         The subcomponent will support the provision of technical assistance for: (i) developing and
                         strengthening BP2BT management, administrative and information technology systems and
                         capacities; (ii) supporting BP2BT operations; (iii) developing consumer financial literacy around
                         BP2BT; (iv) developing a BP2BT public information campaign; and (v) developing and
                         strengthening the lending capacity to non-fixed income segment of Participating Lending Institutions.


                         Component 2: Home Improvement Assistance (USD 675.0 million of which USD 215.0 million of
                         Bank Financing)



                                                                       Page 3 of 18
                         14.     Component 2 will support the scaling up and improvement of the national Home
                         Improvement Assistance Program (Bantuan Stimulan Perumahan Swadaya ➢❨ BSPS) with the aim
                         to support poor and lower income Indonesian households to attain safe and affordable housing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through an incremental home improvement process. The specific household income segments
                         targeted by the component are the bottom 40 percent of all households as measured by gross
                         household income. MPWH has been implementing BSPS since 2006, having achieved considerable
                         success in terms of reaching primarily rural households.

                         15.      The component will support the expansion and strengthening of the BSPS with the aim of
                         supporting 450,000 home improvement solutions reaching over 1.8 million beneficiaries. NAHP has
                         introduces a series of important shifts and improvements to enhance the impact of the Program: (i) a
                         shift to greater implementation in urban areas through joint implementation planning with the
                         MPWH National Slum Upgrading Program; (ii) expansion of home improvement eligibility to cover
                         basic sanitation investments; (iii) improved application and tracking of targeting and eligibility
                         criteria and compliance; (iv) the introduction of third-party verification for BSPS outputs; and,
                         amongst other system improvements; (iv) shift to a decentralization implementation model.

                         16.     Subcomponent 2.1: Support for Home Improvement Assistance. This subcomponent will
                         finance the provision of home improvement or reconstruction assistance to lower income households.

                         17.      Type and size of assistance:
                         ➢❨¢ rehabilitation (quality improvement), including repair of roof, floor, wall, and sanitation; size
                         of assistance max. IDR 15 million/household (equiv. max. USD 1,150 per household)
                         ➢❨¢ reconstruction, including build the whole house from the land plot (or existing foundation);
                         size of assistance IDR 30.0 million/household (equiv. USD 2,300/household)
                         ➢❨¢ provision of beneficiary matching fund, is an assistance that may be supplemented by
                         beneficiaries➢❨ own funds to cover the overall need of rehabilitation or reconstruction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         18.     Eligibility:
                         ➢❨¢ Demography: consist of household unit, elderly and people with disability are eligible and
                         allowed to use max. 15 percent of assistance to pay labor
                         ➢❨¢ Income: head of HH income no greater than the regional minimum wage, ranges from IDR
                         1.1 ➢❨ 3.1 million/month
                         ➢❨¢ Asset ownership: never have previously owned a house, but own or occupy land physically
                         and hold its legal proof, not in dispute and in accordance with the local spatial plan; own a house that
                         in substandard quality
                         ➢❨¢ Coverage: nationwide - 33 provinces

                         19.     Mechanisms:
                         ➢❨¢ Combination of top-down and bottom-up approach: Central Government establishes the
                         national policy and technical guideline for BSPS; Local Government proposes the list of priority
                         locations and the candidate household beneficiaries
                         ➢❨¢ Use of community approach: establish a beneficiary group (max of 20 people) to facilitate
                         the cooperation during construction; use self-construction method, assisted by facilitator
                         ➢❨¢ Policy direction influence location prioritization: address the slum area (to support the
                         100-0-100 target)

                         20.     Facilitation:


                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                         ➢❨¢ Technical process and construction: One facilitator to facilitate 60 beneficiaries in the Local
                         Government level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         21.      Subcomponent 2.2: Support to BSPS Management and Operations. This subcomponent will
                         support the provision of support for the management and operations of BSPS. Specifically, the
                         subcomponent will support Program management consultants at the national and provincial levels as
                         well as for facilitators who provide Program implementation and administration.

                         22.      Subcomponent 2.3: BSPS Program Development. This subcomponent will support the
                         provision of technical assistance, advisory services and training to strengthen BSPS management,
                         operations and monitoring, including: (i) the development of a Swadaya Management Information
                         System (SMIS) to integrate all data related to housing provision programs at the national and local
                         levels into a single database; (ii) the provision of support for facilitation management; (iii) the
                         establishment and implementation of a comprehensive complaint handling system; (iv) the
                         development of a rigorous monitoring and evaluation methodology and system; and (v) the
                         development of a comprehensive impact asses sment and policy for BSPS.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance for Housing Policy Reform (USD 20.0 million of Bank
                         Financing)

                         23.    The component will finance a technical assistance program to support policy reform,
                         improved governance and enhanced capacity in the housing sector. The component will support two
                         subcomponents on demand-side and supply side technical assistance, summarized in greater detail
                         below. Activities to be supported under this component were identified and, in most cases, benefit
                         from analysis and policy advisory work conducted under both the Roadmap for Housing Policy
                         Reform 2015 the ongoing Land, Housing and Settlements PASA.

                         24.      Subcomponent 3.1: Expanding Access to Housing Finance. This subcomponent will support
                         the provision of technical assistance to support policy and regulatory reform and improve governance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to strengthen the primary and secondary mortgage markets and the enabling environment for housing
                         finance. Specifically, the subcomponent will principally support five areas of technical assistance: (i)
                         Housing and Real Estate Information Systems (HREIS); (ii) Secondary Mortgage Market
                         Development; (iii) Regulatory and Institutional Reform for Housing Provident Fund (TAPERA); (iv)
                         Development of Mortgage Guarantee System; and (v) Policy Advisory on Housing Microfinance.
                         Other just-in-time areas of technical assistance may be supported during implementation.

                         25.     Subcomponent 3.2: Addressing Supply-Side Constraints. This subcomponent will support
                         the provision of technical assistance to support policy reform, improve governance and enhance
                         capacity of stakeholders in addressing supply-side constraints to the provision of affordable housing.

                         ➢❨¢ Development and Reform of Public Housing Programs: This activity will support policy
                         advisory on subsidized housing programs administered by MPWH. The goal of this activity is to
                         develop and/or improve housing policies and programs to respond to different housing needs and
                         preferences. The advisory under this activity will assist MPWH to diversify, reform and expand
                         physical housing typologies and tenure options for publicly subsidized formal housing. Specifically,
                         technical assistance will assist MPWH to evaluate and reengineer public rental housing initiatives,
                         including potentially a revised Rumah Susun Sederhana Sewa (Simple Public Rental Apartments -
                         Rusunawa Program).


                                                                      Page 5 of 18
                         ➢❨¢ Strengthening Perumnas as a Public Affordable Housing Developer. Technical assistance
                         under the Program will seek to strengthen the role of the National Housing Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Corporation, Perumnas (formerly Perusahaan Umum Perumahan Nasional), as an affordable housing
                         developer through policy advisory and capacity building. Government Regulation No 83/2015
                         mandates that Perum Perumnas act as a land asset manager, public housing and urban developer, and
                         building/estate manager for the release of state assets for affordable housing.

                         ➢❨¢ Strengthening Local Government Housing Policy and Planning Capacity. The Program will
                         support a multi-year technical assistance program to strengthen the capacity of medium- and large
                         cities to develop and implement effective local affordable housing plans. The technical assistance
                         program will support cities to: (i) monitor and assess local land and housing markets (linked to
                         HREIS development); (ii) inventory and develop plans for the mobilization of public land assets for
                         affordable housing development; (iii) develop and implement local regulations and policies related to
                         spatial planning, land use, zoning, land readjustment and permitting that would increase the
                         availability of affordable land for housing; (iv) explore public-private partnership arrangements with
                         private developers for the development of mixed-use and affordable housing development; and (v)
                         develop integrated local housing plans across central (i.e. BP2BT, BSPS, slum upgrading and
                         Rusunawa) and local initiatives.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         26.      The Program is a nationwide in scope and will therefore cover all districts and cities in the
                         country, including rural, peri-urban and urban areas. Gradually the focus of the Program will shift
                         towards urban areas as the demand for affordable housing accessible for low-income and poor
                         families in cities has significantly increased. Environmental and social impacts will take place in
                         already developed areas where houses financed by Component 1 and 2 are built and/or improved.
                         Potential environmental and social impacts are expected to be insignificant, non-irreversible, small-
                         scale, and site-specific which are manageable by the involving parties. As a nationwide Program, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         anticipated that IP communities or Masyarakat Hukum Adat (MHA) would be part of the eligible
                         target beneficiaries and/or affected by the Program. Housing improvement and development will
                         improve the living conditions of the occupants and the neighborhoods, which will ultimately lead to
                         better health and social quality of life. Participating districts and cities will be identified during
                         Program implementation, but the exact sites of housing improvement and housing development in
                         each district and city would only be known at the later stage of the Program implementation.

                         27.     The increased access to mortgage financing through down-payment assistance under
                         Component 1 would lead to increased affordability for low- to medium-income households to
                         purchase or self-construct a home with formal land title and undertake incremental expansion or
                         upgrading of an existing home. Houses will be built or improved individually or by developers in
                         small clusters on private owned land, land owned by beneficiary households (in cases of self-
                         construction or home improvement) or local government land within already build-up urban or peri-
                         urban areas of a district or city.

                         28.      Home improvement or new construction financed by Component 2 will be located in the
                         existing individual land plots owned or occupied by the beneficiaries, typically spread out in a
                         district or city with one or two houses in each cluster.

                         29.     Location for houses potentially financed by Component 1 and 2 will be in discrete sites,


                                                                     Page 6 of 18
                         geographically spread out within districts or cities, and consist of individual to small clusters of
                         houses. As has been the case with similar programs, such as FLPP (Fasilitas Likuiditas Pembiayaan
                         Perumahan/Housing Finance Liquidity Facility), it is expected that under BP2BT (Component 1),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         land will be acquired through willing buyer-willing seller scheme either by individuals or by
                         developers. In the case of BSPS (Component 2), field observations to several districts/cities showed
                         that home improvements and new houses are built on land that have been legally owned, physically
                         occupied or have proven tenure. A certificate or a Statement Letter of the Head of the Village/
                         Kelurahan on the land tenure is acceptable by the Program. Hence, there will be no cumulative
                         environmental and social impacts expected within the area of influence. The likely environmental
                         and social impacts would occur during construction, including minor disturbance to the communities
                         in the area such as noise, dusts, materials stocking, and minor alteration access to the sites.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)
                         Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (GEN2A)
                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes           The Program will support the GOI➢❨ s national program
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     to increase access for the low to medium income
                                                                   households to affordable housing. Component 1 (BP2BT)
                                                                   of the Program is housing finance scheme for the low and
                                                                   middle non-salaried income groups to enable each of the
                                                                   beneficiaries buy a new house, a second-hand house, or a
                                                                   unit apartment, and improve existing house or build a
                                                                   house. As a financing scheme, this Component will
                                                                   indirectly (down the road through lenders) involve small
                                                                   investment per beneficiary (household). Under this
                                                                   Component, the value of housing investment varies across
                                                                   regions and across income levels, ranges between USD
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   7,700 ➢❨ USD 18,080, hence, it will typically involve
                                                                   small-scale physical works with an average house size 36
                                                                   m2 (max. up to 60 m2). Component 2 will involve home
                                                                   improvement for poor and lower income households, for
                                                                   example, roof, floor and wall repair and construction of
                                                                   new small house (average 36 m2), that takes place in
                                                                   individual land plots or small land areas with small group
                                                                   of houses in each cluster. The amount of the grant ranges
                                                                   from USD 1,150 to 2,300 per household.

                                                                   Each housing site is distinct and discrete from others,
                                                                   geographically spread in wide areas in the urban or peri-
                                                                   urban area of a district or city, and located in the already
                                                                   developed residential areas. The potential environmental
                                                                   impacts of the Program are expected to be insignificant,
                                                                   non-irreversible, localized, and manageable by the
                                                                   involved parties by implementing good construction
                                                                   housekeeping. The main source of the impacts will be
                                                                   from the physical construction activities on the



                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                         improvement/rehabilitation of existing homes and
                         construction of new houses that will be done on individual
                         basis, in relatively short term period (3-4 months), not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through large-scale development. Given the nature of the
                         Program as explained above, it is expected that it will
                         have minor, non-irreversible, small-scale, and site-
                         specific environmental and social impacts. The Program
                         will not involve successive, incremental and/or combined
                         impacts of multiple development. Cumulative impacts are
                         unlikely. Overall environmental impacts will be positive
                         whereby low income and poor families will enjoy better
                         housing quality that will lead to improved neighborhood
                         health quality and social life. No natural habitat, no forest,
                         no sensitive or protected areas will be affected or involved
                         in the Program.

                         Given the nature of TA under Component 3.1 (housing
                         and real estate information system, secondary mortgage
                         development, regulatory and institutional reform for
                         housing provident fund, development of mortgage
                         guarantee system, policy advisory on housing
                         microfinance), all activities will not (i) directly or
                         indirectly support engineering design or technical studies
                         leading to the preparation of physical investments; (ii)
                         directly or indirectly support the drafting of any policies,
                         strategies, laws or regulations with environmental and
                         social impacts; (iii) establish or support the formulation of
                         land use plans; or (iv) directly or indirectly support
                         capacity building to support institutions to carry out
Public Disclosure Copy




                         downstream activities that have potential environmental
                         and social impacts. As such, all activities under
                         component 3.1 be categorized as EA Category C activities
                         and correspondingly do not require any instrument or
                         treatment prior to Appraisal or during implementation to
                         address environmental or social impacts.

                         Similarly, activities under subcomponent 3.2 (i.e.,
                         development and reform of public housing programs,
                         strengthening Perumnas as a Public Affordable Housing
                         developer, and strengthening local government housing
                         policy and planning cap acity) will not: (i) directly or
                         indirectly support engineering design or technical studies
                         leading to the preparation of physical investments; or (ii)
                         directly establish or support the formulation of land use
                         plans. However, activities under subcomponent 3.2 may:
                         (i) directly or indirectly support the drafting of any
                         policies, strategies or regulations with environmental and
                         social impacts; or (ii) directly or indirectly support


                          Page 8 of 18
                                                       capacity building to support institutions to carry out
                                                       downstream activities that may have potential
                                                       environmental and social impacts. All activities under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       component 3.2 are categorized as Category B.

                                                       During Program implementation, the preparation of
                                                       policies, strategies and regulations prepared under
                                                       Component 3.2 will include assessment of the
                                                       environmental and social impacts that would entail, and
                                                       identification of relevant approaches to address such
                                                       impacts during the implementation of such policies,
                                                       strategies and regulations later on. Procedures and
                                                       requirements for carrying out such assessment and
                                                       identification to address potential environmental and
                                                       social impacts are specified in the ESMF. The Terms of
                                                       Reference (TOR) for the preparation of policies, strategies
                                                       and regulations should include such procedures and
                                                       requirements.

                                                       For capacity building activities, during Program
                                                       implementation PIUs will ensure that the Terms of
                                                       Reference (TOR) for capacity building activities for
                                                       institutions who would carry out downstream activities
                                                       involving investments will include requirements for
                                                       developing and delivering training/workshop materials on
                                                       environmental and social safeguards management.
                                                       Procedures and requirements for environmental and social
                                                       management are specified in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       TORs for activities supported by Component 3.2 will be
                                                       reviewed and approved by the Bank.

                                                       Given the nature of all components in the Program and
                                                       potential environmental and social impacts that would
                                                       entail, overall, the Program is a Category B for
                                                       environmental assessment.

                                                       The Program has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                       Management Framework (ESMF) in compliance with the
                                                       triggered World Bank safeguards policies, relevant
                                                       Government of Indonesia laws and regulations and Bank's
                                                       Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                       Policies to Technical Assistance Activities in Bank-
                                                       Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the
                                                       Bank (January 2014).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The Program activities will take place on already-
                         4.04                          developed land/areas. The Program will not finance
                                                       activities that involve significant conversion or


                                                        Page 9 of 18
                                                        degradation of critical natural habitats or natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The Program will not finance activities that involve
                                                        conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        natural forests as defined under the policy. The program is
                                                        not intended for commercial plantation and there is no
                                                        project component to improve the forest function.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The Program will not procure or use any pesticide or
                                                        support activities that may lead to the use and/or a
                                                        significant increase in the use of pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The Program will be located in already developed
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           locations that are known as residential areas, and will not
                                                        change the landscape with large construction
                                                        development.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The Program triggers OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples
                         BP 4.10                        (IPs) as it geographically covers nation-wide rural and
                                                        urban areas and therefore IPs or MHA (Masyarakat
                                                        Hukum Adat) can be beneficiaries of BP2BT and BSPS.
                                                        The Program expects that IPs or MHA communities,
                                                        individually or collectively will have the same access to
                                                        BP2BT and BSPS as their counterpart common poor
                                                        households. The Program will promote outreach and
                                                        social inclusion to IPs or MHA communities by providing
                                                        information and requirements of the Program and will
                                                        adopt the principles of free, prior, informed consultation
                                                        that lead to broad support from the IP communities.
                                                        Requirements and procedures for such inclusion to be
                                                        implemented by PIUs and by local governments (for
                                                        BSPS) are specified in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        As explained in the OP 4.01 described above, TA
                                                        Component 3.2 (i.e., development and reform of public
                                                        housing programs, strengthening Perumnas as a Public
                                                        Affordable Housing developer, and strengthening local
                                                        government housing policy and planning capacity) may:
                                                        (i) directly or indirectly support the drafting of any
                                                        policies, strategies or regulations with environmental and
                                                        social impacts; or (ii) directly or indirectly support
                                                        capacity building to support institutions to carry out
                                                        downstream activities that may have potential
                                                        environmental and social impacts.

                                                        During Program implementation, PIUs will identify
                                                        potential IPs presence and assess potential impacts
                                                        (positive and adverse) of policies, strategies and
                                                        regulations prepared under Component 3.2 that might
                                                        entail on IPs, and identify the relevant approach to
                                                        address such impacts during the implementation of such



                                                        Page 10 of 18
                                                        policies, strategies and regulations later on. Procedures
                                                        and requirements for carrying out such assessment and to
                                                        address potential impacts on IPs are specified in the IPPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        as part of ESMF. The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the
                                                        preparation of policies, strategies and regulations should
                                                        include such procedures and requirements.

                                                        The PIUs will ensure capacity building activities for
                                                        Perumnas and local governments who would carry out
                                                        downstream activities involving investments will include
                                                        training/workshop materials or subjects on IPs. The
                                                        Terms of Reference (TOR) for capacity building activities
                                                        will require the need to develop and deliver training
                                                        materials on the approach for identifying IPs, social
                                                        assessment, and approach to address impacts on IPs as
                                                        specified in the IPPF as part of the ESMF.

                                                        The above mentioned TORs for activities supported by
                                                        Component 3.2 will be reviewed and approved by the
                                                        Bank.

                                                        The Program has prepared an Indigenous Peoples
                                                        Planning Framework (IPPF) as part of the Environmental
                                                        and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in
                                                        compliance with the triggered World Bank safeguards
                                                        policies, relevant Government of Indonesia laws and
                                                        regulations and Bank's Interim Guidelines on the
                                                        Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance
                                                        Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Administered by the Bank (January 2014).
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   As explained in the OP 4.01 described above, TA
                         OP/BP 4.12                     Component 3.2 (i.e., development and reform of public
                                                        housing programs, strengthening Perumnas as a Public
                                                        Affordable Housing developer, and strengthening local
                                                        government housing policy and planning capacity) may:
                                                        (i) directly or indirectly support the drafting of any
                                                        policies, strategies or regulations with environmental and
                                                        social impacts; or (ii) directly or indirectly support
                                                        capacity building to support institutions to carry out
                                                        downstream activities that may have potential
                                                        environmental and social impacts.

                                                        During Program implementation, PIUs will develop the
                                                        Terms of Reference (TOR) for the preparation of policies,
                                                        strategies or regulations to be financed by Component 3.2
                                                        which include guidance to identify and assess land
                                                        acquisition / resettlement issues as well as approach to
                                                        address the impacts that might entail in the policies,


                                                        Page 11 of 18
                                                                      strategies or regulations implemented later on.

                                                                      For capacity building activities for Perumnas and local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      government to be financed by Component 3.2, during
                                                                      Program implementation the PIUs will develop Terms of
                                                                      Reference (TOR) for the training/capacity building
                                                                      activities which include the need to develop and deliver
                                                                      training/workshop materials on land acquisition/
                                                                      resettlement for the implementation of downstream
                                                                      investments that they might have in the future. Procedures
                                                                      and requirements on land acquisition/resettlement are
                                                                      included in the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as
                                                                      part of the ESMF.

                                                                      The above mentioned TORs for activities supported by
                                                                      Component 3.2 will be reviewed and approved by the
                                                                      Bank.

                                                                      As mentioned in the OP 4.01 above, the Program has
                                                                      prepared an ESMF in which RPF is part of, in compliance
                                                                      with the triggered World Bank safeguards policies,
                                                                      relevant Government of Indonesia laws and regulations
                                                                      and Bank's Interim Guidelines on the Application of
                                                                      Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance Activities in
                                                                      Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by
                                                                      the Bank (January 2014).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The Program will not finance construction and/or
                            4.37                                      rehabilitation of dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No            The Program will not be located in the watersheds of any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The Program is not located in any known disputed areas
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          as defined under the policy.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall results of the Program will improve housing conditions of the beneficiaries, hence the
                              quality of life and the neighborhood. With the nature of the Program described in Section I.3,
                              potential environmental and social safeguards impacts will be insignificant, non-irreversible, and
                              discrete, site-specific. Potential environmental and social impacts for the individual housing
                              development under Component 1 and individual housing improvement/rehabilitation under
                              Component 2 are likely taking place during construction, such as disturbance on the drainage
                              channel due to piling of construction materials, debris from the rebuilt houses, and dusts. As
                              housing development will take place in a particular small land plot (up to max 100 m2) and
                              geographically discrete and scattered within a district or an urban/rural village depending on the
                              preference of the beneficiaries and conformity with the spatial plan (Component 1) and on the


                                                                       Page 12 of 18
                         existing land plots of the home improvement beneficiaries (Component 2), as such, potential
                         environmental and social impacts will be small, site specific and in relatively short period. These
                         impacts can be managed by the beneficiaries with capacity strengthening through socialization of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         booklet of best practice (for Component 1 and 2) and additional guidance from facilitators (for
                         Component 2). For Component 1, land for the individual housing plots are to be obtained by the
                         implementation of willing-seller willing-buyer principle between the land owners and the
                         beneficiaries of the BP2BT or developers, and each land plot is expected to be small in size
                         (average 70 m2 with maximum up to 100 m2), with average house size ranges from 36 m2 to 60
                         m2. Also refer to section I.6.

                         Although the Program will likely to target beneficiaries in an urbanizing districts and cities, it will
                         not exclude members of IPs as individual beneficiaries should they meet the eligibility criteria.
                         Potential impacts could be lack of information received by the members of IPs on the procedures
                         and requirements to access BP2BT and BSPS due to language barriers, lack of education and the
                         remoteness of their living place. This will be addressed by the lenders (Component 1) and the
                         Provincial Satkers (Component 2) through outreach and a more extensive socialization on the
                         Program to the IP communities.

                         As explained in Section I.3, Component 3 consists of a TA for expanding access to housing
                         finance (Component 3.1) and a TA for addressing the supply-side constraints (Component 3.2).
                         These TA activities involve preparation and establishment of policy and regulatory reform,
                         improve governance to strengthen the primary and secondary mortgage markets and enabling
                         environment for housing finance both for demand side as well as supply-side for affordable
                         housing.

                         As explained in Section I.6, given the nature of TA under Component 3.1 (housing and real estate
                         information system, secondary mortgage development, regulatory and institutional reform for
                         housing provident fund, development of mortgage guarantee system, policy advisory on housing
                         microfinance), all activities will not (i) directly or indirectly support engineering design or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical studies leading to the preparation of physical investments; (ii) directly or indirectly
                         support the drafting of any policies, strategies, laws or regulations with environmental and social
                         impacts; (iii) establish or support the formulation of land use plans; or (iv) directly or indirectly
                         support capacity building to support institutions to carry out downstream activities that have
                         potential environmental and social impacts.

                         Similarly, activities under subcomponent 3.2 (i.e., development and reform of public housing
                         programs, strengthening Perumnas as a Public Affordable Housing developer, and strengthening
                         local government housing policy and planning capacity) will not: (i) directly or indirectly support
                         engineering design or technical studies leading to the preparation of physical investments; or (ii)
                         directly establish or support the formulation of land use plans. However, activities under
                         subcomponent 3.2 may: (i) directly or indirectly support the drafting of any policies, strategies or
                         regulations with environmental and social impacts; or (ii) directly or indirectly support capacity
                         building to support institutions to carry out downstream activities that may have potential
                         environmental and social impacts

                         During Program implementation, the preparation of policies, strategies and regulations prepared
                         under Component 3.2 will include assessment of the environmental and social impacts that would
                         entail, and identification of relevant approaches to address such impacts during the implementation
                         of such policies, strategies and regulations later on. Procedures and requirements for carrying out

                                                                    Page 13 of 18
                          such assessment and identification to address potential environmental and social impacts are
                          specified in the ESMF. The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the preparation of policies, strategies
                          and regulations should include such procedures and requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          For capacity building activities, PIUs will ensure that the Terms of Reference (TOR) for capacity
                          building activities for institutions who would carry out downstream activities involving
                          investments will include requirements development and delivery of training materials on
                          environmental and social safeguards management. Procedures and requirements for environmental
                          and social management are specified in the ESMF.

                          TORs for activities supported by Component 3.2 will be reviewed and approved by the Bank.

                           Refer to Section I.6 for Indigenous Peoples and land acquisition/resettlement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           In the long term, the Program will provide positive impacts to the quality of life of the
                           beneficiaries who have better access to housing finance and whose homes are improved to the
                           standard living condition, and hence their neighborhood (where there will be no longer sub-
                           standard houses).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower prepared the ESMF as the main guideline to prevent and manage the potential
                           environmental and social issues during the implementation of the Program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Both PIUs (DG of Housing Finance and DG of Housing Provision) do not have a special unit in
                          their organizational structure for environmental and social safeguards management. At appraisal,
                          the sub-directorate of facilitation under the Directorate of Self-Help Housing will be in charge of
                          the BSPS safeguards management. Capacity of technical staff under these two PIUs on safeguards
                          management is limited. Further, the awareness and knowledge of Provincial Satkers as well as
                          local governments, consultants and facilitators who are involved in the BSPS on environmental
                          and social safeguards need to be improved through training. On the other hand, lenders such as
                          BTN, have a certain level of awareness and implement requirements of environmental and social
                          safeguards through screening, IMB implementation, and audit of the developers who built houses
                          for FLPP beneficiaries.

                          Both PIUs have developed a capacity building program for stakeholders involved in BP2BT and
                          BSPS. This will be part of the Component 1, 2 and 3 activities. The capacity building program is
                          part of the ESMF. The Directorate General of Housing Finance and Directorate General of
                          Housing Provision will ensure that the ESMF is consistently implemented in the three Program
                          components. During Program implementation, the sub-directorates of Monitoring and Evaluation
                          under each of these directorates will monitor and evaluate the compliance of the Program
                          implementation with the ESMF. Capacity building including awareness training and assistance for
                          the PMC, PIUs, lenders, local governments, consultants and facilitators on environmental and
                          social aspects (including safeguards) will be one of the most critical factors to mitigate risks. In


                                                                    Page 14 of 18
                          addition, the establishment of the tasks of the Directorates for Monitoring and Evaluation each
                          under the DG of Housing Finance and DG of Housing Provision of the MPWH to ensure that
                          ESMF is implemented consistently is a must.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          For BP2BT, lenders will also play a key role in ensuring that the ESMF is followed by BP2BT
                          beneficiaries. The Directorate of Housing Finance Scheme will monitor lenders in ensuring that
                          the ESMF is consistently followed by the BP2BT beneficiaries. For BSPS, the roles of provincial
                          Satker, local governments and facilitators hired by the Satker are key to ensure and monitor that
                          implementation of the Program meets the requirements specified in the ESMF. For Component 3,
                          the Directorates of Planning of the two DGs will ensure that the Terms of References (TORs) for
                          advisory services, technical assistance and policy development will include environmental and
                          social safeguards management specified in the ESMF, as relevant.

                           Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM). Both PIUs will establish a GRM including a Unit or Staff
                           assigned to manage the grievances and prepare an SOP for BP2BT and BSPS. This GRM is
                           dedicated to all issues related to the Program and not exclusively for safeguards. The address/
                           contact info for complaints will be disseminated widely through the website and through Program
                           socialization and training.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the Project Management Committee (PMC), PIUs, namely DG Housing
                           Finance and DG Housing Provision under MPWH that will be the executing agency for the
                           Program. A PMC will be institutionalized to oversee and coordinate the implementation of the
                           project. The PMC will be headed by the Echelon I of the Ministry of Public Works and Housing
                           which will oversee the two Project Implementation Units (PIUs). The PMC will regularly
                           coordinate and report to the Steering Committee in the semi-annually coordination meeting. A
                           Ministerial Decree establishing the PMC and the PIUs will be issued prior to the Program
                           implementation and will be part of the NAHP condition of effectiveness. The implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the safeguards will be the responsibility of the PIUs.

                          A stakeholders➢❨ consultation for the draft ESMF was carried out on October 13, 2016.
                          Participants were representatives of participating District and City Governments, lenders, NGOs,
                          universities, as well as practitioners, housing experts, Perumnas, and PIU staff. Should during
                          Program implementation IPs are presence in a particular area of Program influence, outreach and
                          socialization will be carried out by the PIUs and local governments with a free, prior, informed
                          consultation to provide them with good information on the requirements and procedures to access
                          the housing finance and grant facilities provided under Component 1 and 2, respectively, so that
                          their participation in the Program would increase. Consultation requirements and approaches are
                          specified in the IPPF as part of the ESMF.

                          Participants of the consultation supported the Program for adopting the ESMF, however, were
                          concerned and requested the Program to ensure that ESMF will be implemented consistently
                          through adoption of operations manual or safeguards technical guidelines that outline clear roles of
                          each party involved in the Program and to provide adequate training for related stakeholders.
                          Further, the participants were concerned on the capacity of the local governments to verify and
                          monitor the enforcement of the building permits and the issuance of the certificates of the building
                          function acceptance and the need to increase awareness of the individual beneficiaries and/or
                          developers in utilizing environmentally friendly housing materials. In particular, for Component 2


                                                                   Page 15 of 18
                           - BSPS, issues that may arise from the Program implementation are conformity of the location of
                           the improved houses with the spatial plan, landscape for the settlement, and environmental impacts
                           during construction. Verification of the beneficiaries of BSPS is another concern of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           participants of the stakeholders➢❨ consultation. For the TA under Component 3, the participants
                           suggested that the Perumnas would only use government land and/or its own land and occupiers
                           are provided housing. The draft ESMF (Bahasa Indonesia version) was disclosed in the
                           Program➢❨ s website www.bspspupr.org on October 4, 2016.

                           The ESMF will be elaborated and included into the Program Operational Manual, which will be
                           reviewed and approved by the Bank then socialized and distributed to Program management staff,
                           lenders, district and city governments, consultants, and facilitators. The final draft ESMF had been
                           disclosed in the www.bspspupr.org on October 4, 2016 and was consulted with relevant
                           stakeholders on October 13, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Sep-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Sep-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                        04-Oct-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Sep-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Sep-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                        04-Oct-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Sep-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                        04-Oct-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                     Page 16 of 18
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 17 of 18
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Taimur Samad
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 01-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                      Date: 01-Dec-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 18 of 18
