                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR19572
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 16-Aug-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Zambia                          Project ID:               P127254
    Project Name:                      Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase II) (P127254)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Iretomiwa Olatunji
    Estimated Appraisal                14-Mar-2013                     Estimated Board           09-May-2013
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEN01                           Financing                 Specific Investment
                                                                       Instrument:               Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:            36.00                             Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                 0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                            0.00
    Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                                                                       5.00
    Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                                       31.00
    Total                                                                                                              36.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objective of the project would be to strengthen Zambia's institutional framework for
climate resilience and improve the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin.

Progress towards reaching this objective would be measured through the following Project Development
Objective (PDO) level indicators:

1) 25% real increase in budgetary allocation supporting climate resilience in vulnerable sectors
2) At least 70% of direct beneficiaries under targeted districts, wards and communities assessed to have used
information and planning tools to respond to climate change and variability
3) Average flow velocity of target canals at 80% of optimal (limiting flow standard of 0.6 m/s for sandy clay

                                                      Page 1 of 8
soils)
4) Number of direct project beneficiary households (of which women-headed and very vulnerable
households)

The number of direct project beneficiaries under Participatory Adaptation is estimated at 130,000 (about
25,800 households). This comprises 12 percent of the total population of the Barotse sub-basin, and 73
percent of the population of 24 targeted wards (sub-districts) and 8 target districts in the sub-basin. At the
community level, the project would target the estimated 32 percent of the population that consists of women-
headed households, as well as male-headed households considered to be very or extremely vulnerable
(earning less than 10 ZMW of cash income/adult/month and/or suffering from more than 5 months of food
insecurity a year). Through strengthened management of canals, the project would help generate an
estimated 3,250 person-days of labor-intensive works, and directly benefit the rural population estimated to
live in wards adjacent to the canals (about 41,700 people)
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The development objective of the project would be to strengthen Zambia's institutional framework for
climate resilience and improve the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities in the Barotse sub-basin.

Progress towards reaching this objective would be measured through the following Project Development
Objective (PDO) level indicators:

1) 25% real increase in budgetary allocation supporting climate resilience in vulnerable sectors
2) At least 70% of direct beneficiaries under targeted districts, wards and communities assessed to have used
information and planning tools to respond to climate change and variability
3) Average flow velocity of target canals at 80% of optimal (limiting flow standard of 0.6 m/s for sandy clay
soils)
4) Number of direct project beneficiary households (of which women-headed and very vulnerable
households)

The number of direct project beneficiaries under Participatory Adaptation is estimated at 130,000 (about
25,800 households). This comprises 12 percent of the total population of the Barotse sub-basin, and 73
percent of the population of 24 targeted wards (sub-districts) and 8 target districts in the sub-basin. At the
community level, the project would target the estimated 32 percent of the population that consists of women-
headed households, as well as male-headed households considered to be very or extremely vulnerable
(earning less than 10 ZMW of cash income/adult/month and/or suffering from more than 5 months of food
insecurity a year). Through strengthened management of canals, the project would help generate an
estimated 3,250 person-days of labor-intensive works, and directly benefit the rural population estimated to
live in wards adjacent to the canals (about 41,700 people)
3. Project Description
The proposed project (US$36 million) would have three components:

1. Strategic National Program Support
2. Support to Participatory Adaptation
3. Pilot Participatory Adaptation

Component 1 would be national in scope. Components 2 and 3 would focus on the Barotse sub-basin of the
Zambezi ? the pilot area for Project activities.

Component 1: Strategic National Program Support (US$9.6 million grant). This component aims to
strengthen the national institutional and financial framework for climate resilience, thus providing the

                                                  Page 2 of 8
umbrella for long-term transformational change in Zambia. The strengthened framework and public
awareness will in turn contribute to a more effective mainstreaming of climate resilience in vulnerable
economic sectors, and allow lessons learned from the field to be progressively scaled-up. It includes two
sub-components:

(a) Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Support to National Climate Change Program (US$5.8 million grant),
comprising the following activities:
(i) Mainstreaming Climate Resilience into key national and sectoral policies and programs, through use of
screening guidelines adapted to the Zambian context;
(ii) Institutional strengthening, through post-graduate and short-term training for climate change champions,
knowledge sharing, and analysis and dissemination of lessons learned;
(iii) A study on Management of External Resources and Climate Risk Financing, to enhance Zambia?s
capacity to access and manage climate funds directly, and support the establishment of viable climate risk
financing instruments (such as contingency funds, multi-donor climate funds, and possibly insurance) ; and

(iv) Incremental support to the National Climate Change Secretariat, including technical assistance, fiduciary
support, programmatic monitoring and evaluation, and incremental operating costs.

(b) Sub-component 1.2: Strengthened Climate Information (US$3.8 million grant), providing more reliable,
accessible and timely early warning and climate information to users. The project would support:
(i) A Social marketing awareness campaign to promote the importance of addressing climate change risks
from national to local level;
(ii) Strengthened early warning system through the application of rapid communication systems between line
agencies and communities in the pilot sub-basins, and
(iii) Establishment of a pilot open data platform to facilitate the sharing of climate risk data amongst
decision makers.

Component 2: Support to Participatory Adaptation(US$5.6 million grant).This component will strengthen the
adaptive capacity of vulnerable rural communities in the Barotse sub-basin, through:
(i) Facilitation and strengthening of community decision-making, through the services of experienced non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), who would assist target communities in understanding and articulating
climate risks, use participatory approaches to prioritizing adaptation options, preparing sub-grant proposals
and implementing and monitoring the sub-grants; this would also include facilitation of community-based
canal management.
(ii) Specialized technical assistance and training to Western Province and district councils, including (a) a
climate risk and assessment study for the Barotse floodplain which would consider planning for its optimal
and long-term management; (b) technical assistance to provincial and council-level planners to incorporate
climate resilience into spatial plans and regional budgets; (c) provision of experts on both structural
(infrastructure) and non-structural (soft) adaptation options; (d) communication equipment and services to
facilitate access (by the beneficiaries) to best practice adaptation knowledge and centers of expertise; and (e )
technical assistance and workshop support to Western Province in improving the policy for, and recurrent
financing of traditional canals.
(iii) Incremental project management support to Western Province and target councils, including in financial
management, safeguards screening, monitoring and evaluation, equipment, vehicles and incremental
operating costs to oversee field operations.

25. Component 3: Pilot Participatory Adaptation (estimated costs US$15.8million grant and US$5.0 million
credit).This component will fund actual participatory adaptation investments in the Barotse sub-basin. It
would include two sub-components, the first focusing on investments prioritized through climate resilient
planning, and the second on optimizing the climate resilience function of traditional floodplain canals. Both


                                                   Page 3 of 8
would be implemented progressively, incorporate lessons learned after each annual flood and/or droughts:

(a) Sub-component 3.1: Community Adaptation Sub-grants(US$15.8 million grant), would fund priority
adaptation sub-projects identified through the process of climate resilient planning supported by Component
2. It would be piloted in approximately 8 districts and 24 wards of the Barotse sub-basin. The sub-grants
would be available at the (i) district; (ii) ward; (iii) community/group; and (iv) individual innovators
(champions?) level, and would be disbursed directly to beneficiaries. Beneficiary proposals would have to
demonstrate clear adaptation co-benefits and meet the eligibility and capacity criteria specified in the
Operational Manual. The sub-projects would be largely demand-driven, but also benefit from external
expertise to ensure transformational change. At the community/group level, the interventions would
specifically target women-headed households, as well as households classified as very or extremely
vulnerable. The project would further support (v) an Adaptation Contingency Fund to progressively reward
the best performing beneficiaries, and fund additional sub-projects upon early warning of a disaster.

(b) Sub-component 3.2. Rehabilitation and Strengthened Management of Traditional Canals(US$5.0 million
credit).This sub-component will focus on rehabilitation and strengthened management works of about 5
priority traditional canals on the floodplain, to optimize their use in climate resilience (particularly in the
management of floods and droughts). The project would fund both mechanized as well as labor-intensive
(cash-for-works) activities. Self-reliance arrangements would be promoted amongst water user groups for
tertiary/feeder canals, although the project could consider sub-grants to these beneficiary groups to fund tools
and other required materials. The design of the works would be done in close collaboration with traditional
and local authorities to retain their traditional structure as much as possible, while optimizing their use in
managing climate related stresses.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will be implemented at the national level for Component 1 (Strategic National Program), and in
the Barotse sub-basin of the Zambezi for Components 2 and 3.

The Barotse sub-basin is home to 1.1 million people and one of the most vulnerable areas in Zambia. A
designated Ramsar site and Zambia?s second largest wetland, it is currently proposed as a World Heritage
Site. This vast flood plain is critical for livelihoods and culture of the Lozi people, who developed intricate
systems of traditional resource management under their King (Litunga) and the Barotse Royal Establishment
(BRE). Having learned to live with floods for centuries, the Lozi rely on a complex system of traditional
earth lined canals for transport, drainage, irrigation, fisheries, and cultural ceremonies. In recent times,
livelihoods have been increasingly disrupted by unpredictable floods and periods of drought and intense
rainfall, as well as changing socio-economic patterns. Parts of the traditional canals built in the late 1880s
have become silted, affecting agriculture and fisheries production. These impacts are affecting the livelihoods
and water resources of the Lozi ? for example, Muoyowamo canal, where the traditional Kuomboko
ceremony is performed (marking the migration of the Lozi king and his people by boat to higher lands at the
end of the rainy season), has had to relocate parts of the trajectory due to increased erosion. Addressing these
challenges effectively is the focus of the proposed project. Project preparation has been endorsed by BRE
and the authorities of Western Province, and has involved close partnerships with local experts, including
Red Cross Zambia, the National Heritage Conservation Commission, the Zambia Civil Society Network, and
youth champions.

Component 2 and 3 are expected to be implemented in 14 districts of the Barotse sub- Basin of the Zambezi,
of which are in Kazungula (Southern Province), Kalabo, Kaoma, Limulunga, Lukulu, Luampa, Mitete,
Mwandi, Mongu, Nalolo, Senanga, Sesheke, Shangombo and Sioma (all in Western Province).. While sub-
component 3.1 (Community Adaptation sub-grants) would cover all 14 pilot districts, sub-component 3.2


                                                  Page 4 of 8
(Rehabilitation and Strengthened management of traditional canals) would be implemented primarily in the
districts of Mongu and Senanga, where most of the canals are located. In total, sub-component 3.1 is
expected to provide some 24 district-level sub-grants (estimated at US$125,000/unit), 68 ward-level sub-
grants (estimated at US$50,000/unit), and 1,150 community/group level sub-grants (of which a quarter would
be structural and three quarters ?soft? adaptation sub-grants). The project would also provide individual
grants to local champions (e.g. innovative farmers who have piloted climate resilient crops), averaging about
US$100/beneficiary. Local authorities have prioritized about 7 traditional canals, of which 3 are primarily
used for open canoe navigation and cultural events, and 4 for drainage and agriculture. In total, these canals
have an estimated length of 300 km. However, the specific location and type of interventions (whether
mechanized, labor based, or carried out through self-help mechanisms) will require further consultations with
water users and traditional authorities, and are therefore not known in advance.

A preliminary screening of the prototypes of sub-projects, including canal rehabilitation to be funded under
Component 3 (Pilot Participatory Adaptation) complemented by field inspections during pre-appraisal
suggest that any potential environmental impacts are likely to be short-term, site specific, non-sensitive or
reversible, and that adequate mitigation measures can be incorporated to reduce the negative impacts. For
this reason, as well as due to the uncertain nature and location of the implementation activities, the national
team has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and Pest Management Plan (PMP) specifying the requirements for screening the sub-
grants and canal interventions, including unlikely cases for which specific EMPs or RAPs may be required.
A more detailed assessment for Conceptual Design; Environmental and Social Impact assessment(ESIA)
study for the improved use of the priority traditional canals which was commissioned has been completed
and available during the first year of implementation. This study helped to determine the more precise type
and location of the interventions and, where required, prepare an EMP and/or RAP. The ESIA report
described both social, cultural and environmental baseline in the Study area. And the main recommendation
from this ESIA is that local governments and the BRE needs to be engaged as soon as possible in developing
a comprehensive wetland management plan for the plain. This plan could fill the gaps in scientific knowledge
on ecology of the plain and could ensure sustainability of natural resources uses such as fishery. It would also
define areas of high ecological value (such as the Banded Neolebias critical habitat) and implement a zoning
of the floodplain. This plan would call for redefining delineation of the current Ramsar site by integrating
wetlands around Lubitamei and the upland plateau lakes north of Mongu.

The ESMF, PMP and RPF were concluded and disclosed in draft form in-country on 7 March, 2013 and
submitted to Infoshop on 6 March (ESMF) and on 7 March 2013 (RPF and PMP). The ESIA has since been
disclosed in country on May 15th, 2015 and submitted to Infoshop on 1 October, 2015.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba( GEN01 )

 Njavwa Namposya Chilufya( GSU07 )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   Yes
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
Pest Management OP 4.09                       Yes
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes


                                                   Page 5 of 8
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Preliminary screening of the prototypes of sub-projects and field inspections during pre-appraisal suggests
that any potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be short-term, site specific, non-sensitive or
reversible, and that adequate mitigation measures can be incorporated to reduce the negative impacts. It is
unlikely that actual relocation of households will result from sub-project activities.

Prototype sub-projects under Component 3 may include: (i) upgrading and retrofitting (to climate resilient
standards) social or small-scale productive infrastructure such as schools, health clinics, feeder roads,
markets, clinics, etc.; (ii) conservation agriculture or diversification into climate-resilient crops or livestock;
(iii) management of natural resources such as reeds and grasses for craft making; (iv) community based canal
management (de-silting and cleaning, minor dredging, aligning slopes to prevent erosion, and vegetative
lining); (v) improved drainage and water management; (iv) community preparedness support, including
better access to climate information, strengthened early warning systems; (v) elevation of settlement mounds
on the floodplain; (vi) floating platforms for evacuation of people and livestock; (vii) crop storage facilities;
and (viii) disease control. Associated short term impacts for upgrading and retrofitting might include air
pollution from dust, noise from construction activities, occupational health risks, localized disposal of
construction materials, and temporary sand displacement due to potential heightening of settlement mounts.
There could also be an expansion in crop areas in the vicinity of rehabilitated canals and boreholes, but these
are located mostly in degraded land. Canals rehabilitation could lead to some loss of arable land.
However, the low population density relative to the size of the floodplain implies that it would be relatively
easy to locate replacement or compensation for land holdings for any potentially affected households. These
potential impacts and mitigation measures are further described in the disclosed ESMF and RPF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Over the long-term, heightened awareness of climate risks and incorporation of risk and exposure mapping
into local planning may lead communities and local Governments to opt to install permanent settlements and
critical infrastructure away from the floodplain, into higher and less exposed grounds. The project will also
promote livelihoods that diversify income sources for very vulnerable households away from climate
sensitive sectors (e.g. exposed crops and natural resources) ? these may include micro-enterprises, agro-
processing, as well as production of crafts and goods for sale in nearby Namibia and Angola. This
transformational process is already under way, as people increasingly settle in district centers. As such, the
participatory planning and mapping processes initiated by the project are expected to primarily assist
communities and local decision makers in making more informed decisions which will benefit them over the
long-term. Under the two studies currently proposed for the floodplain, there would be specific
recommendations for social and environmental safeguards to be followed should this long-term population
and infrastructure relocation trend accelerate.

                                                     Page 6 of 8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The project seeks to alleviate climate vulnerability of the Barotse community in their existing sub-region and
is therefore not expected to have any irreversible adverse negative impacts; no alternatives are relevant to the
project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Finance, through the Secretariat, has prepared: (i) an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to provide a uniform approach for addressing potential negative impacts, and specify the
arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing and monitoring specific Environmental and Social
Management Plans (as required during implementation); (iii) a Resettlement Policy Framework to address
any potential impacts resulting from involuntary resettlement, land acquisition or restriction to means of
livelihood; and (c) a Pest Management Plan to guide specific investments (such as canal rehabilitation or
specific sub-grants) that may require the application of pesticides. The Zambia Environmental Management
Agency (ZEMA) is responsible for ensuring that all requisite measures are put in place prior to project
implementation and is responsible for providing clearances for all documents prepared, as well as ensure
their disclosure. These procedures will be included also in the Operational Manual for Participatory
Adaptation (currently under preparation).
During the first year of project implementation, a more detailed assessment and consultation study will be
carried out for canal rehabilitation, which will include, if required, specific EMPs and RAPs in accordance
with the ESMF and RPF. The Conceptual Design; Environmental and Social Impact assessment(ESIA)
assessment study has since been completed and available . This study helped to determine the more precise
type and location of the interventions and, where required, prepare an EMP and/or RAP. The ESIA report
described both social, cultural and environmental baseline in the Study area. And the main recommendation
from this ESIA is that local governments and the BRE needs to be engaged as soon as possible in developing
a comprehensive wetland management plan for the plain. This plan could fill the gaps in scientific knowledge
on ecology of the plain and could ensure sustainability of natural resources uses such as fishery. It would also
define areas of high ecological value (such as the Banded Neolebias critical habitat) and implement a zoning
of the floodplain. This plan would call for redefining delineation of the current Ramsar site by integrating
wetlands around Lubitamei and the upland plateau lakes north of Mongu.

The ESMF, PMP and RPF were concluded and disclosed in draft form in-country on 7 March, 2013 and
submitted to Infoshop on 6 March (ESMF) and on 7 March 2013 (RPF and PMP). The ESIA has since been
disclosed in country on May 15th, 2015 and submitted to Infoshop on 1 October, 2015.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for the projects are the Barotse communities, the Barotse Royal Establishment, the
provincial and district authorities (including the Councils), the National Heritage Conservation Commission,
WorldFish, NGO partners working in the target districts (including CONCERN, Oxfam, Red Cross Zambia,
WWF, the Zambia Climate Change Network, youth groups, and others), Agora Micro-Finance, and the
National Government.

These stakeholders have been consulted since project inception and will also be consulted during the
preparation of the environmental and social assessment studies. ZEMA is the key stakeholder for ensuring
consultation of all project affected people. It is their requirement that prospective developers and or project
proponents conduct consultation meetings before they issue clearances for preparation of environmental
studies. Such information is also required during study preparation. In addition, ZEMA conducts regular
project audits to ensure the approved specifications have been followed.
.




                                                   Page 7 of 8
 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes   [X]     No []       NA          []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes   [X]     No []       NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes   [X]     No []       NA          []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes   [X]     No []       NA          []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes     [X]     No []       NA          []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes   [X]     No []       NA          []
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):        Name: Iretomiwa Olatunji
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:         Name:                                   Date:
    Practice Manager/Manager:   Name:                                   Date:




                                                Page 8 of 8
