                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                      Report No.:ISDSC16828
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 11-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Bangladesh                   Project ID:              P150220
    Project Name:                 Bangladesh Weather and Climate Services Regional Project (P150220)
    Task Team Leader(s):          Poonam Pillai,Nadia Sharmin,Shahpar Selim
    Estimated Appraisal           07-Dec-2015                  Estimated Board          03-Jun-2016
    Date:                                                      Date:
    Managing Unit:                GSU18                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                               Instrument:              Financing
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       127.80                         Total Bank Financing: 113.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     14.80
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                          113.00
      Total                                                                                                127.80
    Environmental Category:       B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    The main objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the capacity of the Government of Bangladesh to
    deliver weather and climate information in priority sectors and to prepare for climate variability and hydro-
    meteorological disasters.
    C. Project Description
    The project interventions are expected to encompass improved meteorological information services,
    improved hydrological information services, strengthened forecasting and early warning systems, and
    improved dissemination of agro-meteorological information. It will be implemented over a period of 5 years.

    The project has the following main components:

    Component A. Strengthening Meteorological Information and Services (USD 40 million)

    The main objective of this component is to strengthen lead time and accuracy of weather forecasting and


                                               Page 1 of 7
Multi-hazard early warning systems. This component will be implemented by the BMD and include the
following:

Sub-Component A1: Strengthening Meteorological Monitoring, Forecasting and Disaster Related Early
Warning Systems (28 million): This sub-component aims to support modernization of BMD?s
meteorological observation network over land, air and ocean, weather forecasting capacity and strengthening
public weather and climate services. Modernization will be national in scope including critical habitats such
as the Sunderbans. It will finance installation of new Automatic Weather Station netowrks, real time rain
gauges with telemetry, upper air soundings and strength marine meteorology. The telecommunication
system at BMD and its divisional offices, database management, will be upgraded. The sub-component will
support access to high performance computers; state-of-the-art numerical weather prediction tools, and
improved hardware and software for BMD and divisional offices. Modernization of BMD?s information
system will help it to improve its capacity for handling data from international and national observation
networks, and observations from satellites and radar network. The weather forecasting system is expected to
be upgraded from 24 hours to 7 days forecast with verification of reliability. This sub-component will also
support strengthening public weather services, development and implementation of a National Framework
for Climate services, development of climate information products and services, support for urban weather
services, and design of end-to-end early warning systems for severe weather phenomenon (such as
thunderstorms) in targeted areas.

Sub-Component A2: Institutional Capacity Strengthening, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
(USD 7 million): This sub-component will provide strategic support for enhancing institutional capacity for
weather and climate service delivery at the national and divisional levels. It will support strengthening policy
and regulatory framework for BMD operations. The capacity strengthening of BMD will be improved
through modern equipment, training and capacity building and collaboration with international
meteorological institutions. This sub-component will also support successful project management, targeted
analytic studies, and monitoring and evaluation.

Sub-Component A3: Regional Collaboration: (USD 5 million) This sub-component will support expanding
GTS bandwidth to improve exchange of meteorological data to and from regional centers, scaling up
ongoing regional pilot mechanisms such as Bangladesh?s contribution and participation in the South Asia
Climate Outlook Forum (SASCOF), support to scaling up SAARC- Severe Thunderstorm Observation and
Regional Modelling (STORM) program; participation by BMD officials in regional workshops; twinning
arrangements with regional and international hydrometeorological agencies; regional technical studies;
establishment of climate portal for accessing and sharing regional weather and climate information products;
and regional consultations and workshops to support disaster resilience.

Component B: Strengthening Water and Flood Information Services (USD 27 million)

The main objective of this component is to improve lead time and accuracy of hydrological forecasting, risk
information and strengthen early warning systems. The component would be implemented by the BWDB
and includes the following:

Sub-Component B1: Strengthening Hydrological Monitoring, Forecasting (USD 15 million): This sub-
component will support design and modernization of the country?s hydrological observation network and
forecasting, including installation of automated hydrological stations, strengthening groundwater monitoring
network, sediment monitoring and measurement of river morphology. BWDB?s existing equipment repair
and calibration facility will be upgraded and a centralized Data Center will be established. Multipurpose
communication technologies for transmission and processing data to enable higher quality forecast and
increase flood warning lead times. This sub-component will also support acquisition of hardware and


                                            Page 2 of 7
software for improving hydrological and flood (flash floods, urban, riverine, coastal floods) forecasting. This
would include a flood prediction model capable of assimilating river flow routing information and
generating inundation maps. The model would be developed, calibrated and validated for basins/rivers in
Bangladesh.

Sub-Component B2: Early Warning Systems and Disaster Risk Management in Priority Areas (USD 7
million): The objective of this sub-component is to improve Early Warning Systems (EWS) and Disaster
Risk Management in priority areas. Building on existing risk assessments, this sub-component will support
development of end-to end flood related early warning systems, including identification of risk through
multi-hazard risk assessments leading to generation of credible risk information for informing mitigation
actions at policy, planning and community levels; establish decision support tools for flood risk management
including software, hardware; installation of a now-casting system for flash floods and strengthen
community based early warning systems. This sub-component will be implemented in close coordination
with sub-component B1. While forecasting and procurement of systems and equipment related to forecasting
would be covered under sub-component B1, this has an intrinsic relationship with dissemination of early
warnings as a critical input.Priority areas will be identified during preparation.

Sub-Component B3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
( USD 5 million): This sub-component would support institutional strengthening of the Hydrology Division
of the BWDB. This would focus on strengthening the capacity of central, divisional and sectional offices of
BWDB; establishment of a knowledge center that would serve as a repository of all water and flood
forecasting related data and information, technical studies and project management. This sub-component
will also support M&E activities to track implementation progress.

Component C: Agro-Met Information Systems Development and Use (USD 8 million)

The main objective of this component is to provide appropriate agro-meteorological services to farmers in
priority districts. The main implementing agency for this component will be the DAE and has the following
sub-components:

Sub-component C1: Development of a Decision Support System for Agro-Meteorological Information (USD
4 million): This sub-component will support the development and operationalization of a Decision Support
System for processing agro-meteorological information. Activities to be funded include setting up a web-
based portal for agromet services; support for hardware and software; development of agricultural
monitoring products; risk mapping of climate vulnerable communities; and development of agricultural
information products.

Sub-component C2: Dissemination of Agrometeorological products to farming communities in different
agro-ecological zones (USD 2 million): This sub-component would support outreach and dissemination of
agrometeorological information services to farmers in priority districts; and development of mobile
applications and use of new technologies. The sub-component will also support capacity building and
training at the farm level for improved use of weather and climate information.

Sub-component C3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
(USD 2 million): This sub-component would support technical capacity strengthening of DAE staff,
technical studies, participation in regional fora on agromet service delivery, training visits, project
management and monitoring and evaluation. The use and impact of disseminated information would be
monitored and assessed at the community level through this sub-component.

Component D: Contingent Emergency Response Component (USD 0)


                                            Page 3 of 7
Following an adverse natural or man-made event or that causes a major disaster, the Government may
request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to this component (which presently carries a zero allocation) to
s upport response and reconstruction. This component would allow the Government to request the Bank to
reallocate project funds and designate them as IRM funds to be engaged to partially cover emergency
response and recovery costs. This component could also beused to channel additional funds should they
become available as a result of the emergency.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Nationwide; including the Bay of Bengal. Specific locations are not known at this time.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) under Ministry of Defense (MoD), Bangladesh Water
Development Board (BWDB) under Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) and the Department of
Agriculture Extension (DAE) are the implementing agencies.

Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) is a government organization under the administrative
control of the Ministry of Defense. BMD falls under the non-military category of the MoD. The staffs are
hired through the Public Service Commission. BMD does not have any prior experience in working with the
World Bank though it has experience working with other donor agencies particularly JICA. During
preparation, it will be ensured that BMD?s administrative location under the MoD will not hinder in any
respect the World Bank?s ability to carry out its project supervision, oversight, operational and fiduciary
responsibilities. Prior to negotiations stage, BDM will prepare an O&M plan to ensure long terms
sustainability. Further, BWDB and DAE have previous experience in implementing IDA funded projects,
though BWDB?s Hydrology Division has not been involved in any of those projects. The capacity of this
Division including for safeguards will need to be strengthened.

The MoD will be the nodal ministry; it will create the Project Steering Committee (PSC) with
representatives from other ministries. The PSC will be responsible for overall project oversight. Each
implementing agency will have its own Project Management Unit (PMU). There will be one Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) under MoD which will coordinate with all three PMUs and will operate under the
overall guidance of the PSC. The implementing Ministries will have the overall responsibility for the project
implementation including, but not limited to, reporting, monitoring and evaluation, procurement control,
financial management, audit and disbursements, compliance with environmental and social assessments, as
well as coordination with the line agencies and the World Bank. It will be necessary to strengthen each
implementing agency with PMUs housing professional, technical, procurement, financial management,
social, and environment staff that would use appropriate procurement and financial management systems,
and procedures with adequate internal control arrangements. These would be complemented by a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) for BMD. For BWDB and DAE, GAAPs for other
IDA projects will be updated and incorporated as needed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                    Team
 Md Istiak Sobhan( GEN06 )
 Sabah Moyeen( GSU06 )
 Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi( GEN06 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)


                                            Page 4 of 7
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes             The proposed project is not expected to create any
                                                    significant environmental impact since it is targeted
                                                    to develop institutional capacity for transmission
                                                    and processing data to enable higher quality
                                                    forecast and increase flood warning lead times.
                                                    However, the project will support both (i)
                                                    Strengthening Meteorological Monitoring,
                                                    Forecasting and Disaster related Early Warning
                                                    System and (ii) Strengthening Hydrological
                                                    Monitoring and Forecasting. These will include
                                                    acquisition of hardware and software. Installation of
                                                    some hardware may require physical infrastructure
                                                    development at the field. Details of the hardware
                                                    support and associated infrastructure are not known
                                                    at this stage and the project is classified as Category
                                                    ?B?. An Environmental and Social Management
                                                    Framework will be prepared for the project to
                                                    describe the procedure for environmental and social
                                                    management in the proposed project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          TBD            The project physical activities are not expected to
                                                    lead any conversion or degradation of critical or
                                                    other natural habitats. However, the modernization
                                                    of the network includes Sundarbans, which is an
                                                    UNESCO heritage site and the single largest
                                                    mangrove forest. In addition, there will be some
                                                    installations in natural water bodies. Accordingly,
                                                    the policy has been triggered as TBD. No separate
                                                    instrument is required for natural habitats. It will be
                                                    covered under ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No             The proposed project is not expected to have any
                                                    impact on the health and quality of forests, the
                                                    rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                    dependence upon or interaction with forests; and
                                                    the management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                    forests or plantations. As such, the policy has not
                                                    been triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09              No             The project will not finance procurement of
                                                    fertilizers and pesticides. Also the project will not
                                                    influence on the increased use of fertilizers and
                                                    pesticides. Accordingly, the policy has not been
                                                    triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD          Some of the project locations may have cultural
                                                    property associated with them that may be impacted
                                                    by infrastructure development work. A Cultural
                                                    Property Action Framework may need to be
                                                    prepared as part of ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes            The project is expected to be implemented
                                                    nationwide including in the Southern part of the

                                      Page 5 of 7
                                                          country where Indigenous People may live. The
                                                          specific locations for project interventions are not
                                                          known at this stage and so an Indigenous Peoples
                                                          Development Framework (IPDF) or Small, Ethnic
                                                          and other Vulnerable Communities Development
                                                          Framework (SEVCDF). The latter will be included
                                                          as part of the Social Management Framework (part
                                                          of Environmental and Social Management
                                                          Framework) discussed below, and will include
                                                          consultation and communication strategies and
                                                          measures to enhance the positive impacts of the
                                                          project for the communities.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     Yes           Under Component A and B the project will upgrade
                                                          and modernize equipment, install new equipment
                                                          and weather stations, as well as update
                                                          communication and data generation/dissemination
                                                          processes. While it is understood that the scale of
                                                          these activities will be relatively small in terms of
                                                          land and space usage, and that the activities will be
                                                          mainly carried out within the existing premises of
                                                          the implementing agencies, it cannot be guaranteed
                                                          that no land acquisition will be required or that
                                                          people and livelihoods on private and/or public
                                                          lands will not be impacted by the project. Since the
                                                          project?s scope is nationwide and the specific
                                                          locations for the various interventions has not been
                                                          determined a Social Management Framework will
                                                          be prepared for the project to include a
                                                          Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a
                                                          Consultation and Communication Strategy (CCS)
                                                          focused on ongoing information and feedback
                                                          which can lend itself to participatory project design.
                                                          Component C would support outreach and
                                                          dissemination of agromet information services to
                                                          farmers in priority districts, development of mobile
                                                          applications and use of new technologies. The
                                                          views and needs of communities in terms weather
                                                          and climactic situations they face and the
                                                          type/frequency of forecasts which would be locally
                                                          useful, needs to be captured and analyzed via a
                                                          Social Assessment and the CCS. The CCS will have
                                                          a gender focus as well to address the needs of
                                                          women specifically relevant to the project activities
                                                          and outcomes.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No            Not relevant to the project
    Projects on International Waterways     TBD
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No
.




                                            Page 6 of 7
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        30-Jun-2015
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the         safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific      studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage       ISDS.
        May, 30, 2015


V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Poonam Pillai,Nadia Sharmin,Shahpar Selim
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA) Date: 20-Jan-2016
    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst                    Date: 08-May-2017
                                              (PMGR)


    1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
    persons.




                                                         Page 7 of 7
