                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR17213
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Malawi                                       Project ID:           P120825
                            Project Name:       MW: Mining Governance and Growth Support Project (P120825)
                            Task Team           Martin Lokanc
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           31-Jan-2011                                  Estimated   31-Mar-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEX2                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Public administration- Energy and mining (88%), Tertiary education (6%),
                                                Information technology (5%), Other Mining and Extractive In dustries (1%)
                            Theme:              Other environment and natural resources management (64%), Environmental
                                                policies and institutions (28%), Tax policy and administrati on (4%), Other
                                                accountability/anti-corruption (4%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        25.00           Total Bank Financing:                                        25.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                           25.00
                              Total                                                                                                 25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the efficiency, transparency and sustainability of


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         mining sector management.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Development Objective is to improve the efficiency, transparency and sustainability of
                         mining sector management.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project has three components and a fourth component of project management.

                          A. Managing Mineral Rights and Operations.
                          The objective of this project component is to support the Government to build an efficient,
                         transparent and environmentally and socially sustainable framework f
                         or managing mineral rights and operations. To achieve this, the project will sup
                         port the following:

                          #       A-1 Public Communications, Outreach and Stakeholder Dialogue by setting up the structure
                         and support arrangements for continuous and formalized dialogue among
                         stakeholders on mining policy issues and oversight of policy implementation, as
                         well as design of MNREE's communications and outreach functions.
                          #       A-2 Modernizing Minerals Legislation by finalizing the new mining law and developing a
                         body of regulations to give effect to it, covering mineral licensing, m
                         onitoring and inspection functions, health, safety and environmental standards,
                         and a model Mining Development Agreement.
                          #       A-3 Reforming Minerals Licensing by establishing a modern computer-based cadastral
                         system and administrative arrangements for the efficient and transparent al
                         location and management of mineral exploration and mining rights by MNREE.
                          #       A-4 Strengthening Mineral Operations Supervision by building capacity of MNREE for
                         regular monitoring and inspections of exploration, mining and mineral proce ssing operations using
                         appropriate equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          #       A-5 Strengthening Environmental and Social Management of Mining by establishing a
                         comprehensive environmental and social management framework and robust monit oring systems at
                         central, district and community levels.

                          B. Generating and Managing Mineral Revenues.
                          The objective of this project component is to support the Government to develop transparent
                         arrangements for optimal generation and use of mineral revenues. To
                         achieve this, the project will support the following:

                          #      B-1: Reforming the Mineral Royalty and Tax Regime by completing the establishment of a
                         coherent, standardized and globally competitive fiscal regime for minin
                         g through design and implementation of suitable royalty and tax regulations.
                          #      B-2: Maximizing Mineral Revenue Collection by building capacity in royalty and tax
                         administration.
                          #      B-3: Building Mineral Revenue Transparency so that revenue collection arrangements can be
                         subjected to scrutiny and assurances given to the public that revenu
                         es are being properly accounted for.
                          #      B-4: Developing Mineral Revenue Forecasting as part of the Government's annual budget
                         preparation cycle and medium-term macro-economic planning.
                          #      B-5: Developing Mineral Revenue Management Policies to deal with potentially large and


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         volatile mineral revenue flows and determine allocations made from fund s collected.

                          C. Promoting the Mineral Sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The objective of this project component is to support the Government to improve the enabling
                         environment for mining sector development by acquiring and dissemin            ating geo-data, fostering
                         more sustainable artisanal and small scale mining, inc reasing the supply of Malawians trained at
                         tertiary level in minerals and improv        ing the policy environment for mining-related infrastructure
                         development. To ach         ieve this, the project will support the following:

                          #       C-1 Program of Geo-data Acquisition, Interpretation and Promotion, including a
                         comprehensive country-wide airborne geo-physical survey to acquire new data, in terpretation
                         studies and resource assessments to identify promising mineral oppo rtunities and activities to
                         promote investor interest.
                          #       C-2 Establishing a Geo-Data Management Center to digitize, store and increase on-line
                         access to geo-data.
                          #       C-3 Program of Training and Awareness Raising for Artisanal Mining to gradually improve
                         ASM practices and institutional support to the ASM sub-sector.
                          #       C-4 Building Capacity for Tertiary Education in Mining to increase the supply of Malawians
                         qualified at tertiary level in mining related disciplines in order        to help build the capacity
                         of government institutions and to alleviate the chron                        ic skills shortage faced
                         by a fast growing mineral sector.
                          #       C-5 PPP Framework for Mining-related Infrastructure to assist the Government to roll-out
                         the Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework to the mining sector, through support to MNREE in
                         tailoring the framework to mining-related infrastruc ture development and building requisite
                         expertise.

                          The TA project will not involve financing of any significant civil works[1] , infrastructure
                         investments, resettlement, land use planning or zoning. The scope o f the project is limited to
                         technical assistance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          [1]Aerial surveys and refurbishment of MNREE offices will be procured under works contracts, but
                         do not involve any significant physical impacts. Office refurbi      shment will be minor, not
                         involving any new construction or significant reconstr       uction.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project involves country-wide technical assistance to a specific sector. As such, the scale and
                         scope of the project will cover all of Malawi. The airborne                                  geo-
                         physical survey will be countrywide. Mineral resource assessments will be a
                         mix of desk-based data interpretation and analysis of geo-data and some field-ba
                         sed survey work conducted by the Geological Survey Department, a public institut
                         ion. Mineral resource assessments will have regional or sub-regional coverage, a
                         nd not be site / mineral deposit-specific.

                          Malawi has one of the highest population densities in southern and eastern Africa and a
                         predominantly rural population, resulting in high pressure on arable lan
                         d, and widespread degradation to the natural environment and natural resources. Nevertheless, it is a
                         country of considerable natural beauty, with a number of s ignificant biodiversity conservation areas
                         and a nationally significant tourism industry based on the country's natural assets. Of outstanding


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                           international imp ortance is the unique biodiversity of Lake Malawi's fish fauna, which also suppo rts
                           the lion's share of the countries fisheries. Almost all of the territory of the country fall within either
                           the immediate catchment of Lake Malawi, or the ca tchment of its outflow, the Shire River, which is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a vital source of drinking wat er, power generation, irrigation, fisheries, and wildlife habitat.
                           Initiatives a re under development to strengthen river basin planning and management in the ca
                           tchments of both Lake Malawi and the Shire River. Malawi's terrestrial biodivers ity generally
                           exhibits lower endemism than its aquatic fauna, being largely repr esentative of wider southeast
                           African ecosystems. Nevertheless, there are localized areas of terrestrial endemism sometimes
                           overlapping with mineral concentrati                        ons, most notably in the case of the Mount
                           Mulanje massif.

                            High population densities have also resulted in disputes over land rights in some areas, and efforts
                           are underway to reform the land tenure system to facilitate a clearer delineation between customary,
                           state and private land.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU07)
                           Knut Opsal (GSU07)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (OPSPF)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:




                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                             As a technical assistance project, most of the activities have virtually no direct environmental or
                           social impact, and the project is not anticipated to have any large scale, significant adverse or
                           irreversible impacts. Rather, the aim to promote sustainable management in the mining sector,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including environmental and social management, is intended to yield positive environmental and
                           social impacts.

                           The project will not finance significant civil works, land use planning or zoning. Nor will it
                           provide detailed recommendations on any particular mineral deposit-specific site of investment,
                           being limited to developing appropriate legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks at the
                           national level, as well as strengthening government's capacity to manage mining sector
                           investments and operations in the future in a sustainable manner.

                           Although th Project is limited to the provision of technical assistance and is not expected to result
                           in any direct negative environmental or social impacts, the project classified is as a Category B
                           investment, triggering OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) due to the potential impacts of
                           follow-on mineral investment projects. Downstream impacts have been addressed through
                           preparation of a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) delivered in 2015,
                           including an action plan for strengthening environmental and social management in concert with
                           sector promotion.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The project is expected to strengthen Malawi's capacity to address environmental and social
                           impacts of mining through improving the policy/regulatory framework                     and
                           enhancement of institutional and human resource capacity to implement the policies and
                           regulations. Nevertheless it would help to create a more favorable enabling environment for the
                           expansion of large-scale mining as well as artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) in Malawi,
                           therefore leading to activities that may engender a range of social and environmental impacts that
                           are well-studied and understood at the global level. The exact location, timing and technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           features of follow-on mineral investments by mining companies are not known at this time, but the
                           risks posed by such activities could include:
                            (i)    pollution and sedimentation of waterways, potentially including the Shire River and Lake
                           Malawi;
                            (ii)   loss or degradation of forests and other natural habitats, potentially including protected
                           areas and other sites of high conservation value;
                            (iii)  land tenure conflicts;
                            (iv)   loss of livelihoods and involuntary resettlement to make way for mining facilities;
                            (v)    in- migration and mining "boom towns" that strain local public services; and
                            (vi)   the spread of HIV-AIDS and other communicable diseases.

                           The project will draw on the extensive body of international experience and best practice to
                           identify ways to manage and mitigate such downstream risks, so that they can be incorporated in
                           the national environmental and social management frameworks. These potentially include:
                            (i)     providing benchmarks and tools for evaluating specific areas of high environmental
                           sensitivity (including protected areas, other natural habitat and biodiversity areas, culturally
                           sensitive areas, and areas prone to natural hazards) where mining concessions and permits are not
                           allowed, or where only certain low-imp act mining techniques can be used;
                            (ii)    establishing and enforcing specific environmental standards for different types of mineral
                           extraction and processing;


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                            (iii)   environmental performance bonds and other legal tools to promote good practices by
                           mining firms;
                            (iv)    promoting investment in conservation offsets to compensate for mining-related damage to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           natural habitats, through helping to improve the management of particular protected areas or
                           payment into a dedicated conservation fund (such as the proposed National Forests Fund);
                            (v)     clarifying the "rules of the game" for mining companies to obtain access to rural lands
                           under customary use and other tenure regimes, in terms of negotiating procedures, decision
                           authority, minimum required payments to the community, recommended or allowable types of
                           social investments, etc.;
                            (vi)    criteria and procedures for physical resettlement (when required), livelihoods restoration,
                           and land tenure regularization;
                            (vii) providing guidance on methods of influx-management by the mining companies and local
                           authorities, including identifying means by which potential conflicts              can be identified
                           and resolved.
                            (viii) strengthening the system of public health monitoring, preventive measures to control the
                           spread of HIV-AIDS and other diseases, and clinical treatment in mining settlements and adjacent
                           communities; and
                            (ix)    improved registration, licensing, regulation, and monitoring of ASM.

                           Key to the management of potential downstream impacts will be appropriate sequencing of project
                           activities, such that the identification of risks and establishment of mitigation systems (as
                           described below) do not lag behind the promotion of additional investments in the sector. This
                           sequencing is laid out clearly in the environmental and social action plan developed under the
                           SESA, and will be closely monitored by the Bank team during implementation. The project
                           includes the legal remedy of suspension if the Government does not apply standards and measures
                           consistent with international good practice to ensure th e environmentally and socially sustainable
                           use of any information [data] produced under the Project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                             A number activities which would have involved additional environmental and/or social impacts
                           were considered, but not included in the project design, including
                           pilot on-the-ground investments (e.g. in lower impact ASM systems), civil works with significant
                           physical impact, and identification and preparation (e.g. feasibility studies) for specific mining or
                           mining-related infrastructure investments. The current design was selected as the best alternative
                           to avoid and minimize                                       adverse impacts in the near and long term.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             As no direct adverse environmental or social impacts will result from this project's interventions,
                           the project will not develop an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Given the potential for
                           the project to facilitate downstream investments which would involve impacts, however, a form of
                           environmental assessment is still needed, and for such sector reforms the appropriate instrument is
                           the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The SESA is a consultative and
                           iterative process, which itself provides considerable opportunity for capacity building. In 2009, a
                           rapid strategic environmental analysis was carried out as part of the preparation of the Mineral
                           Sector Review. During preparation of the project, the Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and
                           Environment (MNREE) prepared comprehensive Terms of Reference for the SESA, satisfactory to
                           IDA, which was disclosed in country and via the Bank's InfoShop prior to Appraisal.



                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                          The primary objective of the SESA is to identify the priority actions that Government can take to
                          foster the environmentally sustainable and socially equitable development of Malawi#s mining
                          sector. The specific objectives are to:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a.          Diagnose the key environmental and social problems and opportunities associated with
                          the anticipated growth of Malawi's mining sector.
                           b.      Identify the policy, legal, regulatory, and institutional adjustments and capacity-building
                          actions needed to minimize the adverse environmental and social impacts of mining operations
                          and associated infrastructure development, while enhancing the positive impacts.
                           c.         Propose specific measures that Government can implement in the near future to
                          improve the environmental and social sustainability of mining in Malawi, particularly through the
                          MGGSP Project.

                           The SESA considered both large-scale investments and ASM, ancillary infrastructure linked to
                          mining developments, the environmental implications of broad sector development policies, as
                          well as the requirements for policies specifically addressing environmental and social
                          sustainability, and the capacity development needed for effective implementation of those policies.
                          The SESA was finalized in late 2015.

                           MNREE already has guidelines for EIA and environmental management specifically in the
                          mining sector, but implementation capacity for general environmental management is weak in the
                          country, and mining faces the additional challenge of being a relatively under-developed sector.
                          The only large mining operation to date in Malawi is owned and operated by an Australian
                          company subject to considerable international scrutiny and used to following international
                          environmental management standards. Broader development of the sector will bring the possibility
                          of in vestments by less experienced or proactive companies, increasing the oversight burden on
                          government. Given the relative inexperience in major mining investments, national capacity to
                          conduct studies is weak, and the project has engaged international consultants to assist in the
                          preparation of the SESA, as well as detailed technical exchange with the Bank team during
                          implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The SESA has assessed the needs for strengthening the capacity, financial, technical, and human
                           resources-of relevant Malawian agencies (at the national and local level) including the
                           Environmental Affairs Department and Department of Mines within MNREE. Some capacity-
                           building activities are being delivered in parallel with the development of the SESA, including (i)
                           development of a set of environmental standards specific to mineral exploration, mining and
                           minerals processing which will be used to guide operations planning and compliance monitoring,
                           (ii) building capacity for monitoring and inspecting environmental compliance of exploration and
                           mining operations and (iii) providing equipment needed for sampling and laboratory testing. The
                           SESA evaluates the merit and modalities for other potential activities mentioned in the Mineral
                           Sector Review, including (i) development of a resettlement policy and guidelines for mining-
                           impacted communities, including improved consultation procedures, (ii) creation of an
                           environmental and social management database, and improving public access to data, (iii) creation
                           of grievance and dispute resolution mechanisms in mining-impacted areas, (iv) arrangements for
                           engagement of citizens and communities in monitoring of mining and ancillary operations, (v)
                           systems for improving funding of environmental inspection and compliance monitoring, and (vi)
                           strengthening local capacity for planning and absorption of mining revenues.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                            As the project is national in scope, it will involve a broad range of stakeholders, including several
                           government agencies, NGOs and private sector organizations linked to current and potential
                           mining activities. From an environmental and social perspective, key stakeholders include local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities in area currently or potentially impacted by mining, local and downstream natural
                           resource users, Forestry Department, Department of Parks & Wildlife, and NGOs representing
                           impacted social groups and environmental concerns.

                            A public consultation event was conducted on 20th January 2011, which involved a detailed
                           presentation and discussion on the content of the SESA TOR with government, private sector and
                           NGO representatives. Participants recommended that the Terms of Reference should include
                           documentation of regional best practices and case studies, assessment and strengthening the role of
                           the civil society and cover all key areas and minerals for baseline information. A description of the
                           consultation event was annexed to the SESA TOR and disclosed (made publicly available through
                           MNREE) and via the Bank's Infoshop. In addition, the disclosure notice published via newspapers
                           in Malawi provides contact details where further comments on the SESA TOR can be sent up until
                           the start of the procurement process (beyond which, stakeholder feedback will be provided
                           through the SESA consultation processes themselves, including:
                            a. Stakeholder analysis to identify and describe all key stakeholder groups that have an
                           environmental or social interest in the development of the mining sector, and provide a mapping of
                           interests. It should identify vulnerable stakeholders such as women, youth, and the poor whose
                           voices are sometimes not heard in the policy process, and indicate how SESA preparation will
                           engage them in a manner that is culturally and politically appropriate.
                            b. Stakeholder input to SESA to ensure that the full range of interested stakeholders have ample
                           opportunity to provide information and opinions to the SESA process, including the identification
                           of priority environmental and social problems, the range of possible solutions, and the specific
                           measures recommended for implementation under the project.
                            c. Documentation of stakeholder consultations, including an annex which should specify (i) which
                           stakeholder organizations or informal groups were consulted during which parts of the SESA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process; (ii) the forms of consultation and discussion carried out (meetings, interviews, surveys, e-
                           mails, web page comments, etc.), when and where; and (iii) the main concerns and
                           recommendations of the different stakeholder groups.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Feb-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Malawi                                                           07-Feb-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Martin Lokanc
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 03-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (PMGR)             Date: 03-May-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
