                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC4259

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                          Project ID:      P145897
                            Project Name:       GEF Mainstreaming Integrated Water and Environment Management (P145897)
                            Task Team           Liping Jiang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           23-Feb-2016                    Estimated        31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWA02                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     International waters

                            Sector(s):          Agricultural extension and research (70%), Water supply (30%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (60%), Other environment and natural resources
                                                management (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     28.50                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    19.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            9.50
                              Total                                                                       28.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to control water consumption and reduce pollution discharges in selected pilot sub-river
                           basins with ET/EC technology-based integrated water and environment management approach, and
                           to up-scale the approach in the Hai Basin and Liao Basin to minimize the negative impacts on the
                           ecosystem of Bohai Sea.
                         The above objective will be achieved through the following specific activities:

                         •        To prepare and implement SAPs at the river basin level and IWEMPs at the county level in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the pilot sub-river basins, integrating the use of target ET and target EC to guide and control water
                         extraction, utilization and pollution emissions;
                         •        To carry out research on the application of policies, innovative technologies to up-scaling the
                         approach to cover more areas of Hai and Liao Basins, encouraging a shift towards more efficient
                         modes of production;
                         •        To up-scale the innovative technologies and policy interventions tested at the pilot sub-river
                         basins to cover more areas of the Hai and Liao Basins (20-30% of the problem areas in the Hai and
                         Liao and Yellow River Basins ) to improve water productivity, reduce water pollution and strengthen
                         environmental protection;
                         •        To strengthen the capacity of the central and local governments for integrated water and
                         environmental management; and
                         •        To construct civil works or infrastructure (to be fully financed by government counterpart
                         funds during the second or third year of project implementation) to increase water productivity and
                         reduce pollution discharges during the second or third year of project implementation in line with
                         SAPs and IWEMPs prepared during the early stage of project implementation.
                         C. Project Description
                         The total cost of the project is estimated at US$104.5 million including US$9.5 million from GEF
                         financing, and US$95 million from government counterpart funding.

                         Component 1 ? Studies and Policies on Up-Scaling of ET/EC Technology-based IWEM in the Hai
                         and Liao Basins
                         1.1    Preparation of policies to support scaling of ET/EC technology-based IWEM
                         1.2    Application of existing new technologies to support scaling of ET/EC technology-based
                         IWEM
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 ? Implementation and Up-Scaling of ET/EC Technology-based IWEM System in the
                         Hai and Liao River Basins
                         2.1     National water quantity and quality monitoring system with shared database
                         2.2     Knowledge Management (KM) systems with shared database
                         2.3     Strengthening operations of the Hai River Basin ET Center
                         2.4     Strategic Action Plans (SAPs) at sub-river basin level
                         2.5     Integrated Water and Environment Plans (IWEMPs) at the county level

                         Component 3 ? Infrastructure Construction (to be fully financed by government)
                         3.1 Irrigated agricultural water savings
                         3.2      Reduction of water pollution discharges
                         3.3      Rehabilitation of on-farm works and water measuring facilities for pilot WUAs

                         Component 4 ? Institutional Capacity Building and Exchanges for scaling of ET/EC Technology-
                         based IWEM System
                         4.1 Joint decision making conference system for sub-river basin
                         4.2 Project Management Organizations
                         4.3 Establishment of Water user associations (WUAs)
                         4.4 Consulting services to support project management
                         4.5 International and domestic training and study tours
                           4.6 Domestic and international workshops
                           4.7 Management information system (MIS)
                           4.8 Project monitoring and evaluation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.9 IWLEARN activities
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project areas include demonstration area and scaling-up area. The demonstration area is located
                           in the selected three demonstration cities including Cang-Zhou, Shi-Jia-Zhuang and Cheng-De in
                           Hebei Province. The locations of project activities on physical investment are all in demonstration
                           area. The scaling-up area is located in Hebei where there are no project activities on physical
                           investments. The project activities on non-physical investments (e.g. training and research or
                           software development) are for both demonstration and scaling-up areas. The locations of all physical
                           investments under the project (included in Component 2) cannot be finalized until 2017 or 2018
                           based on the government investment programs. The type of the proposed investment activities
                           include installation of water saving equipment in the exiting irrigated area such as the low pressure
                           pipelines, drip irrigation systems and sprinklers etc. and construction of small wastewater treatment
                           plants and pipelines.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project is an extension of China GEF Hai Basin Integrated Water and Environment Management
                           Project, which was concluded highly satisfactorily. The central PMO-The Ministry of Environmental
                           Protection (MEP) and the Ministry of Water Resources (MWR) have rich experience on the projects
                           financed by the World Bank. The central Project Management Office (PMO) for the previous GEF
                           project will continue managing this project. The central PMO is familiar with the Bank safeguards
                           policies and procedures. At the provincial level, the PMO in Hebei involved in the previous GEF
                           project. The Bank team and the client??s EA consultants will provide trainings to improve its
                           capacity to the acceptable level. All these implementation agencies will receive necessary trainings
                           on project management and the Bank safeguard polices in the early stage of preparation. Therefore,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the institutional capacity is deemed to be sufficient for the Bank's project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Feng Ji (GEN02)
                           Songling Yao (GSU02)
                           Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The proposed project will build on the success of the
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      Hai River Basin Integrated Water and Environment
                                                                           Management Project, which implemented an
                                                                           integrated approach to water resource management
                                                                           and pollution control in the Hai River Basin, and
                                                                           developed water resources management technology
                                                                           and experience. The proposed project will seek to
                                                                           mainstream cooperation for integrated water and
                                                                           environment management, and to further integrate
                                                                           the use of ET and EC to optimize water use at the
                                                             river basin level. As such the project will not likely
                                                             to cause any significant environmental and social
                                                             issues. However, there will be some adverse impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             associated with the physical investment under
                                                             Component 2 and 3 which aim to reduce water
                                                             consumption and control pollution discharges. The
                                                             fund to finance infrastructure under project will be
                                                             coming from the Government counterpart funds. The
                                                             details of these activities cannot be determined until
                                                             the SAPs and IWEMPs to be prepared during project
                                                             implementation.

                                                             It is estimated that there are general construction-
                                                             related impacts, which are site specific, localized,
                                                             small-scale, and few (if any) of them are irreversible,
                                                             and can be readily mitigated with good construction
                                                             management.

                                                             Considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale
                                                             of the project and the nature and magnitude of its
                                                             potential environmental impacts, the project is
                                                             proposed as a Category B project.

                                                             An Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework (ESMF) is proposed to be prepared,
                                                             setting out the guidelines and procedures to address
                                                             the environmental and social impacts of the project
                                                             activities. The ESMF includes, among others,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             -        The Bank??s safeguards policies are to be
                                                             taken into account in the development of the SAPs
                                                             and IWEMPs developed under the project.
                                                             -        Procedures to address Environmental and
                                                             Social Impacts/issues caused by other physical
                                                             activities financed by the Chinese counterpart fund,
                                                             and inclusion of guidelines and procedures to screen
                                                             and assess impacts of ancillary facilities
                                                             -        General Environmental Code of Practice
                                                             (ECOP) to address the general construction related
                                                             impacts.
                                                             -        Institutional arrangement to be specified.
                                                             -        Grievance Redress Mechanism.
                                                             -        Budget for the ESMF implementation.
                                                             -        Public consultation. The public consultation
                                                             will be well documented and results of the
                                                             consultations be taken into account in the project
                                                             design.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project is located in the area (e.g. farmlands)
                                                             which has been heavily influenced by human
                                                             activities. The project does not have the potential to
                                                             cause any significant conversion (loss) or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             degradation of natural habitats, whether directly
                                                             (through construction) or indirectly (through human
                                                             activities induced by the project). Given that there
                                                             are opportunities for benefits to natural habitats, this
                                                             policy is triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project has no potential to have impacts on the
                                                             health and quality of forests or the rights and welfare
                                                             of people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                             interaction with forests, or aims to bring about
                                                             changes in its management or protection. This policy
                                                             is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project does not envision any procurement of
                                                             pesticides or pesticide application equipment, nor
                                                             lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
                                                             subsequent increase in health and environmental risk,
                                                             nor could maintain or expand present pest
                                                             management practices that are unsustainable. This
                                                             policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   Based on the available information from the client
                         OP/BP 4.11                          and the site visit, the project will only involve small
                                                             scale of construction activities. The project is not
                                                             likely to cause any significant adverse impacts on the
                                                             PCRs in the project influence area. It will be further
                                                             confirmed during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   SThe proposed project is to promote an innovative
                         4.10                                approach to integrated river basin management for a
                                                             better water resource conservation and pollution
                                                             control. The project is to be located in the Hai River
                                                             Basin, and the innovative approach will be advocated
                                                             in the scaling-up areas in the Liao and Yellow River
                                                             Basin. During project preparation, a Social
                                                             Management Framework (SMF) will be developed in
                                                             the project Environment and Social Management
                                                             Framework (ESMF) to address social safeguards
                                                             concerns and other social issues, including guidance
                                                             for screening IPs in the project areas, preparation for
                                                             safeguard instruments, public consultation and
                                                             participation, and project consequent influence under
                                                             basin management intensification.

                                                             As guided by the SMF, an Ethnic Minority Planning
                                                             Framework (EMPF/IPPF) will be prepared for those
                                                             areas where IPs will be identified.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The propose project will conduct its demonstrative
                         BP 4.12                              pilot of the ET/EC-based integrated water and
                                                              environment management in some cities in the Hai
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              River Basin, and will scale up the integrated
                                                              management in the ???problem areas??? in the Liao
                                                              and Yellow River Basins. For intensifying the
                                                              integrated basin management, some physical
                                                              investment from the counterpart funds would be
                                                              needed for construction of local WWTPs and saving
                                                              water irrigation facilities, which would entail
                                                              involuntary taking of land.

                                                              During project preparation, a Social Management
                                                              Framework (SMF) will be prepared in which a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                              developed in view of the potential land acquisition
                                                              and resettlement, even though the specific sizes and
                                                              detailed design of the resettlement associated project
                                                              activities are unknown at the preparation and
                                                              appraisal stages. The RPF will guide project
                                                              implementation and ensure the further safeguard
                                                              instrument such as Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                              to be developed in time when some subprojects
                                                              causing resettlement are designed.

                                                              The propose project will conduct its demonstrative
                                                              pilot of the ET/EC-based integrated water and
                                                              environment management in some cities in the Hai
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              River Basin, and will scale up the integrated
                                                              management in the ???problem areas??? in the Liao
                                                              and Yellow River Basins. For intensifying the
                                                              integrated basin management, some physical
                                                              investment from the counterpart funds would be
                                                              needed for construction of local WWTPs and saving
                                                              water irrigation facilities, which would entail
                                                              involuntary taking of land.

                                                              During project preparation, a Social Management
                                                              Framework (SMF) will be prepared in which a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                              developed in view of the potential land acquisition
                                                              and resettlement, even though the specific sizes and
                                                              detailed design of the resettlement associated project
                                                              activities are unknown at the preparation and
                                                              appraisal stages. The RPF will guide project
                                                              implementation and ensure the further safeguard
                                                              instrument such as Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                              to be developed in time when some subprojects
                                                              causing resettlement are designed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                        policy, or dependent upon an existing dam. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        polices is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project will not involve international waterways
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   as defined under this policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The proposed project will not be in a disputed area.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Feb-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During next preparation mission, the draft ESMF prepared by the EA institute will be reviewed by
                                      the Bank team.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liping Jiang
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 16-Feb-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 17-Feb-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
