                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSR17571
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Indonesia                                    Project ID:           P132585
                            Project Name:     ID-TF NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT IN
                                              RURAL AREAS HEALTHY AND BRIGHT GENERATION (PNPM
                                              GENERASI) (P132585)
                            Task Team         Robert Wrobel
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       15-Feb-2013                                    Estimated   30-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSUID                                           Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Health (60%), Primary education (30%), Central government administration
                                              (7%), Sub-national government administration (3%)
                            Theme:            Education for all (24%), Child health (20%), Population and reproductive health
                                              (20%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Participat ion and civic engagement
                                              (16%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        38.70           Total Bank Financing:                                           0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             7.00
                              Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                                       31.70
                              Total                                                                                               38.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives

                                                                                Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed restructuring would support government to implement its "PNPM Generasi Transition
                         Strategy," necessitated by the enactment of the Village Law in 2015. The strategy envisages the
                         phase out of component 1 of the project over the period 2016 and 2017, thereby allowing for a
                         reorientation of facilitation support to assist village government and community to utilize Village
                         Law transfers for health and education purposes. 448 sub-districts would receive component in 2016,
                         with the number falling in 2017 to 130 sub-districts in the provinces that entered the program in
                         2014. All 499 sub-districts will receive facilitation support through 2017 in order to ensure the
                         smooth wrap up and handover of project activities and to support Village Law implementation. The
                         potential for a reduction in the number of sub-districts receiving component 1 was anticipated at
                         appraisal of the Additional Financing, which mentions that project coverage would be revisited at
                         mid-term (early 2016).

                         The proposed changes under restructuring include:
                         a.      Change the name of the project to “Generasi Sehat dan Cerdas”; from the “National Program
                         for Community Empowerment Healthy and Bright Generasi” (Program Nasional Pemberdayaan
                         Masyarakat Generasi Sehat dan Cerdas—PNPM Generasi) reflects the institutional and policy
                         changes for village development introduced through the enactment of the Village Law, which
                         includes the closing of the PNPM Mandiri program in December 31, 2014;
                         b.      Change the name of Component 1 to “Community Grants”; Village Law enactment in
                         principle precludes transfers to the sub-district (kecamatan) level, hence the request to change the
                         name of Category 1 to “Community Grants.” The transfers to community collective bank accounts at
                         the sub-district level remain legal and permissible under MoF regulations;
                         c.      Add $2.4 million in funding approved by the PNPM Support Facility (PSF) Joint
                         Management Committee (JMC) on April, 2015 for village level early childhood education and
                         development (ECED) activities;
                         d.      Reallocate funds across components. The decrease in the allocation for Component 1 and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increased allocations for Components 2 and 3 would support government to implement its "PNPM
                         Generasi Transition Strategy," necessitated by the enactment of the Village Law in 2015. The
                         strategy envisages the phase out of component 1 of the project over the period 2016 and 2017,
                         thereby allowing for a reorientation of facilitation support to assist village governments and
                         communities to utilize Village Law transfers for health and education purposes and;
                         e.      revise the results framework to account for the proposed changes

                         With the proposed changes above, the project continues to consist of the following components:

                         Component 1 (recipient-executed): Kecamatan (sub-district) Grants (US$ 95.5 million original,
                         $89.1 million revised). The bulk of the financing would be used to provide grants to participating
                         kecamatan for investments that improve use and access of targeted health and education services.
                         Communities invest kecamatan grants in demand-side support, such as scholarships for poor
                         children, transportation and other in-kind subsidies, and supply-side activities, such as contract
                         teachers, health, and education facilities, depending on where the need is greatest. This component
                         also finances the administrative costs associated with planning for and preparation of sub-project
                         proposals and training and capacity building for communities (Beneficiaries).

                         Component 2 (recipient-executed): Community Empowerment and Facilitation Support (US$ 14.6
                         million original, $20.8 million revised). This component will continue to provide technical

                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                         assistance to support:
                         (a)      Community empowerment and facilitation, including training to improve community skill
                         levels in diagnosing and overcoming constraints to health and education service utilization;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Improved communications with and linkages to local government health and education
                         offices and front line services providers and communities;
                         (c)      MIS database management.

                         Component 3 (recipient-executed): Implementation Support and Technical Assistance (US$9.3
                         million original, $11.9 million revised). These fun ds would continue to strengthen the management
                         and oversight capacity of the Generasi Secretariat in the Directorate General for Community
                         Empowerment and Development (PPMD), Ministry of Villages, Disadvantaged Areas, and
                         Transmigration (MoV). Funds would also cover government-sponsored workshops, coordination
                         with other ministries, and field supervision. This component also supports training for PNPM
                         Generasi facilitators at all levels of program delivery, including refresher training for existing staff,
                         pre-service training for new staff, specialized training for district database operators, and regional
                         evaluation workshops. Funds will support additional project technical assistance for health and
                         education planning, and national database management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The grant supports PNPM Generasi operations in 499 poor, rural kecamatan in eleven provinces
                         (West Java, East Java, North Sulawesi, West Nusa Tenggara (NTB), East Nusa Tenggara (NTT),
                         Maluku, Gorontalo, West Sulawesi, West Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan, and South Sumatra).
                         PNPM Generasi applies the same Safeguards policies and mitigation measures as developed under
                         PNPM-Rural 2012-2015, which draw on over 14 years of experience operating effectively across
                         great topographic, ecological, biological, and social diversity.

                         The project primarily finances social investments in education and health, with a relatively small
                         percentage of these investments used to construct or rehabilitate education and health infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e.g. kelas jauh, and early childhood development centers). The project also provides kecamatan
                         grants to support sub-district and village level planning processes, including the provision of training
                         and technical inputs to strengthen planning and implementation readiness. Planning includes a
                         simple, community assessment of environmental impact where infrastructure projects are proposed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Fajar Argo Djati (GSUID)
                         Flavio Chaves (GWADR)
                         Ninin K. Dewi (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                                                      No



                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                            Physical Cultural
                            Resources OP/BP
                            Indigenous  Peoples4.11
                                                 OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This project will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
                              impacts, therefore the safeguard issues and impacts associated directly with the proposed project
                              are insignificant, reversible, and site-specific. Mitigation measures are carried out through
                              community participation and community-based sub-project management.

                              Safeguards guidelines for PNPM-Generasi are contained in the Implementation Guidelines for
                              Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) developed under the PNPM-Rural 2012-2015
                              program, which is an annex to the operations manual (PTO). The IGSES was most recently
                              revised during the preparation and appraisal of PNPM-Rural 2012-2015 to reflect recent lessons in
                              implementing environmental and social safeguards, the set of environmental code of practices for
Public Disclosure Copy




                              rural infrastructure as well as health and safety standards for community sub-projects. Facilitators
                              have received at least two round of training on the current IGSES each year since 2013. Newly
                              recruited facilitators receive pre-service training, which includes materials covering the IGSES,
                              prior to being deployed to the field. Refresher trainings for all facilitators are then delivered by no
                              later than November each calendar year.

                              Environmental Assessment: PNPM Generasi investments are primarily social investments in
                              education and health. From 2007 to 2014, investments in health and education infrastructure
                              averaged less than $2,500 per village. These investments are small, discrete, and non-cumulative.
                              As the umbrella program PNPM-Rural covers all rural sub-districts in the country with a wide
                              range of activities proposed by communities, it is anticipated that there could be environmental
                              impacts, and therefore PNPM-Rural triggers the Bank’s policy on Environmental Assessment.

                              In the sub-districts where PNPM Generasi operates, a team of three sub-district facilitators—two
                              specialize in community empowerment and one is a civil engineer—assists local communities to
                              identify, plan, design, and implement sub-projects that improve community access to health and
                              education services. Technical sub-district facilitators, with the support and oversight from district
                              technical consultants, are trained to assist communities to screen for possible environmental and
                              social impacts. If environmental impacts are anticipated, facilitators provide guidance to the
                              communities for developing and implementing measures to address and mitigate them. Measures


                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                         for mitigating negative impacts are included in the revised PNPM Generasi operations manual
                         (PTO), which includes the IGSES, training procedures, field supervision and Safeguards criteria
                         that consultant civil engineers use to screen sub-projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples: Indonesian communities covered by the World Bank's policy on indigenous
                         people is generally referred to Masyarakat Hukum Adat (MHA) customary law communities
                         based on national laws and regulations. These are based on lineage or locality and are bound by
                         customary law. Characteristics of these communities include: (i) self-identification as a distinct
                         indigenous cultural group, (ii) collective attachment to ancestral territories and to the natural
                         resources in the territories; and (iii) customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions.
                         In terms of screening and identification, the project will refer to the identification categories as
                         outlined in OP 4.10.

                         The implementing agency will preliminary screen locations using the list of geographical
                         distribution of MHA as presented in the "EGIMap - Strengthening IPs Screening in Indonesia",
                         2010, World Bank. The PNPM Generasi Program Secretariat in PMD will use this as a reference
                         for carrying out the preliminary screening in PNPM Generasi locations. The Program Secretariat
                         will ensure that the list is disseminated to provincial, district, and kecamatan consultants and
                         facilitators who will then confirm the IP presence in the field. In locations in which IVPs are
                         present, kecamatan facilitators will ensure that the standard social mapping process applies
                         cultural criteria to identify IPs and involving them in program planning, decision-making, and
                         implementation processes as stipulated in the IGSES based on free, prior and informed
                         consultations. PNPM-Rural, of which PNPM Generasi is a part, has already utilizied good-practice
                         principles for indigenous peoples’ participation and involvement, including: recruitment of and
                         tailored training for facilitators from the same ethnic groups; the use of local languages where
                         needed; independent reviews by socio-cultural specialists; and modifications to the planning
                         process to ensure free prior and informed consultations with broad community support.

                         PNPM Generasi benefits from the work by PNPM-Rural to further strengthen the capacity of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program facilitators to address IP concerns through additional facilitator training, and screening of
                         locations for indigenous peoples. Furthermore, due to non-participation of some isolated
                         communities in PNPM-Rural, a rapid social assessment was carried out during the preparation of
                         PNPM 2012-2015, and the IGSES has been updated to take the recommendations into account.

                         Land Donations: There is no involuntary acquisition of land or involuntary resettlement in PNPM
                         Rural and PNPM Generasi, whether financed by loans, grants, or other sources. The IGSES
                         contains detailed procedures to regulate the planning, documentation and verification procedures
                         for voluntary land donation (VLD) e.g. transfer of rights, use and/or passage permits. All land
                         requirements for project activities will be done through land donations and under the community
                         consent with appropriate informed consent from land owners and heirs and properly documented.
                         The project will continue to proceed with legal processing of the existing and future donated land.
                         There is no possibility of the use of eminent domain and persons have the right to refuse to donate
                         or be compensated for their land. If compensation for VLD is required, such compensation will be
                         provided to individuals for land donation and given by the community on a voluntary basis as a
                         gift not as a market or replacement value compensation payment for the acquisition or transfer of
                         the land. The project will not pay compensation for VLD.

                         Gender: PNPM Generasi is designed to specifically engage women as participants in program
                         planning and decision making and respond to women’s basic needs by increasing access to health

                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                          and education services. The project MIS shows that women have been the dominant participants in
                          village-level participatory planning and decision-making (averaging over 60% of participants
                          since 2007). Under the proposed project, PNPM Generasi’s target beneficiaries would continue to
Public Disclosure Copy




                          be pregnant women and those who have recently given birth, children under five, and primary
                          school-aged children. PMD will work to expand engagement of the entire community in issues of
                          maternal and child health, notably husbands and caregivers (e.g., grandparents and other extended
                          family members) through partnerships with local civil society organizations and local health
                          facilities.

                          The PNPM-Generasi project will retain an Environmental Category B classification.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this project. Mitigation
                           against any negative impacts can be managed through community-based approaches with good
                           engineering design and construction practices.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            All updated safeguards policies and mitigating measures defined in the IGSES are applicable and
                           will be enforced through PNPM Generasi and are updated from time to time based on safeguards
                           recommendations that emerge from joint World Bank and Government implementation support
                           missions. For PNPM Generasi, the GOI updated the existing safeguards guidelines and included
                           the revised IGSES (2012) as a supplement to the PNPM Generasi Operations Manual (PTO).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Facilitators receive a 21-day pre-service training prior to deployment, as well as an annual nine
                          day refresher training. The pre-service and refresher trainings include sessions on safeguards and
                          the IGSES. These trainings were conducted for PNPM Generasi facilitators in October 15 – 21,
                          2012 and November 1-9, 2012 and again in November and December 2013, 2014, and 2015. The
                          training modules have been updated to comply with the latest IGSES version (2012).


                          The Ministry of Village (MoV) is the new implementing agency of the project. The MoV is a
                          newly created ministry. However, its staff are comprised of civil servants that worked in the
                          Ministry of Home Affairs as well as the Ministry for Poor and Disadvantaged areas, including
                          staff that have worked on World Bank-funded projects, such as the Poor and Disadvantaged Areas
                          Projects (SPADA) and the PNPM-Rural projects. Furthermore, experienced PNPM Generasi
                          Secretariat staff and National Consultants continue to be employed by the MoV. Thus core
                          Safeguards capacity has been retained under MoV. The project has no significant environmental
                          and social safeguard issue, and therefore it is expected that the implementing agency and in
                          particular with the assistance of field facilitators will continue to be able to manage any safeguard
                          issues, which, if they occur, are likely to be minor. The primary issue is more on the inclusion on
                          the indigenous peoples in the project and to ensure that they will be part of project beneficiaries.
                          The MoV itself has a capacity to deal with the indigenous people issue.



                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                          A September 2015 Implementation Support Mission found no serious adverse environmental or
                          social impacts, and concluded that overall implementation of safeguards was Satisfactory. With
                          the end of PNPM-Rural, the project started to look at adjusting some of the guidelines to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                          that these guidelines were relevant for the implementation of PNPM Generasi (which has funded
                          only a limited number of very small-scale infrastructure projects). The Project also initiated an
                          assessment of administrative issues in preparation for the phase-out of the Project.

                          Indigenous Peoples (IP): A series of discussions with representatives of the local government and
                          local facilitators suggest that efforts to encourage indigenous peoples’ participation in PNPM
                          Generasi The main issue affecting these indigenous people communities relates to the limited level
                          of access to basic education and health services, with these communities being located in isolated
                          mountain areas with poor infrastructure.

                          Environment: No major environmental issues were identified during the implementation of the
                          Project. However, a number of environmental issues should be considered by field implementers,
                          especially relating to hygiene and sanitation conditions. It was noted that: (i) posyandu are not
                          equipped with running water and basic lighting, consequently limiting the range of activities that
                          can be conducted at these establishments; (ii) poor environmental hygiene in posyandu
                          (community health posts) is an issue of concern, with no one designated with the responsibility for
                          regular cleaning and maintenance. Cleaning only takes place once a month; and (iii) the use of
                          plastic food and drink packaging during PNPM Generasi meetings was prevalent in all locations
                          visited. This raises concerns over the unnecessary production of non-degradable waste as a result
                          of PNPM Generasi activities and indicates facilitators’ limited environmental awareness.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders and decision makers are villagers in rural areas. PNPM Generasi social and
                           environmental objectives and procedures are explained at inter-village meetings and during
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community-level trainings for village facilitators and for the TPKs (Village Implementation
                           Teams).

                          There are several ways in which PNPM Generasi addresses indigenous and vulnerable groups:

                          a.      Developing dissemination and facilitation materials that are culturally appropriate, in
                          collaboration with local communities;

                          b.      Using appropriate, inclusive decision-making mechanisms in environments where
                          indigenous groups are politically and culturally marginalized, including free, prior and informed
                          consultations leading to broad community support at the community level;

                          c.       Introducing innovative and effective ways to involve groups, such as women, that tend to
                          be excluded from traditional institutions. In Generasi, these include the mobilization of “mother’s
                          groups” (kolompok ibu) in each participating sub-village that are involved in project planning,
                          counseling, and parenting activities. That said the task team implementing agency is aware that
                          men play a key role in determining household decisions that affect nutrition and education of
                          children. Project facilitators therefore also make efforts to involve husbands and fathers in local
                          nutrition and parenting counseling sessions supported by the program;



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           d.       Addressing concerns that marginalized indigenous groups are especially vulnerable to
                           problems of elite domination and corruption. Adaptations include recruiting and training
                           facilitators from marginalized communities, providing specialized logistical support (higher
Public Disclosure Copy




                           transport costs for facilitators to reach isolated areas), employing two village facilitators (one man
                           and one woman) in all locations who are trained and mentored in order for them to gradually take
                           charge of village planning and accountability meetings, proposal writing, and oversight.

                           Furthermore, participatory consultation takes place in the form of inter-village, village, and sub-
                           village meetings. Environmental and social screening and mitigation measures are identified and
                           agreed among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the sub-project proposals and discussed
                           during community meetings. The need and mechanisms for obtaining land (although rare in
                           PNPM Generasi) are identified and agreed upon by program participants through the consultation
                           process during the preparation of subproject proposals. Facilitation and verification of these
                           processes, as presented in the IGSES, are documented in sub-project proposals by project
                           facilitators, though the quality of documentation needs to be improved and will be closely
                           monitored through PNPM Generasi.

                           Disclosure is Mandatory. The PNPM Generasi Operations Manuals, including the IGSES, are
                           disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on the PNPM Support Facility website http://pnpm-support.org/. An
                           executive summary of the IGSES in English is available through the Bank’s InfoShop. Additional
                           English-language material is available upon request.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                           17-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                           17-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the

                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Robert Wrobel
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Kevin A Tomlinson (PMGR)                         Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
