INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                             Report No.: JSDSC1361 1
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Mekong                     Project ID:   P149149
Project Name:    South East Asia Disaster Risk Management Project (P149149)
Task Team        Henrike Brecht,Armando Eduardo Guzman Escobar
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Feb-2016                Estimated     01-Aug-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Flood protection (60%), General finance sector (30%), Public administration-
Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
Theme(s):        Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (20%), Natural
disaster management (40%), Climate change (20%), Water resou rce
management (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
6       Total Project Cost:     140.00             Total Bank Financing:   140.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     140.00
Total                                                           140.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to help reduce the risk of flooding and enhance disaster risk
financing capacity within the Southeast Asia region.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed project is planned as a regional program in Southeast Asia, covering Cambodia, Lao
PDR, and Myanmar. It will improve coordination in disaster risk management and promote
standardized approaches for building resilience to disasters in Southeast Asia. The following four
components will be included in the project: (1) Flood Risk Management Investments; (2) Disaster
Risk Financing and Insurance Mechanisms; (3) Contingent Emergency Response; and (4) Project and
Program Management.
o
Component 1: Flood Risk Management
The objective of this component is to reduce the physical vulnerability of the three countries to
adverse natural events. Activities under this component would include a suite of structural and non-
structural measures to better manage flood risks and improve the resilience to disasters. Activities to
be financed are expected to include, but would not be limited to, the following: (i) the rehabilitation
and upgrading and of existing water control infrastructure, including embankments, polders,
drainage, pumping stations, and flood gates; (ii) the resilient rehabilitation and upgrading of critical
infrastructure, including existing rural roads and bridges, water supply and sanitation facilities, and
small scale irrigation structures; (iii) community-based disaster risk management, including capacity
building and potentially small scale investments to address local resilience priorities; (iv) green
solutions for storing water by means of vegetation, soil, porous surfaces and wetlands; (v) hydromet
and early warning systems; including strengthening observation networks, computer systems,
information and communication technology, regional data sharing and forecasting, and early warning
systems; and (vi) institutional and technical capacity building, as well as developing and updating of
disaster risk management databases, policies and plans. The specific location of investments will not
be known by project appraisal.
Component 2: Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Mechanisms
The objective of this component is to strengthen the financial resilience of the three participating
countries to disaster events by enabling them to ensure post-disaster liquidity for low, medium, and
O
high risk events. The component would develop both national and regional instruments, combining
risk retention (for high frequency, low severity events) and risk transfer (for low frequency, high
severity events). At the regional level, countries may be able to take advantage of pooling benefits of
large catastrophe losses depending on the nature of their exposure. At the national level, Ministries of
Finance could lead in implementing a disaster risk financing strategy that combines risk transfer with
mechanisms such as disaster funds, reserves, and contingent financing. Accordingly, this component
would support countries to explore and implement solutions on two levels: (i) A regional catastrophe
risk pooling facility could help the countries secure immediate post-disaster funding through a
combination of (a) regional reserves; and (b) catastrophe risk transfer solutions to access
international reinsurance and capital markets; and (ii) National disaster risk financing strategies could
help countries mobilize resources in advance and also plan the execution of those funds in a timely
manner, e.g. through DRM funds, public asset insurance, or disaster-linked social protection. As part
of this work, disaster risk management information systems will be developed to ensure
comprehensive data collection and knowledge management.
Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response Component
The objective of this component is to allow for rapid response and re-categorization of financing in
the event of a disaster to meet crises and emergency needs. Due to the high risk of a catastrophic


﻿event in Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar, this contingent emergency response component will be
added under this project with provisional allocation of zero dollars in accordance with OP 10.00,
paragraphs 12 and 13, for projects in situations of urgent need of assistance or capacity constraints.
Following an adverse natural event and the Government's declaration of emergency in accordance
O
U       with its national law, and subject to the Bank's satisfaction that a situation of national emergency
exists, the contingent component would be activated and implemented following simplified rapid
response procedures. This component would finance public sector expenditures on an agreed list of
goods and/or specific works, goods, services and emergency operation costs required for emergency
recovery. An Emergency Response Operations Manual will apply to this component, detailing
financial management, procurement, safeguards and any other necessary implementation
arrangements.
Component 4: Project and Program Management
The objective of this component is to provide institutional support and capacity development for
project management and execution implementation for the Projects in each of the three country,
including staffing (fiduciary, safeguards, procurement, amongst others) training, operating costs,
monitoring and evaluation, project studies, and the cost of audits. It will also provide support for
regional coordination of the different country Projects and the program implementation at the
regional level.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed SEA DRM project will cover flood risk management investments that contribute to
disaster risk and poverty reduction as well as strengthening local capacity for longer term disaster
risk management in Lao, Myanmar and Cambodia. These flood risk management investments could
include resilient rehabilitation of existing facilities, such as river embankments, flood gates, pumping
stations, resilient secondary level roads and small bridges, evacuation routes, shelters, drainage, and
coastal polders. The project will also support community-based disaster risk management approaches
to address local resilience priorities. Community infrastructure such as existing access roads, bridges,
irrigation, water gates and flood protection schemes could be financed under this operation. The
scope of national and regional-level investments will be refined during project preparation. However,
the specific location of investments will not be known by project appraisal.
While this project is not expected to finance new construction works, various levels and magnitude
of potential environment and social impacts are envisaged from the implementation of these sub-
projects depending on their magnitude and locations, which are still to be identified in consultation
with the governments and local communities of the recipient countries. Based on the information
known at this project concept note stage, the project will likely trigger the following World Bank
safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10,
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12; Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, and Projects on International
Waterways OP/BP 7.50 with the following policies being considered TBD at this stage: Physical
Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37, and Pest Management OP/BP 4.09.
The clients are required to carry out safeguard screening to identify potential impacts and propose
mitigation measures. Through the impacts assessment, the process of free, prior and informed
consultation should be carried out to establish broad community support for the project. Given that
specific project investments, targets and locations will be identified after project appraisal, safeguard
instruments such as the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the


﻿Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) will be
developed during project preparation and applied under the project. Each of these frameworks will be
developed for each country. These safeguard instruments will be publicly disclosed and discussed
(minimum during two public consultations) in the World Bank's Infoshop and in each of the
O
U       borrower's countries prior to appraisal.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The safeguard implementation capacity of the three borrowers is weak. Particularly, Myanmar would
a      require extensive support to build its implementation capacity. Although Cambodia and Lao PDR are
somewhat familiar with safeguards management under various World Bank financed projects, both
countries will require extensive support. An assessment of the clients' capacity for safeguards
implementation will be carried out during project preparation, and recommendations for training will
be developed.
Close guidance for the preparation of the relevant project safeguard documentation (e.g.
Environmental Impact Assessments, Resettlement Plans and Indigenous Peoples Plans) as well as
oversight on the implementation of Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Plans will
be required. The Bank will assist and guide the Borrower with the development and the
implementation of the ESMF and other relevant safeguard instruments. The project would encourage
and finance regional collaboration and exchange among the three countries and implementing
agencies for effective safeguards implementation. The implementing agencies will be provided with
technical assistance and implementation support from the Bank's safeguard task team.
Close guidance for the preparation of the relevant project safeguard documentation (e.g.
Environmental Impact Assessments, Resettlement Plans and Indigenous Peoples Plans) as well as
oversight on the implementation of Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Plans will
be required. The Bank will assist and guide the Borrower with the development and the
implementation of the ESMF and other relevant safeguard instruments. The project would encourage
and finance regional collaboration and exchange among the three countries and implementing
agencies for effective safeguards implementation. The implementing agencies will be provided with
technical assistance and implementation support from the Bank's safeguard task team.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Makathy Tep (GENDR)
Peter William Crawford (GENDR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Sybounheung Phandanouvong (GSURR)
Warren Paul Mayes (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is proposed as Environmental Category
OP/BP 4.01                              A - Full Assessment at this stage. The planned
subprojects will cover resilient rehabilitation of
existing facilities, such as river embankments,
levees, flood gates, pumping stations, resilient
secondary level roads and small bridges, evacuation


﻿routes, shelters, drainage, and coastal polders. They
might also target existing community infrastructure,
for example, access roads, bridges, irrigation
structures, water gates and flood protection schemes.
The project will also support nonstructural
investments for disaster and climate resilience in the
selected three countries, which could include the
development and implementation of an integrated
hydromet modernization plan for Cambodia and Lao
PDR to strengthen their National Meteorological and
Hydrological Services. Finally, the project intends to
support the establishment of financial protection
strategies and the development of flood risk models
under a disaster risk financing and insurance
program. The Terms of References (TORs) of
relevant non-structural studies should include
screening of environmental and social safeguard
risks, assessment of impacts (including cumulative
aspects) and issues in line with relevant World Bank
Group operational policies. The scope and scale of
project investments will be refined during the project
preparation but the location of the project
investments will not be known by project appraisal.
An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for each
country. The ESMF will guide the screening and
assessment of environmental and social issues and
the preparation of required site-specific safeguard
instruments during project implementation. The
ESMF will be developed at the level of category A
investments based on ToRs reviewed by the Bank
team and cleared by the Regional Safeguards
Secretariat. The ESMF will cover all investments and
activities financed by or involving the Bank and sets
out the process based on which the related
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
(ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs), as well as any Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) or Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs)
will be developed during project implementation in
line with the ESMF once the investment locations are
known and detailed designs and other relevant
technical studies have been prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          Project activities may have negative impacts on
natural habitats, for example rehabilitation works to
enhance existing channels or associated with the
upgrading of the hydromet system could potentially


﻿affect aquatic and riparian habitats.
The ESMF will include(i) screening procedures to
determine whether subprojects are in a critical or
non-critical natural habitat and (ii) guidelines for
mitigation measures to minimize or avoid damages
to natural habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36        No           No activities financed under this project are
anticipated in forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         TThe project activities are not expected to lead to
procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
equipment. However, the policy is TBD at this stage
as the project might finance rehabilitation works for
existing irrigation schemes destroyed by natural
disaster events, which may lead to increase pesticide
use or pest management practices.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD         All 3 countries are known of being rich in heritage
OP/BP 4.11                               resources yet no PCRs impacts are anticipated. This
policy is TBD at this stage until scope of
rehabilitation works is known as project advances
preparation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          S Some provinces and parts of Laos, Myanmar and
4.10                                     Cambodia are home to multiethnic groups who meet
the World Bank definition of Indigenous People
policy (OP/BP4.10). The investments to be financed
under the project in respective countries will be
identified after project appraisal. Specific
investments under Component 1 will be identified
for and implemented in respective countries,
however, the types, scale and scope of investments
will be similar across the three countries. An
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will
be developed for each country, which will describe
ethnic screening procedures and steps to be taken to
meet the policy requirements if an IP community is
found to be present in project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The investments to be financed under the project in
BP 4.12                                  respective countries will be identified after project
appraisal. It is expected that most of the
infrastructure investments will involve rehabilitation
and retrofitting of existing facilities. The size of the
budget envelope for the three countries is also an
indication of the limited scale of the project
investment. Because the exact scale and scope of
impact is not known during preparation, the policy is
triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework


﻿(RPF) will be developed during preparation. The
RPF will describe policies and procedures to avoid,
minimize and mitigate land acquisition. It will also
describe land donation protocols that will be applied
under the project. Access restriction is not expected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     TBD          If this policy is triggered will be decided once the the
scope of investments are defined further in project
preparation. The project is not expected to finance
rehabilitation works of dams that are 15 m or higher,
or of high hazard dams. The applicability of the
policy will be analyzed during the ESMF preparation
as required in the related ToRs. Resilient related
rehabilitation works for existing river embankments
or irrigation schemes could have implications on
water storage structures or small dams operation. The
project team will inform and consult with RSS if this
policy is triggered.
Projects on International     Yes          Resilient reconstruction of embankments and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       irrigation schemes along the Mekong and its
tributaries may have implications on the downstream
international rivers, the water quality and quantity. A
notification on the water utilization and possible
project impacts on water resources could be required
and disclosed to the Governments of affected
countries. The task team will consult with the EAP
Regional Safeguards Secretariat (RSS) and the
World Bank Legal Department (LEGEN) on the
proper implementation of this policy.
O
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          No activities are planned in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF, RPF and IPPF will be prepared for each country before project appraisal. A minimum
of two public consultations will take place during the preparation of these frameworks - one at the
ToR level and another one when the draft ESMF is available for disclosure.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Henrike Brecht,Armando Eduardo Guzman Escobar
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 06-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                    Date: 06-Nov-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


