INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12544
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pakistan                    Project ID:  P154278
Project Name: FATA TDPs Emergency Recovery Project (P154278)
Task Team       Amjad Zafar Khan
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Jul-2015                 Estimated    10-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPO6                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (75%), Health (25%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (60%), Conflict
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (10%), Child health (20%), Other
human development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     126.20             Total Bank Financing:    75.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           51.20
International Development Association (IDA)                                  75.00
Total                                                                       126.20
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to support the early recovery of families affected by the
militancy crisis, promote child health, and strengthen emergency response safety net delivery
systems in the affected areas of FATA.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
[Context]
In recent years, FATA and KP experienced significant militancy crises. In early 2009, the
government launched major security operations to root out the local pockets of militants. Significant
damage to physical infrastructure and services led to a large number of Temporarily Displaced
Persons (TDPs) losing their homes and livelihoods - approximately 3 million people were displaced.
Given the severity of the situation, the Government has carried in 2009 a post-crisis needs
o        assessment (PCNA), resulting in four strategic objectives aiming to address the drivers of the crisis.
To facilitate the implementation of these objectives, nine key sectors were identified, such as social
protection, governance, education, infrastructure, and health. The KP, FATA and Balochistan Multi-
Donor Trust Fund (MDTF), established in 2010 and administered by the Bank, is one of the main
financing mechanisms to roll out the implementation of PCNA.
In response to militancy, in June 2014, the Army launched a second security operation in various
agencies of FATA. Approximately 315,000 families have moved out. With success of military
operations in most areas, the Government has started the TDPs' repatriation process and until May
2015 about 24,000 families have voluntarily returned to their homelands. Returning families require
immediate support to restore their livelihoods and restart their lives. To address these challenges, the
Government, international organizations, and national NGOs are contemplating relief and
rehabilitation assistance. The Government has already started the provision of relief measures such as
a lump-sum grant of Rs. 35,000 (US$350) per beneficiary family. Moreover, the FATA Sustainable
Return and Rehabilitation Strategy (FSRRS) was formulated by the Government in March 2015.
Under the FSRRS, social protection was identified as one of the top priority sectoral interventions,
with cash transfers as an important tool for the emergency response and recovery. The timeline for
the FSRRS as envisaged by the FATA Secretariat is 24 months (2015-2016), linked to a phased
return of the TDP families planned to be completed by December 2016.
In the context of the social protection sector, the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP), a national
safety net supporting the poorest households of Pakistan, is in place since 2008. The Government
uses an objective targeting mechanism based on a poverty scorecard for identification of
beneficiaries. More than 90 percent of beneficiaries receive their payments through technology based
mechanisms. This regular safety net covers about 150,000 families out of a total of 220,000 FATA
families registered in the National Socio-Economic Registry. It is estimated that about 30 percent of
households in FATA are receiving some form of safety nets, among which 90 percent are provided
through BISP. The BISP coverage in F ATA is envisaged to expand as the security situation becomes
favorable to conduct the poverty scorecard survey for beneficiary identification. In addition to the
poverty scorecard, the BISP targeting mechanism relies on biometric identification and verification
of beneficiaries, supported by the National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA). The
NADRA database and its Computerized National Identification Card were also efficiently used to
provide cash support to approximately 1.1 million families affected by the 2011 floods.
FATA is lagging behind in terms of child health indicators compared to the rest of Pakistan. In the
aftermath of the militancy crisis and with the return of TDP families, the already inadequate child
health outcomes are expected to deteriorate further. In addition, stunting rates in FATA are close to
50 percent and 30 percent of children are classified as underweight. Only 40 percent of children in
FATA are fully immunized with a very large contribution to polio cases within the country. The
situation requires urgent interventions to address both supply and demand side challenges. The
National Immunization Support Project (NISP), currently prepared by the Government with Bank
Page 2 of 8


﻿support, aims at strengthening immunization systems and access to services to improve
immunization coverage nationwide. In addition, the Government has started to address the low polio
immunization rates in FATA by providing polio immunization to children of TDP families in camps
and at the FATA entry check-points.
o
[Project description]
The main project beneficiaries are the Temporarily Displaced People (TDP) families from five
FATA Agencies, namely North Waziristan, South Waziristan, Orakzai, Kurram and Khyber. The
overall Government program will support approximately 315,000 registered TDP families. Given the
IDA envelope, the proposed project will cover more than one third (120,000 families) of the
Government's program beneficiaries. As the average family size in FATA is 6.5, a total of 780,000
beneficiaries are expected to benefit from the Project. In addition, the Project will provide a basic
health services package to all families with children aged 0 to 24 months in up to four Tehsils of the
targeted areas which is estimated to include around 40,000 families. This intervention will be subject
to a phased approach, to be rolled out on the basis of results from the initial phase.
Component 1: Early Recovery Package for Temporary Displaced Persons (total estimated cost - US
$61.9 million). This component will support the early recovery of approximately 120,000 TDP
families from FATA through two cash grants; (i) a one-time Early Recovery Grant (ERG) of US$350
per family and; (ii) a Livelihood Support Grant (LSG) of US$160 per family in four monthly
installments of US$40. These two cash grants are complementary interventions to facilitate the early
recovery of TDP families. All registered TDP families from the five targeted Agencies are eligible
for the ERG, irrespective of their destination, to help them cover large initial expenses to restart their
lives and livelihood. For families that choose to voluntarily return to FATA, the LSG will provide a
predictable source of income over a limited period of time to help covering basic subsistence needs
while livelihoods are being restored. The LSG will be delivered through one-stop-shop (OSS)
registration and delivery centers to be set up in FATA through a phased rollout.
Component 2: Promoting child health in selected areas of FATA (total estimated cost - US$3.1
million). Under this component, a selection of child health services will be offered to families with
children aged 0-24 months in four pilot OSSs which comes to around 40,000 families. The selected
services include child health awareness and counseling, screening of children for malnutrition using
a        growth monitoring, immunization services, and referral of complicated cases. Registration of
families with children aged 0 to 2 years and periodic attendance of awareness sessions at OSS will be
accompanied by a Child Wellness Grant (CWG). The cash grant aims to compensate for the
opportunity costs of participating in the health awareness and counseling sessions and bringing
children to health facilities for regular check-ups. A cash grant of Rs. 7,500 is being proposed to be
provided in three installments for promoting positive health seeking behavior of families for their
children. Based on the learning from the initial pilot phase the Government will decide on the roll out
to other areas.
Component 3: Strengthening program management and oversight (total estimated cost - US$10
million). This component would provide technical assistance to enhance program management,
transparency and accountability at the federal, FATA Secretariat and local level administration
through capacity building, stakeholder consultation, social mobilization and awareness, strategic
communication, and monitoring. This component will be implemented by NADRA and has been
designed to help the Government establish a robust system for cash transfer to beneficiary families,
with adequate safeguards, fiduciary oversight, accountability and transparency. The main areas of
Page 3 of 8


﻿technical assistance include MIS development, hardware provision, communication, outreach and
social mobilization, Operational Review, beneficiary surveys, and capacity building. The component
will finance training and capacity building to staff of the FATA Department of Health to oversee
and deliver services under Component 2, as well as to staff of other FATA agencies involved in
O
U        project implementation
This component will also support the operational costs related to the establishment, operation, and
management of OSSs, as well as the costs of setting up and operation of the grievance counters and
child health services within each OSS. The OSSs will be managed by NADRA, the project
implementing entity. Separate Grievance Counters will be maintained at each OSS to manage
beneficiary grievances and complaints. The component will also finance NADRA's related costs for
end-to-end beneficiary registration based on CNIC data and biometric enrollment, including
verifications of payments.
In addition, the component will support administrative, financial management, disbursement,
procurement and audit activities related to Project implementation. An overall project
implementation unit will be set-up within the EAD with key technical staff contracted by the project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), a semi-
autonomous tribal region in the northwest of Pakistan lying between the provinces of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Baluchistan and neighboring country, Afghanistan. The insurgency and counter
insurgency action s in 2009 led to displacement of approximately 3 million people in FATA and the
neighboring Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) regions and, have had long-term effects on their socio-
economic growth, with high unemployment and large scale internal migration. The situation is
further exacerbated by the long-standing social inequities and sense of deprivation in FATA resulting
from decades of weak governance and the inadequacy of social, economic and physical infrastructure
and service delivery systems. FATA region has historically remained amongst the poorest and
underdeveloped parts of Pakistan with over 60% of its population living below national poverty line.
Though livelihood of majority of people depends on subsistence agriculture and livestock, support to
these sectors through infrastructure development, institutional strengthening, and community
participation has remained minimal. FATA also lags behind other provinces across a wide range of
social and economic indicators, with a lag even more pronounced when viewed through a gender
lens.
FATA region is basically a hilly terrain with dominant dry barren mountains. Figures for forest cover
in FATA are unreliable, ranging from 1% to 8% of the total reported area (FATA Directorate of
Forest, 2005) and is declining rapidly due to uncontrolled grazing and timber extraction for
commercial usage and fuel wo od. The inability of barren hills to retain soil and water is not only
causing soil erosion in the area but affecting the quality and quantity of fodder for livestock, drawing
down of water table, besides increasing incidences of flash floods. Quality of fresh water resources
is also under stress due to over exploitation and inappropriate disposal of wastes.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
Mohammad Omar Khalid (GEN06)
Salma Omar (GSURR)
Page 4 of 8


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Inappropriate practices during vaccine administration and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                associated activities can potentially cause health and
safety hazards. These include not using safe/sterilized
syringes and needles, vaccinators not observing
appropriate safety protocols and not disposing used
syringes and needles in a safe and environment-friendly
manner. None of these impacts are however
unprecedented and can be adequately mitigated with the
help of appropriately designed and implemented
mitigation and precautionary measures. Therefore, the
project has been classified as Category B.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           No physical interventions are included in the project
4.04                                 hence it is not likely to interact with the natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No physical interventions are included in the project
hence it is not likely to interact with the forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Project does not include procurement or usage of any
agro-chemicals.
Physical Cultural       No           No physical interventions are included in the project
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 hence it will not have any impacts on the physical cultural
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           No indigenous people as defined in the Policy are known
BP 4.10                              to exist in the area.
Involuntary Resettlement No          No physical interventions are included in the project
OP/BP 4.12                           hence it will not cause any resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           No dams are involved in the project.
o         4.37
Projects on International  No        No project activities will be carried out in any
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           No disputed areas exist in FATA.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Most of the activities under the project are environmentally benign and will not result in any
environmental degradation. However, the CWG is linked to incentivizing uptake of child health
visits by the affected families. Though not funded by the project, the supply side arrangements for
vaccination, as part of child health services, will be prepared by the FATA Secretariat/Health
Department along with One Stop Shops in the villages where TDPs would return. Inappropriate
practices during provision of health services at these facilities can potentially cause health and
safety hazards for the health service providers as well as for the children, their parents, and public
at large. These include not using safe/sterilized syringes and needles, health services provides/
vaccinators not observing appropriate safety protocols and not disposing used syringes and needles
Page 5 of 8


﻿in a safe and environment-friendly manner. None of these impacts are however unprecedented
and can be adequately mitigated with the help of appropriately designed and implemented
mitigation and precautionary measures.
O
U           There are no long-term social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Large-scale social impacts will be positive as the Project will allow people to re-locate to their
homes with support to resurrect their lives. The CWP will also have overall positive social impacts
as children in the Project area will be immunized against diseases. Some potential negative social
impacts include greater conflict due to lack of awareness about eligibility to receive cash grants,
low uptake of CWP due to travel costs in reaching One Stop Shops and lack of on-site facilities
especially for mothers. These potential impacts have been addressed through specific measures
such as social mobilization and awareness-raising, effectively functioning Grievance Redress
Mechanism, compensation for travel and gender sensitive implementation guided by a Gender
Strategy for the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No indirect or long term adverse environmental impacts are expected to be associated with the
project interventions, primarily because of small quantities of immunization wastes to be disposed.
On the other hand, a successful immunization initiative will have positive and long term impacts
on the key health indicators of the country. The long term social impacts of the project are also
expected to be positive. It will contribute to a healthy society unencumbered by the burden of
common diseases.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The only other alternative is 'no-project' option, which could have detrimental effects on TDPs
returning home and particularly on childhood immunization in the country. The 'no-project'
alternative would though avoid the adverse environmental impacts associatedwith the
immunization particularly waste disposal; however, would also result in continued exposure of
children to diseases that are preventable with the help of appropriate and timely vaccination. "No
project" scenario would also increase poverty and lead to economic hardships, conflict and social
problems for TDPs who would have no cash support to rebuild their lives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
a          assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Government of Pakistan has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) in accordance with the national regulatory requirements as well as World Bank
guidelines. The ESMP identifies and assesses the potentially negative environmental and social
issues including public health and social impacts of the immunization and associated activities,
proposes appropriate mitigation and precautionary measures - most of which are already practiced
by the vaccination teams to address these negative impacts, describes institutional and monitoring
mechanisms to ensure effective implementation of the proposed mitigation and precautionary
measures, and defines the associated documentation and reporting requirements.
EAD will have the overall responsibility for coordination and implementation of the ESMP.
ESMP focal points will be designated within EAD, NADRA, and the FATA Health Department.
The ESMP focal point in the FATA Health Department will be responsible for environmental
aspects associated with health service delivery (mostly immunization), NADRA ESMP focal point
will responsible for the social aspects of ESMP, while the ESMP focal point within EAD will
Page 6 of 8


﻿ensure overall coordination, submission of QPRs, and point of contact with other agencies such as
WB. The FATA Health Department has capacity to implement EMP though additional capacity
building will be carried out under the TDP-ERP and also another Bank funded project (National
Immunization Support Project).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
Key stakeholders constitute local communities in FATA particularly those families that are
relocating to their homes and families with children less than 2 years of age. Women, as mothers
and primary care-givers, form an important stakeholder group. Other stakeholders include
relevant Government Departments, NGOs and CSOs already working on health issues in FATA,
tribal elders and medical professionals.
Stakeholder consultations were carried out while preparing the ESMP. These consultations were
carried out with officials of the Health Department, Environmental Protection Agency as well as
with local communities including women and a wide range of NGOs working on health and
community development issues. Local community groups consulted included TDPs, tribal elders
and women. Several suggestions for improving project operation were received through these
consultations and integrated into project design. Consultations with local communities will
continue during the Project through the social mobilization process. Other stakeholders will be
consulted periodically. A framework for consultations has been identified in the ESMP and will be
followed during implementation.
The ESMP will be released on the FATA Secretariat's website. Printed copies will be placed in
OSSs for public reference.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           1 1-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Pakistan                                                 11-Jul-2015
Comments: The ESMP will be released on the FATA Secretariat's website. Printed copies will
be placed in OSSs for public reference.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[      NA
report?
Page 7 of 8


﻿If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amjad Zafar Khan
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                 Date: 20-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


