                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18796
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                                        Project ID:           P102627
                            Project Name:       India - Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project (P102627)
                            Task Team           Farah Zahir,Ana Bellver Vazquez-Dodero
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           25-Jul-2011                                  Estimated   27-Sep-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GGO18                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Sub-national government administration (90%), General water, sanitation and
                                                flood protection sector (5%), Health (5%)
                            Theme:              Decentralization (56%), Public expenditure, financial management and
                                                procurement (28%), Participation and civic engagement (9%), Nut rition and
                                                food security (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       120.00           Total Bank Financing:                                        84.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    36.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                           84.00
                              Total                                                                                                120.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective of this project is #support Bihar#s capacity to promote and


                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
                         strengthen inclusive, responsive, and accountable Gram Panchayats
                         in selected districts across the state.#
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Project beneficiaries include: (i) elected officials and functionaries at the Gram Panchayat level, who
                         can become stronger leaders; who listen to their constit                                  uents and
                         solve their problems, protect the vulnerable, fairly resolve local con
                         flicts, and capable of mobilizing resources and support and take initiatives; (i
                         i) rural residents in the target PRIs of the six districts, who are more effecti
                         ve in monitoring fulfillment of government obligations and can enjoy better and
                         fairer government services and undertake effective collective actions to solve l
                         ocal problems.


                         Key performance indicators include:

                          #       Increased percentage of active participants from socially disadvantaged groups (SC, ST and
                         women) attend regular Gram Sabha meetings in project districts.
                          #       The regular meetings of GP Standing Committees focus on implementation of their priority
                         thematic programs.
                          #       Increased percentage of GP project beneficiaries are from socially disadvantaged groups
                         (SC, ST and women).
                          #       Increased number of GPs submits annual financial statement within four months from the
                         end of fiscal year for external audit.
                          #       Increased percentage of people from all social groups perceive that the Gram Panchayat is
                         increasingly #inclusive, responsive, and accountable# in helping to
                         address their individual and community issues.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective of this project is #support Bihar#s capacity to promote and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen inclusive, responsive, and accountable Gram Panchayats
                         in selected districts across the state.#

                          Project beneficiaries include: (i) elected officials and functionaries at the Gram Panchayat level, who
                         can become stronger leaders; who listen to their constit                                  uents and
                         solve their problems, protect the vulnerable, fairly resolve local con
                         flicts, and capable of mobilizing resources and support and take initiatives; (i
                         i) rural residents in the target PRIs of the six districts, who are more effecti
                         ve in monitoring fulfillment of government obligations and can enjoy better and
                         fairer government services and undertake effective collective actions to solve l
                         ocal problems.


                         Key performance indicators include:

                          #      Increased percentage of active participants from socially disadvantaged groups (SC, ST and
                         women) attend regular Gram Sabha meetings in project districts.
                          #      The regular meetings of GP Standing Committees focus on implementation of their priority
                         thematic programs.
                          #      Increased percentage of GP project beneficiaries are from socially disadvantaged groups


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         (SC, ST and women).
                          #       Increased number of GPs submits annual financial statement within four months from the
                         end of fiscal year for external audit.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          #       Increased percentage of people from all social groups perceive that the Gram Panchayat is
                         increasingly #inclusive, responsive, and accountable# in helping to
                         address their individual and community issues.
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Gram Panchayat Sarkar Bhawan (US$45.5 million): This component involves
                         construction of Panchayat Sarkar Bhawans in approximately 330 Gram Panchayats (sub-component
                         1a). A new implementing agency - the Local Area Engineering Organization (LAEO) under the
                         Planning and Development Department- is being added as implementing agency for sub-component
                         1a based on their recent experience in constructing Panchayat Sarkar Bhawans with government
                         funding across the state. Capacity building activities are envisioned to strengthen LAEO's capacity in
                         the areas of financial management, procurement and safeguards under World Bank funded projects
                         are envisioned.

                         A new Sub-component 1b (Functional Panchayats) has been added to strengthen functionality of
                         Gram Panchayats and provide incentives for the Government to equip properly the newly constructed
                         Bhawans and staff them with key personnel. Sub-component 1b will disburse against achievement of
                         results.

                         Component 2: Capacity building for gram panchayats (US$ 22.75 million): This component builds
                         panchayats core institutional competencies and empowers them to achieve substantive development
                         outcomes. The component also engages communities and citizens, through training, mobilization,
                         and media, to participate in local governance and to hold panchayats accountable.

                          i.      Institutional Strengthening: This will involve building the core institutional capacity of
                         panchayats, including basic administrative, planning and financial management capacity. It will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include mass media communications and community mobilization to increase people➢❨ s knowledge
                         of their rights and responsibilities in relation to PRIs, to mobilize community participation in PRIs,
                         and to assist communities in seeking redress in the event of grievances involving PRIs.

                         ii.      Nurture development-oriented panchayat leadership and local initiatives: The approach is to,
                         on the one hand, raise awareness among local leaders and communities about important behavior
                         changes and local actions that can improve health and livelihood; and on the other hand, to facilitate
                         their access to government program resource to finance community priorities. The project will focus
                         on developing GP➢❨ s capacity to plan and implement initiatives that improve results in the areas of
                         quality of drinking water, and village sanitation. Support in the areas of natural resource management
                         and nutrition is being dropped as they are already covered by other centrally sponsored schemes.

                         iii.     Strengthen institutional capacity at the State level: This subcomponent will provide funding
                         for capacity building activities to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Panchayat Raj to
                         manage the decentralization process and strengthen block and district resource centers throughout the
                         state to provide training and technical support to GPs.

                         Component 3: Strengthen the State Government capacity to manage a gradual decentralization and
                         empowerment process (US$ 5.25 million). This component will focus on strengthening the
                         regulatory framework on PRIs (i.e. Develop and issue financial management rules, procurement and

                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                         accounting manuals, and revenue administration guidelines), develop a financial management system
                         for GPs to produce timely financial statements and expand annual audit coverage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4- Panchayat Performance Grant. This component is being dropped due to lack of
                         capacity to monitor effectively the performance of the GPs and therefore, ensure implementation.

                         Component 5: Project Management and Coordination (US$ 15 million): GoB has established a Bihar
                         Gram Swaraj Yojana Society (BGSYS) as the implementation agency for the project. The Society is
                         expected to play four critical roles: (i) A catalyst role: public awareness campaign, policy advocacy,
                         innovative capacity building for visible development results, proactive partnership with NGOs to
                         stimulate demand for accountability and improve PRI responsiveness; (ii) A technical support role:
                         to support partner line departments to establish capacity in managing the devolution process and
                         building PRIs capacity in the relevant service delivery area; (iii) A coordination role: coordinate,
                         monitor and report on the devolution and PRI strengthening process; and (iv) A fiduciary role vis-a-
                         vis IDA: Project financing management, procurement and reporting. This component will finance
                         staffing and operational cost of the society
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The BPSP project will be implemented in the six originally envisioned districts of South and North
                         Bihar (i.e. Patna, Bhojpur, Nalanda, Saharsa, Supaul, Madhepura) and six additional districts (ie.
                         Rohtas, Aurangabad, Gaya, Samastipur, Madhubani and Darbhanga) also in the same areas. Some of
                         the salient environmental characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis are:
                          #       The northern project districts (Saharsa, Supaul and Madhepura) fall under the agro-climatic
                         zone Zone II # North East Alluvial plains with jute and rice based cropping systems. Even though the
                         lands are fertile and plenty of water resources are available the productivity of this region is very low
                         due to floods, unscientific cultivation methods, lack of irrigation, etc. The southern project districts
                         (Patna, Nalanda, Bhojpur) fall under Zone III B # South Bihar alluvial plain with rice and wheat
                         based cropping systems. Crop production is good, however parts of this zone are prone to moderate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and severe droughts.

                          #      The Northern project districts have very good rain fall of 1450 mm, while the Southern
                         project districts have 1115 mm. There are abundant surface water resources in the state with 14 river
                         basins. The level of ground water exploitation is considered safe. However, there is high dependence
                         on tubewells for irrigation.

                          #       73% of the geographical area of the state is flood-prone due to heavy rainfall in the
                         catchments of the rivers that originate in neighboring countries, heavy siltation leading to breaches of
                         bunds, shifting river courses, etc. Floods are annual phenomenon in the Northern project districts (the
                         Kosi belt with Saharsa, Supaul and Madhepura districts). Water logging affects over 1550 sq km of
                         land in the state.

                         #       Bihar has very small areas under forest (6.87%). Nalanda district has maximum forest cover
                         with 2.66% of geographical area under forest.

                          #      Tube wells are the major source of drinking water in Bihar. Quality of drinking water is a
                         concern with fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron contamination. Arsenic and nitrate contamination is
                         observed in Bhojpur and Patna whereas Supaul has fluoride contamination. Iron contamination is
                         found in Bhojpur, Patna, Supaul and Saharsa.


                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                          #      Only about 20% of households in the state have toilet facilities. Diarrhea, schistosomiasis,
                         cholera and jaundice are the most common sanitation related diseases in Bihar with high spread
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during post flood situations.

                         Some of the salient characteristics relevant to social analysis are:

                          #       Bihar is one of the largest and poorest states in India. Per capita income is about one-third of
                         the national average. Out of its 83-million population, 70% live in rural areas. Agriculture employs
                         80% of Bihar#s labor force and contributes to 40% of the state Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
                         However, despite fertile land and abundant water resources, agricultural productivity is low.
                         According to the latest data from 2004-5, poverty incidence is over 40% among the rural population
                         and people living in small and medium towns, comparable to the highest in the developing world.
                         Literacy rates are 56% among men and 35% among women. 38% of rural households have no literate
                         member. In 2006, 56% of children under the age of five were stunted, 56% were underweight, and
                         27% were wasted. 45% of the women aged 15-49 suffer from chronic malnutrition, two-thirds of the
                         women in this age group and 87% of children under the age of three suffer from anemia. Basic
                         access to sanitation is very poor. Only 16% of rural households have toilets. Quality of drinking
                         water is a big problem, as a result of poor sanitation and fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron.

                          #      There are deep rooted inequalities in Bihar. Land distribution is very unequal, with a large
                         proportion of landless or marginal farmers. Among the rural population, 28% belong to Scheduled
                         Castes and Scheduled Tribes (SC/ST), who typically live in deeper poverty. Poverty incidence is
                         64% among the SC population and 56% among the ST population. Median land ownership for an
                         SC/ST household is 0.0 3 ha. 60% of SC/ST households are engaged in agricultural labor. 70% of the
                         head s of SC/ST households are illiterate. While the past two decades have seen the political rise of
                         backward castes, SC/ST continues to face social oppression and have limited economic opportunities.

                          #      The government that came into office in 2005 provided for positive discrimination for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         women, SC/ST and extremely backward castes in the Bihar Panchayat Act (2006). Because of these
                         provisions, the 2006 panchayat elections had ensured a much larger role for marginalized sections of
                         the population in local governance. Currently, 55% elected panchayat members are women, 14% are
                         SC, and 0.66% are ST. The demographic profile of GP ward members mirrors those they represent #
                         many of them are poor, illiterate and uneducated. The reservation policy created an unprecedented
                         opportunities for poor people#s voice to be heard.

                          #       Deep rooted social inequality, especially along gender and caste lines, limits the degree of
                         participation of all social groups in a panchayat. The legal framework in India and Bihar provides
                         many opportunities for villagers to participate in local governance and to hold authority to account,
                         for example, gram sabhas, social audit, and Right to Information. In reality, it will take a long time
                         for hitherto suppressed social groups to gain confidence and skills to occupy meaningful seats in
                         local governance.

                         #      Activities that the project will finance include construction work in approximately 330 Gram
                         Panchayats out of 1312 Gram Panchayats in 12 select districts of South and North Bihar.
                         Construction of each Panchayat Bhawan is likely to require 0.3-0.5 acre of land.

                         #       The share of tribal population in the project area (12 districts) is less than 1% and dispersed.



                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GEN07)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental             Yes        The project will finance the construction of Bhawans.
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Such construction activities generate varied kinds of
                                                              waste which have the potential of polluting the
                                                              neighboring air, water and land. The neighborhood and
                                                              surrounding areas of any construction can be adversely
                                                              affected by the huge amounts of construction materials,
                                                              waste and the influx of temporary construction workers.
                                                              Sourcing of materials for the constructions will be done
                                                              from Government authorized quarries. Safety of the
                                                              community and health, occupational safety and sanitation
                                                              of these temporary workers is an added concern which
                                                              needs to be addressed during the course of the
                                                              construction activities. All opportunities to make the
                                                              Bhawan design environmentally friendly and to use safe
                                                              materials will be explored. All these issues have been
                                                              addressed in the EMF, and will be implemented in site-
                                                              specific ESMPs
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP    No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural         No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/    No         The Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) of the World Bank's
                         BP 4.10                              safeguard policies is not triggered given that tribal
                                                              population in the new project area (12 districts) is
                                                              dispersed and account for less than 1 percent of the total
                                                              population in their respective districts and state.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Component 1a will construct offices for approximately
                         OP/BP 4.12                           330 gram panchayats (GPs) in 12 district, with land
                                                              requirement of 0.3-0.5 acre each. Preliminary data suggest
                                                              that in most GPs, the bhawans will be built on suitable
                                                              common government land. But there may be exceptional
                                                              cases where the Government needs to purchase land
                                                              which may cause involuntary resettlement. Displacement
                                                              is unlikely to be significant, but could involve the
                                                              following scenarios: (i) removal of encroachments and
                                                              squatters leading to loss of livelihood and/or shelter; and
                                                              (ii) land acquisition leading to loss of private land, house,
                                                              trees, other immovable assets and livelihood. A



                                                               Page 6 of 11
                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared to
                                                                        mitigate impacts in case of involuntary resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37
                            Projects on International    No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed         No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment safeguard:
                              The Restructured project activities remain the same, although the geographical locations have
                              increased to 12 districts. As a part of project preparation, an environmental assessment study was
                              undertaken by the Government of Bihar which identified potential environmental impacts
                              associated with the proposed project activities. An Environment Management Framework was
                              prepared which detailed potential impacts, mitigation measures, Environmental guidelines,
                              negative list of subprojects which cannot be financed, screening tool and format for monitoring
                              and reporting. Given that the restructured project activities remain the same, the restructured
                              project is not expected to have any additional potential impacts and the existing ESMF remains the
                              key document to be followed during project implementation. A new implementing agency has
                              been added for sub-component 1a (construction of Bhawans) whose capacity in the area of
                              safeguards will be strengthen before project activities will start. The project retains environmental
                              screening category B.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Social safeguard:
                              The development objective of the project is to promote inclusive, responsive and accountable
                              gram panchayats in selected districts. So the social inclusion and accountability issues are
                              addressed by the project as a whole and not just by the safeguard measures. Tribal population in
                              the new project area (12 districts) is dispersed and account for less than 1 percent of the total
                              population of their respective districts and state.

                              The Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) of the World Bank's safeguard policies is triggered. The
                              Panchayat Sakar Bhawan component will construct offices for approximately 330 gram
                              panchayats in 12 districts, with land requirement of 0.3-0.5 acre each. Preliminary data from some
                              districts suggest that in most GPs, the bhawans will be built on suitable common government land
                              (Gairmajurwa). In some GPs where such land is not available, community members may donate
                              land. But there may be exceptional cases where the Government needs to purchase land/acquire
                              the land too. Such land takes can cause involuntary resettlement. Displacement is unlikely to be
                              significant, but could involve the following scenarios: (i) removal of encroachments and squatters
                              leading to loss of livelihood and/or shelter; and (ii) land acquisition leading to loss of private land,
                              house, trees, other immovable assets and livelihood.

                              The Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) of the World Bank's safeguard policies is not triggered given


                                                                          Page 7 of 11
                           that tribal population in the new project area (12 districts) is dispersed and account for less than 1
                           percent of the total population in their respective districts and state.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             The project is expected to have an overall positive social impact through promoting inclusive,
                           responsive and accountable gram panchayats.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Several mitigation alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts are proposed in the
                           Environment Management Framework (EMF) such as:
                            #       Emphasizing adherence to country systems (national and state legislation) that are known
                           to be comprehensive.
                            #       Mitigation measures include institutional arrangements and capacity building at all levels
                           for project staff.
                            #       Internal monitoring and external audit of implementation of the identified mitigation
                           measures.
                            #       Demonstration of the feasibility and advantages of good environmental practices.

                           Alternative design options for construction of Panchayat Bhawans have been prepared under the
                           project to reduce the land requirement under the project. The current land requirement ranges from
                           0.3-0.5 acre.

                           The agreed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed under the project provides
                           guidelines for screening of potential sites from social impact and equal access point of view. For
                           the likely project affected people if any, an entitlement framework is also developed based on the
                           applicable legal and policy frameworks of the country and World Bank OP 4.12 requirements.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                           have been developed as an output of the environmental assessment study. The purpose of the EMF
                           is to ensure that the project interventions are environmentally sustainable and are in compliance
                           with all the regulatory requirements (of the Government of Bihar, Government of India and
                           safeguard policies of the World Bank).

                           The EMF consists of procedures and tools that assist in the environmental appraisal and
                           preparation of environmental management plans for the GP Bhawans and for activities taken up
                           with the Performance Award by Gram Panchayats. While environmental appraisal for project-
                           supported activities is mandatory, its application to other (non-project supported) activities of
                           Gram Panchayats will be promoted as good practice through capacity building efforts.
                           Environmental appraisal involves checking to ensure that no activity on the environmental
                           negative list is included in the GP plan (screening). This is followed by the preparation of an
                           environmental management plan which involves referring to the given environmental guidelines
                           for identifying the potential issues and mitigation measures. The environmental guidelines are
                           developed for the GP Bhawans, agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, forestry, housing, roads,
                           promotion of non-conventional energy, small scale industries, etc. The identified mitigation
                           measures are included in the activity plan, along with additional costs if any. They will also be
                           included in the contract documents for the work execution (wherever applicable), ensuring that the


                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           contractors are legally bound to implement the mitigation measures included in the formats. The
                           environmental appraisal will be done by the Block Facilitator # Environment Natural Resources
                           Management (ENRM) / District ENRM Coordinator in consultation with the relevant Standing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Committee. The appraisal of activities requiring more detailed assessment will be undertaken by
                           the District ENRM Coordinator.

                           The RPF shall guide the social impact assessment and preparation of a resettlement plan for any
                           GP where bhawan construction will result in involuntary resettlement. The RPF shall be updated/
                           addendum will be issued to make it consistent with the changes in project area and all applicable
                           laws and policies of the Government of Bihar with respect to involuntary resettlement through a
                           dated action in the legal agreement. Specifically, the RPF outlines the policy, procedures and
                           institutional arrangements for preparation and implementation of GP-specific resettlement plans.

                           The EMF and RPF include a capacity building strategy that involves provision of orientation to all
                           project staff, detailed training of District and Block level specialists, and detailed orientation to the
                           relevant GP Standing Committees on environmental and social safeguards. Additional capacity
                           building activities will be conducted to enhance the capacity of the new implementing agency of
                           Component 1a (LAEO) before project activities will start.

                           Internal monitoring of the EMF and RPF implementation at the block, district and state levels by
                           the project staff is planned. Key aspects of monitoring include implementation of capacity
                           building programs, integration of environmental management into GP planning process,
                           environmental appraisal of GP bhawans and GP activities, implementation of mitigation measures,
                           promotion or implementation of environment friendly activities by the GPs, etc. Independent
                           external audit will be done twice during the remaini ng project period for assessing the overall
                           implementation and effectiveness of EMF and RPF. The roles and responsibilities for ensuring the
                           implementation of the EMF and RPF have been detailed at the state, district, block and GP levels.
                           The financial requirement for the implementation of the EMF has been worked out and has been
                           included in the project budget.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The EMF and RPF development process included consultations with key stakeholders
                           (representatives of the PRIs, line departments, representatives of NGO/CBO, etc.), including field
                           consultations in 33 GPs in 6 districts. A state level consultation workshop was organized on 15
                           November 2010 and the draft EMF was circulated to key line departments for feedback. The final
                           version of the EMF and RPF incorporates the inputs/ comments/suggestions received from the
                           stakeholders during the consultations. The EMF has been disclosed on the website of the
                           Panchayati Raj Department, Government of Bihar and will be circulated to the project districts.

                           The EMF and RPF will be revised to incorporate the changes in the project area and the
                           implementing agency, and will be re-disclosed 30 days after Cabinet, Government of Bihar
                           approves the restructuring. The Operations Manual will also be reviewed before the restructuring
                           becomes effective.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                            02-Jun-2011
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                         17-Jun-2011


                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           India                                                         01-Dec-2016
                           Comments: The revised ISDS will be disclosed in country 30 days after Cabinet approves the
                                         restructuring.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   02-Jun-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                17-Jun-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Farah Zahir,Ana Bellver Vazquez-Dodero
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)              Date: 14-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)            Date: 14-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
