                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC12639

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                             Project ID:      P153548
                            Project Name:       Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction and Risk Reduction Project (P153548)
                            Task Team           Madhu Raghunath
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           14-Oct-2015                       Estimated        10-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSU08                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (20%), General education sector (20%), Rural and Inter-
                                                Urban Roads and Highways (20%), Sanitation (20%), Water supply (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Natural disaster management (60%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                                Delivery (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%), Oth er environment
                                                and natural resources management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    277.50                       Total Bank Financing:         250.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        27.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          250.00
                              Total                                                                          277.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed objective is to build disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction and
                           emergency preparedness.
                           C. Project Description
                         a.       Overview
                         On April 20, 2013, almost five years after the 2008 Great Wenchuan Earthquake, the magnitude 7.0
                         Lushan earthquake struck Sichuan province, with its epicenter in the Lushan County, Ya’an City.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         While the scale was smaller, the Lushan earthquake caused similar type of damage, disruptions to
                         infrastructure and impact on the province’s population as the Wenchuan earthquake. However,
                         efforts to rescue people from collapsed buildings in the affected region were hindered as more
                         remote communities in the mountains were cut off due to blocked roads, collapsed bridges, fallen
                         boulders and landslides. Similar to the Wenchuan earthquake, there were many landslides and
                         rockslides in the Longmen Mountains, where Qionglai and Ya'an are located. During the emergency
                         and relief period, traffic had to be regulated by restricting most roads to one-way traffic which
                         resulted in long round-trips for emergency responders and rescue workers, delaying provision of
                         emergency help. It was reported that parts of Baoxing County, Ya'an, were isolated by landslides and
                         rescue teams were delayed for 33 hours. Water service, electrical power, and telecommunications
                         were interrupted by the Lushan earthquake. More than one month after the disaster, their restoration
                         was still in progress. The underground water system was severely damaged and temporary above-
                         ground pipes had to be laid to provide emergency water service. This vulnerability demonstrates the
                         need for the infrastructure investments under this project to be designed in consideration of the
                         prevalent hazards to which the project localities are exposed to.

                         The proposed project targets Qionglai City (Chengdu Municipality) and Ya’an Municipality. These
                         areas are exposed not only to earthquake hazard but also other geological hazards such as landslide
                         and slope instability, as well as flooding. Located 15km from the epicenter of the Lushan earthquake,
                         Qionglai City has a population of 660,000. Qionglai City covers an area of 1,384 sq. km with
                         jurisdiction of 24 towns, 6 of which were severely affected by the earthquake. According to the
                         project description provided by the city, the road network in Qionglai’s western regions suffered
                         serious damage (350 km of rural roads), resulting in economic losses of CNY 300 million (or
                         approximately US$48.4 million). Landslides crippled traffic and severely hampered the emergency
                         response after the disaster. The Ya’an Municipality is a prefecture-level city in the western part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sichuan province, with an area of 15,300 sq. km. and population of 1.57 million (1.52 million of
                         whom were affected by the Lushan earthquake). There were 176 fatalities and 12,136 injured. Urban
                         and rural infrastructure was significantly damaged by the Lushan earthquake

                         b. Proposed Components
                         The proposed project components are as follows:
                         Component 1. Upgrading and risk reduction for urban and rural roads.
                         Component 2. Upgrading of prioritized urban infrastructure and urban flood risk mitigation.
                         Component 3. Establishment of emergency management facilities/evacuation areas.
                         Component 4. Multi-hazard vulnerability assessment of lifeline infrastructure and risk mapping.
                         Component 5. Project management and capacity building.

                         Since 2008, strong earthquakes in Sichuan have diminished the stability of slopes throughout the
                         Longmen Mountains, which increases the province’s exposure to secondary geological disasters like
                         landslides. Similarly, the integrity of infrastructure that was not visibly damaged during the
                         Wenchuan and Lushan earthquakes may have been compromised by the strong ground motions
                         associated with these events. The municipalities’ exposure to flood hazard also needs to be
                         considered in the technical design of the proposed investments.

                         In order to improve the resilience of critical urban and rural infrastructure and design risk reduction
                         measures, it is crucial to conduct a comprehensive, multi-hazard assessment of the risk to
                         infrastructure in the project areas. This is proposed as a project component, which is pending
                         confirmation by the Sichuan authorities. Developing a risk reduction investment plan and feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         studies for the selected sectors and facilities, this component would also serve to inform and
                         prioritize future risk reduction investments in the project municipalities.

                         c.       Selection Criteria
                         These proposed investments will be finalized according to the following selection criteria, as
                         discussed and agreed with Sichuan authorities: i) all proposed investments should form an integral
                         part of the Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Master Plan, the Project of Overall Planning and
                         Implementation Covering Reconstruction after Lushan Earthquake (Sichuan Development and
                         Reform Commission Investment No. 315), and relevant sectoral plans; ii) all infrastructure
                         investments should enhance urban infrastructure service quality and comply with relevant local urban
                         development plans; iii) investments should address both reconstruction needs (“building back
                         better”) and long-term socio-economic development, and iv) investments should contribute to risk
                         reduction in the project municipal ities as well as build local capacity for long-term disaster risk
                         management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project areas are located in western Sichuan Province, with the urban infrastructure component
                         to be implemented in 6 counties/districts of the Ya’an Municipality, and the rural road component to
                         be implemented in Qionglai City (Chengdu Municipality) and two counties (Tianquan and Yingjing)
                         of Ya’an. Qionglai City is located in the west of Chengdu Plain and borders Ya’an to the southwest.
                         While Qionglai's topography transitions from plain to mountains from east to west, Ya’an is mostly
                         mountainous.

                         The specific investments currently proposed by the project municipalities are:
                         i) Qionglai City, Chengdu Municipality: 1) the 14-km Daozuo-Huojing Rural Road Reconstruction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project, and 2) the 10.5-km Nanbaoshan Youyu Road-Dayi Huashuiwan Rural Road Reconstruction
                         Project.
                         ii) Ya’an Municipality: Lushan County, Baoxing County, Tianquan County, Yingjing County,
                         Yucheng District, and Mingshan District. The proposed infrastructure investments comprise 39.5km
                         of urban roads, 1.1km of embankment, 3.3km of floodway, 1 water supply plant, and 8 emergency
                         shelters.

                         The project area experiences strong monsoonal influences, with rainfall heavily concentrated in the
                         summer, classified as a humid subtropical climate with long, hot, humid summers and short, mild to
                         cool, dry and cloudy winters. Water resources are abundant. Annual average temperatures range from
                         14.1~17.9 degrees Celsius, while annual average precipitation is about 1,800mm.

                         The project area has a long history of human development, with agricultural production as the
                         predominant economic activity. The population is concentrated in small towns that are mostly
                         located in valleys or small plains in the mountainous area. Given its natural conditions, the project
                         areas are in good ecological condition, with extensive and robust surface vegetation. For example,
                         Ya’an has a surface vegetation of 63%. However, the project localities are exposed not only to
                         earthquake hazard, but also other geological hazards such as landslide and slope instability, as well
                         as flooding.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A provincial-municipal-county/district project management hierarchy is in place. At the provincial
                           level, there are two Project Management Offices (PMOs). The rural road component will be managed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           by the Sichuan Provincial Highway Administration Bureau (SPHAB). SPHAB has no World Bank
                           project experience but has been implementing a large ADB-financed road project to rehabilitate and
                           reconstruct 368 high-priority earthquake damaged roads in the nineteen worst-affected counties of
                           Sichuan Province after the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake (Emergency Assistance for Wenchuan
                           Earthquake Reconstruction Project). The project was classified as Environmental Category B. For the
                           urban infrastructure components, Sichuan Urban PMO has extensive experience and is currently
                           managing two World Bank projects, including the Wenchuan Earthquake Reconstruction Project.

                           At country/district level, capacity for implementing safeguards policies is limited. Two counties have
                           prior World Bank project experience from having been involved in the Wenchuan Earthquake
                           Reconstruction Project implementation since 2009. The Sichuan Urban PMO provided safeguards
                           training in March 2015 to county/district staff, and worked together with the PMO on project
                           safeguards screening tables, demonstrating progress on safeguards capacity-building efforts.

                           Both provincial level PMOs have assigned dedicated safeguards staff for project preparation.
                           Similarly, each county/district has assigned dedicated safeguards staff. Qualified Environmental
                           Assessment and RAP consultants will be engaged to prepare safeguards instruments in accordance
                           with the World Bank’s policies and domestic regulations.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
                           Ning Yang (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project is anticipated to have environmental and
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      social impacts mainly during construction. Based on
                                                                           the initial screening and scoping, the potential
                                                                           environmental and social impacts are of limited scale
                                                                           and intensity, and can be effectively controlled
                                                                           through proper design and construction management.
                                                                           Thus, the project is classified as Environmental
                                                                           Category B.

                                                                           Environmental screening: The rural road component
                                                                           will include improvement of 4 low-volume roads
                                                                           with total length of 48.5km (two county roads and
                                                                           two village roads). The existing road widths
                                                                           (3.5-5.5m) will be expanded by 1-3m. These roads
                                                                           serve as critical and, in some cases, are the only
                                                                           access roads for remote villages. Based on the
                                                                           information provided by the counterparts as well as
                                                                           field observations, the main environmental issues are
                         associated with construction activities, including
                         clearing of vegetation and soil erosion associated
                         with excavation and filling operations, temporary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         traffic blockage, and pollution to small rivers and
                         creeks. Although the number of households along the
                         roads that were visited does not appear to be high, at
                         certain sections, construction activities may cause
                         disturbance to the population, such as noise, dust and
                         safety issues to nearby households if not well
                         controlled. Road alignments should be carefully
                         planned to minimize cutting, filling and disposal of
                         material. In addition, adequate drainage is critical to
                         minimize environmental impact and flooding during
                         road operation, and warrants particular attention
                         during design and construction.

                         The urban infrastructure component will be
                         implemented in built-up or suburban areas of several
                         towns in 6 counties/districts in the Ya’an
                         Municipality, including 39.5km of road, 1.1km of
                         embankment, 3.3km of runoff channel, 1 water
                         supply plant, and 8 emergency shelters. Specific
                         activities may include: 1) urban roads including
                         subsurface water supply, drainage and wastewater
                         networks; 2) subsurface networks under existing
                         roads that do not currently have such networks; 3)
                         flood/drainage channel improvement and
                         rehabilitation; 4) emergency evacuation areas with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emergency facilities; and 5) a new 4000 t/d water
                         treatment plant (WTP) in the Baoxing county. Based
                         on field observations, the proposed activities are of
                         limited scale; the main environmental issues may
                         include social disturbance to nearby communities,
                         such as noise, dust, traffic blockage, and safety
                         issues; water pollution, management of construction
                         wastes and sediments as result of earth works and
                         flood/drainage channel rehabilitation. In comparison,
                         the new WTP in Baoxing may have more significant
                         impacts. The task team was informed that the WTP’s
                         raw water will come from creeks and springs in the
                         mountainous area, where such water resources are
                         abundant. The trunk mains from the WTP to
                         distribution networks is included in the project. No
                         major facilities, such as dams, will be needed.

                         Overall, the project environmental impacts and risks
                         are rated as moderate. The recommended
                                                             Environmental Assessment (EA) instruments include
                                                             an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an
                                                             Environmental Management Plan (EMP). For each
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             specific type of activity, the EMP should be
                                                             organized to include specific environmental codes of
                                                             practices to be followed by contractors during
                                                             construction. In addition, subproject selection criteria
                                                             and design shall take environmental considerations
                                                             into account. These may include environmental
                                                             sensitivity of proposed activities, proper
                                                             determination of scale (to minimize land taking and
                                                             ecological footprints to the extent possible), good
                                                             environmental design such as robust road drainage in
                                                             hilly areas and minimization of material borrowing
                                                             and spoil disposal. The Social Assessment (SA) will
                                                             be a separate report prepared by social assessment
                                                             consultant; and its key findings and
                                                             recommendations will be incorporated into the EIA.

                                                             Information disclosure and public consultation will
                                                             be carried out during EA preparation, through
                                                             questionnaire survey, group meetings and interviews.
                                                             Public opinions should be incorporated into project
                                                             technical design and EA. The full draft EA should be
                                                             disclosed locally prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Based on the initial screening, there are no critical
                                                             habitats or environmentally sensitive areas such as
                                                             natural reserves or forest parks that will be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             by the project. Most activities will take place in built-
                                                             up or suburban areas. Construction of rural roads will
                                                             result in a limited amount of vegetation clearing. A
                                                             small scale water treatment plant will use surface
                                                             water or springs as raw water sources, which are
                                                             abundant in the hilly areas and will not impact water
                                                             ecology substantially. Overall the project is not
                                                             anticipated to result in significant loss, conversion or
                                                             degradation of natural habitats. Further survey and
                                                             assessment will be conducted during project
                                                             preparation to determine whether the policy will be
                                                             triggered. EIA will closely look into the potential
                                                             natural habitat issues, and as needed, carry out
                                                             alternative analysis, develop avoid/mitigate/offset
                                                             hierarchy to mitigate any impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not affect any forests. The policy is
                                                             not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not result in use or procurement of
                                                             pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   Initial survey shows that there are no significant
                         OP/BP 4.11                           cultural relics or other types of PCRs in the project
                                                              area of influence. Further survey and assessment will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              be conducted during project preparation. The EIA
                                                              will closely look into the physical cultural relics
                                                              issue through survey and consultation following the
                                                              policy requirements during the project preparation,
                                                              which will provide rationale for the policy triggering.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    The social screening suggests that there is no
                         4.10                                 indigenous community or people within the proposed
                                                              project sites. Most of the project activities and works
                                                              are in urban areas. Even the rural roads selected for
                                                              this project are existing roads identified for
                                                              improvement or expansion by 1-3 meters. They do
                                                              not pass any ethnic community according to
                                                              information available. The Social Assessment (SA)
                                                              will be conducted to determine in more detail the
                                                              social aspects of the project to adequately address
                                                              social impacts and risks in relation to poverty,
                                                              gender, citizen engagement as well as involuntary
                                                              resettlement. The policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The proposed project will support the construction of
                         BP 4.12                              civil works under the first three components. Land
                                                              acquisition and involuntary resettlement is likely to
                                                              take place in activities such as 1) urban roads
                                                              including subsurface water supply, drainage and
                                                              wastewater networks; 2) subsurface networks under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              existing roads that do not currently have such
                                                              networks; 3) flood/drainage channel improvement
                                                              and rehabilitation; 4) emergency evacuation areas
                                                              with emergency facilities; and 5) a new 4000 t/d
                                                              water treatment plant in the Baoxing county. The
                                                              proposed activities are of limited scale and demands
                                                              for land acquisition and resettlement will also be
                                                              limited and manageable. The infrastructure to be
                                                              supported under this project consist of 39.5km of
                                                              roads which include expansion of existing roads,
                                                              1.1km of embankment, 3.3km of floodway, 1 water
                                                              supply plant, and 8 emergency shelters which may
                                                              amount to several hundreds of thousands of square
                                                              meters. Based on initial estimation and screening,
                                                              these works will need to acquire over 600 mu of land
                                                              and resettle several hundreds of thousands of square
                                                              meters of ground structures. It is estimated that more
                                                              than 100 households will need to be resettled. The
                                                              final figures of the above land demands will be
                                                              further confirmed during project preparation. In the
                                                                                                                        meantime, the project will also maximize the positive
                                                                                                                        social impacts in poverty reduction, risk reduction
                                                                                                                        and inclusive development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        Suggested social safeguards instruments include a
                                                                                                                        Social Assessment (SA) and a Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                        Plan (RAP) for each project locality. An overall SA
                                                                                                                        report for all the project counties/cities and a
                                                                                                                        consolidated RAP combining all the county RAPs
                                                                                                                        will be developed. These instruments will be
                                                                                                                        prepared by the PMOs, through experienced
                                                                                                                        professional consulting team to address adequate
                                                                                                                        land acquisition, compensation and livelihood
                                                                                                                        restoration for project-affected people and
                                                                                                                        communities.

                                                                                                                        Furthermore, subproject selection criteria and design
                                                                                                                        shall take social impacts and risks into consideration
                                                                                                                        to avoid or minimize negative social impacts of the
                                                                                                                        project. These may include (i) land demands and
                                                                                                                        readiness; (ii) risk-informed future development
                                                                                                                        needs and trends of local social economic
                                                                                                                        development, such as tourism development; and (iii)
                                                                                                                        providing inclusive development opportunities for
                                                                                                                        the bottom 40% of income groups (poor areas and
                                                                                                                        population, including men and women) by targeting
                                                                                                                        project works and services to poor areas and
                                                                                                                        communities, engaging local citizens, where possible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        and applicable.

                                                                                                                        The provincial PMOs will need to build the capacity
                                                                                                                        of county or city PIUs in in order to finalize the list
                                                                                                                        of subprojects, identify needs for land for civil
                                                                                                                        works, optimize the location and scale of project
                                                                                                                        works, and address social impacts.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not involve dams. The policy is not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      TThe project is location does not involve any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is located in the central region of the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                country and does not involve any disputed areas. The
                                                                                                                        policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             Safeguard Preparation Plan > Target date November 1, 2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Madhu Raghunath
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                              Date: 09-Jul-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                         Date: 09-Jul-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
