                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSA21201
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 12-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               12-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Mexico                       Project ID:             P151604
    Project Name:                     Mexico Dedicated Grant Mechanism for IP and LC (P151604)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Carlos Tomas Perez-Brito
    Estimated Appraisal               29-May-2017                  Estimated Board
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GEN04                        Financing               Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:             Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                  Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:            6.00                         Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                 0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                     Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                    0.00
    Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                                6.00
    Total                                                                                                       6.00
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Proposed Development Objective of the project is to strengthen capacity of forest-dependent people from
    targeted regions to participate in local, national and international REDD+ related processes.
    3. Project Description
    1. In the spirit of the DGM’s collaborative approach to design and implementation, the DGM Project objective
    is consistent with the interests and aspirations of the IPLCs expressed in the DGM Design Proposal and the
    DGM Framework Operational Guidelines (OG). Likewise, the proposed PDO has an overarching approach
    which leaves enough room to allow the selection of activities based on the principle of demand-driven
    interventions and identified through an extensive participatory and representative process which is the nature
    and essence of the DGM at the national and regional level.

    Project Description

                                                    Page 1 of 14
2. The main beneficiaries of the Project are IPLC from Mexico s FIP and REDD+ Early Action Areas targeted
states include: Jalisco, Oaxaca, and the Yucatán Peninsula (Campeche, Yucatan and Quintana Roo). For the
purpose of this Project, IPLC is defined as any of the following indigenous peoples and/or local communities
located in the Member Country’s territory, including: ejido, agrarian community (comunidad) (including
individuals living in an ejido or agrarian community, including avecindados), associations or organizations of
producers, and legally established community enterprises.. In addition to having a geographical targeting, the
Project will also include a set of eligible activities under an integrated forest landscape management approach
and integration between communities and associations of producers, and markets.

Groups of Beneficiaries.

1.- “Ejidos” and “comunidades”. In Mexico, “Comunidades” (or ―agrarian communities) are long-standing
rural population centers that have been given formal ownership of their traditional or customary lands.
Theoretically ―agrarian communities are entirely composed of indigenous peoples. “Ejido” refers to a portion
of land that has been titled to a rural population nucleus that was formed more recently or relocated from
another area. Most of them are non-indigenous “campesinos”. Both types of community property are governed
by a similar structure, with an “Asamblea” of all “ejidatarios” or “comuneros”, a “Comisariado Ejidal” or
“Comisariado de Bienes Comunales” and a “Consejo de Vigilancia”. It is estimated that 9,000 communities and
“ejidos” have a forest area equal to or greater than 300 hectares, of which about 3,000 are engaged in forestry as
their main activity.
2.- “Avecindados”. Persons who live in the territory without being “ejidatarios” or “comunero".
3.- Associations or Organizations of Producers. Two or more ejitarios/comuneros or ejidos/comunidades” that
are dedicated to the same productive activity, and choose to combine efforts under a cooperative contribution
scheme.
4.- Community Enterprises Legally established and recognized organization of an “ejido” or “comunidad”, that
is dedicated to a productive activity and follows a formally established business structure and purposes.

Project Components
3. Component 1: Financing Mechanisms for Community Forestry Management (US $ 3.7 million). This
component will support IPLC sub-projects for conservation and integration of sustainable productive activities
in forest landscape management activities related to (a) avoided deforestation and forest degradation through
SFM, (b) protection of environmental services; (c) enhancement of carbon stocks in forest landscape, (d)
agroforestry and sustainable use of timber and non-timber products, (e) low carbon production systems in
agriculture, and (f) strengthening of community forest and non-forest enterprises.

4. Sub-Component 1.1. Demand-Driven Community Projects. (US$ 3.10 million). This sub-component will
finance the provision of sub-grants and matching grants to IPLC from eligible targeted states, and thematic areas
and activities. All sub-grants and matching grants proposals will be assessed by the National Steering
Committee (NSC) and the National Executing Agency (NEA) using the following criteria: i) improving local
population livelihoods, ii) strengthen participation of indigenous and local communities in the overall forest
landscape management, iii) target low carbon emission and sustainable forest landscape products and value
chains; iv) addressing climate change mitigation and adaptation, and the ability to offer additional
environmental co-benefits such as biodiversity and hydrological services; v) socio-economic feasibility; vi)
number of potential beneficiaries; and vii) evidence of broad community support.

5. Taking into consideration the current scenarios faced by IPLCs, from the different target states, proposals will
be eligible for funding under two sub-grant windows: (i) Social Inclusion Sub-Projects Window. Small and
innovative sub-grants proposals that can be fully funded coming from but not limited to social priority and
vulnerable groups including indigenous women, youth and “Avecindados”; and (ii) Market-oriented and
Financial Inclusion Sub-projects Window. These will be from producer organizations, and Community (Forest


                                                Page 2 of 14
and Non Forest) Enterprises that will be funded with the goal of leveraging resources and to strengthen regional
organization between communities, organizations and enterprises (horizontal integration), as well as access to
markets (vertical integration), and usage and quality of financial services. A minimum share of 50 percent of the
funds allocated for this component will be targeted to the Social Inclusion Window and a maximum share of 50
percent to Market Oriented Window.

6. Sub-Component 1.2. Training and Sustainability Assistance. (US$ 600,000) This sub-component will
finance technical assistance and operational cost of conducting critical project management activities for pre-
selected and selected sub-grants. This activity will focus on enhancing the organizational, technical and
managerial capacities of beneficiary organizations from pre-selected and selected proposals under a financial
inclusion scheme in order to ensure sustainability and extend access to markets and financial services existing in
Mexico. This activity will also support workshops by region to help develop pre-selected innovative ideas into
full proposal eligible for funding for any of the windows. These activities will be executed by the NEA before
launching the first official call for proposals and directly after an initial assessment of all selected proposals in
order to identify technical gaps that need to address for long-term sustainability and to define tailor made
workshops and specific technical assistance package.

7. Component 2: Capacity Building, Communication and Advocacy (about US$ 1.4 million). This component
will support technical assistance and financing of operational cost for (i) training to Local Community
Promoters “Promotores Comunitarios Locales”; (ii) conduct knowledge-sharing and know-how workshop and
exchanges among IPLC, associations of producers and community enterprises through Community Schools
(“Ejidos-Escuela”); (iii) develop and adapt training modules on financial inclusion to complement and fill the
gaps in already existing training materials; and (iv) developing a culturally appropriate communication and
advocacy strategy for the all DGM activities and REDD+ processes.

8. Sub-component 2.1. Capacity Building. (US$ 1, 100,000) This sub-component will support technical
assistance and financing of operational cost for capacity building and knowledge-sharing and exchanges
activities through two delivery mechanisms: (i) Selection and training of a roster of 20 qualified young
professionals to become Local Community Promoters (“Promotores Comunitarios Locales”). The 20 local
community promoters will be trained on financial inclusion topics and REDD+ processes using training
modules and materials developed or adapted under numeral iii. The local community promoters be identified
and proposed by “Ejidos” and communities from each of the targeted regions that will also help in the
promotion for the selection of sub-projects, support IPLC from their own regions in financial inclusion and
Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PM&E) issues. For the selection of these local community promoters,
a special consideration will be given to attract youth-female community leaders that are fully supported by their
own communities to participate in this program; and (ii) Conduct 50 knowledge-sharing and know-how
workshop and exchanges through Ejidos-Schools ( “Comunidades Instructoras”) This capacity building activity
will be carried out following an “Ejido-to-Ejido” and Community-to-Community approach to improve the
capacity of incipient “Ejidos” and communities to conduct integration of sustainable productive activities in
forest landscapes, successful access to markets and financial services, key lessons learned, cultural appropriate
approaches and build synergies among communities, associations of producers, financial intermediaries, and
government institutions for sustainable production in forest landscapes. These workshops will be given by
already successful “Ejidos” and community forest enterprises pre-identified for this purpose from within
targeted regions or beyond, if needed, to conduct the exchanges. Subsequently, 50 exchanges will be carried out
through the lifetime of the Project which will allow to strengthen knowledge among IPLCs. In addition to the
two previous capacity building activities, the Project wil l (iii) develop and adapt training modules on financial
inclusion to complement and fill the gaps in already existing training materials. One of the main barriers faced
by IPLC in terms of accessing funding for their activities is the lack of knowledge and information on key
requirements to access different financial resources available in the country and also technical expertise to
prepare proposals. The goal of this activity is to tackle those issues by developing training modules on key


                                                 Page 3 of 14
financial inclusion topics to complement some already available and also adapt some others to conduct tailor
made training for the local community promoters and to be used as part of the overall knowledge-sharing and
exchanges in the “Ejidos”-Schools.

9. Sub-component 2.2. Communication and Advocacy. (US$ 300,000) This sub-component will support
technical assistance and financing of operational cost to conduct communication and advocacy activities by: (i)
developing a culturally appropriate communication and advocacy strategy for the DGM activities. Particularly,
this strategy will facilitate the successful implementation of Project’ activities, including the design and
administration of the DGM Mexico Internet website, support effective and culturally appropriate calls for
proposals for sub-projects, identify and disseminate lessons learned, good practices and show case successful
sub-projects to both internal and external audiences and interested parties such as “CONAFOR, CDI,
SAGARPA, FIRA, Financiera Nacional”, etc and the international community. With this activity, the NEA will
ensure that targeted beneficiaries, organizations and communities in the selected areas within the geographical
intervention of the DGM know about the Project, the funding windows, call for proposals for sub-projects, and
overall activities; and (ii) support the participation of DGM beneficiaries, the NSC and regional sub-
committee’s members in key DGM and REDD+ processes and events at the local, national and international
level.

10. Component 3: Management, monitoring and evaluation (about USD$ 900,000). This component will support
two main areas. First, it will support activities that increase the capacity of IPLC to oversee and assess their
forest resources and to monitor and evaluate project activities using a participatory approach. Second, it will
cover the incremental management costs of the NEA to implement the sub-projects and facilitate capacity
building. That said, the component and its cost are an integrated approach to cover project management,
monitoring under a participatory approach, and supervision.

11. Sub-component 3.1. Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (PM&E). (US$100,000) This sub-component
will support technical assistance and financing of operating cost to (i) design and implement a pilot PM&E
system to test the concept within the context of the project and areas of intervention; (ii) implementation of the
PM&E system in all sub-project areas, with the key feature to focus on participation, not only to oversee the
results of the project, but also serve as a tool to empower forest-dependent communities´ to improve the
management of their own resources and to promote collaborative learning; (iii) implementation of a sub-project-
level survey to compare with national existing metrics provided by CONAFOR’s annual National Beneficiaries
Survey (“Encuesta Nacional de Beneficiarios”) and (iv) dissemination and exchange of lessons learned of the
use of the PME system (under the DGM Global Component). Monitoring and Evaluation will include reporting
of outputs and outcomes based on the indicators specified in the Results Framework (RF) in PAD-Annex 1, and
will be collected mostly using a participatory approach.

12. Sub-component 3.2. Management. (US$ 800,000) This sub-component will finance the incremental
operational and managerial costs of the NEA to carry out its task and responsibilities. The maximum total
operational cost of the NEA is 12% of the total donated amount, equivalent to US$720,000.00, and it does not
include the cost of the audits. These responsibilities include: (i) Serving as secretariat to the NSC, including
technical and financial support for the organization of annual NSC and Regional Sub-Committees’ meetings and
the provision of technical assistance to support the NSC’s approval process; (ii) Project’s technical coordination,
monitoring and evaluation; (iii) reporting to The World Bank, NSC, and the Global Steering Committee (GSC);
(iv) Project’s financial management, procurement, and social and environmental safeguard (v) design and
implementation of Project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (vi) supervising the implementation of
community initiatives and results assessments; and (vii) developing a robust OM for the Project. Additional US$
80,000 will cover the cost of contracting the annual Project audits for the life of the project.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)

                                                Page 4 of 14
13. The target area of the project includes the State of Oaxaca, the coastal watersheds in the State of Jalisco and
the Yucatán Peninsula. In this priority project target area, forestry remains a relevant economic sector and about
7.3 million people live under the poverty line. Together, these states are responsible for 12.9 percent of the
country’s timber production (5.9 million cubic meters) and 11.7 percent of its fuelwood and charcoal production
(0.7 million cubic meters).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                    Team
 Arelia Jacive Lopez Castaneda( GSU04 )
 Dora Patricia Andrade( GEN04 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes            This Project is rated as Category B. The Project is
                                                              designed to generate positive environmental
                                                              impacts through increased incentives to protect the
                                                              forests and stronger capacity at the local level for
                                                              forest and natural resource management. Potential
                                                              negative impacts will be of limited scope and not be
                                                              significant or irreversible. A programmatic stand
                                                              alone ESMF (Environment and Social Management
                                                              Framework) was prepared by the NSC in close
                                                              collaboration with the WB team. Based on that the
                                                              NEA (Rain Forest Alliance) prepared a Specific
                                                              ESMF for the Mexico DGM that was disclosed on
                                                              RA’s national web site on March 10, 2017.
                                                              (http://www.rainforest-
                                                              alliance.org/lang/sites/default/files/uploads/4/proye
                                                              cto-mde-mexico-mgas.pdf).
                                                              The ESMF will enhance local capacity to address
                                                              the direct and underlying drivers of deforestation
                                                              and forest degradation in the selected areas, based
                                                              on a community driven forest landscape
                                                              management approach, which will particularly
                                                              focus on a stronger inclusion of vulnerable groups,
                                                              such as indigenous people, women and young.
                                                              Subprojects to be selected will necessarily need to
                                                              demonstrate, i) improving local population
                                                              livelihoods, ii) strengthen participation of
                                                              indigenous and local communities in the overall
                                                              forest landscape management, iii) target low carbon
                                                              emission and sustainable forest landscape products
                                                              and value chains, and iv) addressing climate change
                                                              mitigation and adaptation, and the ability to offer
                                                              additional environmental co-benefits such as
                                                              biodiversity and hydrological services. Eligible
                                                              subprojects/activities might consist of activities
                                                              related to: Sustainable Forest Management (SFM)
                                                              (Including among other Community Forest
                                                              Management, and forestpasture); Eco-agriculture in


                                                Page 5 of 14
                                          Forest landscapes (restoration and stabilization of
                                          the agriculture and livestock frontier, sustainable
                                          rural production systems (grazing rotation,
                                          conservation tillage, agro-ecology, afforestation,
                                          reforestation, restoration and forest certification,
                                          low impact sustainable plantations (café de sombra,
                                          milpa and acuahual), low intensive cattle ranching,
                                          control of forest fires by changing the patterns of
                                          land use); Ecotourism (Support Nature-based forms
                                          of tourism -observation and appreciation of nature-
                                          educational and interpretation features by
                                          community driven); and Enhancing local
                                          governance, inclusion and advocacy (collaborative,
                                          community-driven processes for dialogue, planning,
                                          negotiating, implementation and monitoring,
                                          financial and basic business administration and
                                          entrepreneurial skills). All of these activities are
                                          expected to have a net positive impact on the
                                          environment contributing to the benefits of forests,
                                          natural habitats and landscapes. It will also improve
                                          the living conditions of vulnerable IPLC, which
                                          rely on forest resources for their livelihoods.
                                          The most significant risk for the conservation of
                                          forests and biodiversity is represented by those
                                          activities that are not carried out under principles of
                                          sustainability and within a sustainable rural
                                          development approach.
                                          The ESMF outlines the sustainability criteria and
                                          process to be included in the Environmental
                                          Management Plans. EMP’s will be prepared for
                                          those activities that require such a Plan, especially
                                          those that could be in the proximity of
                                          environmentally sensitive areas, and provides
                                          specific guidelines to avoid or minimize risks and
                                          manage potential environmental impacts.
                                          Any subproject or activity considered to be
                                          Category A will not be eligible for funding by the
                                          Project. During preparation, efforts were made to
                                          ensure consistency with other relevant national
                                          processes such as the Forest Carbon Partnership
                                          Facility/REDD+ (P12041 7 and P162749), and the
                                          Forest and Climate Change Project (P123760), that
                                          also includes the main portion of the Mexico FIP
                                          Investment plan.
                                          The ESMF is considered a living document, and as
                                          such it will be updated as needed. The updated
                                          versions will always be available on the NEA’s
                                          website and the Bank website.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes         The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy is
                                          triggered as some of the community based

                               Page 6 of 14
                                                     agroforestry subprojects may have impacts on
                                                     natural habitats. The ESMF promotes sound
                                                     practices in forest management, which may include
                                                     innovative approaches to protect environmentally
                                                     sensitive habitats, includes a description of the
                                                     mechanisms to engage stakeholders during the
                                                     implementation to avoid any land use conversion or
                                                     degradation that may result associated with project
                                                     activities. A list of ineligible activities is also
                                                     included in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes         The Forests (OP/BP 4.36) policy is triggered as the
                                                     proposed project will be implemented in natural
                                                     forest areas and supports non-timber, agroforestry,
                                                     and timber subprojects.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         The Pest Management (OP 4.09) policy is triggered
                                                     as the project will finance agroforestry and non-
                                                     timber forest products (NTFP) subprojects. The
                                                     project will not directly finance the use of
                                                     pesticides but will promote integrated management
                                                     of pest programs and eventually the use of certain
                                                     non-restricted pesticides to minimize risks to
                                                     human health and the environment. The ESMF
                                                     contains a specific Pest Management Plan (Annex
                                                     1) to ensure a responsible management. The Plan is
                                                     in line with sound environmental and human health
                                                     protection objectives. This Plan was consulted as
                                                     part of the ESMF with interested parties. The PMP
                                                     is integrated as annex in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
                                                     policy is triggered as project related activities may
                                                     have an impact on the use of and access to areas
                                                     with potential cultural significance such as sacred
                                                     sites. The principles of this Policy are fully
                                                     integrated into the screening and mitigation
                                                     planning processes described in the ESMF
                                                     procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes         The World Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10
                                                     Indigenous Peoples is triggered for this project. As
                                                     indigenous peoples are the project’s direct and main
                                                     beneficiaries, this project is considered to be an
                                                     Indigenous Peoples Project. For this reason, an
                                                     Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will not be prepared
                                                     and the elements of an IPP will be included in the
                                                     overall project design.
                                                     The project is not expected to have direct negative
                                                     impacts on IP. However some issues were
                                                     identified in the review of existing social
                                                     assessments and the overall preparation process for
                                                     the programmatic ESMF: i) the need for social

                                          Page 7 of 14
                                                  inclusion of indigenous peoples and communities,
                                                  ii) the need for culturally and socially appropriate
                                                  means of communication, iii) capacity building
                                                  activities for the most vulnerable groups within
                                                  ejidos and communities and for IPLC in general,
                                                  and iv) consideration of IPLC traditional
                                                  knowledge and traditions during the project
                                                  preparation and implementation. The ESMF
                                                  focuses on mainstreaming and optimizing the
                                                  project benefits for indigenous people, and includes
                                                  a strategy for culturally adequate communication, a
                                                  gender inclusion strategy and monitoring and
                                                  evaluation mechanisms. Overall, the DGM will
                                                  provide financing through grants and matching
                                                  grants to specific demand-driven sub-projects from
                                                  IPLC.
                                                  The Project was prepared jointly with the NSC and
                                                  in full consultation under a participatory process
                                                  with indigenous leaders from the project areas. A
                                                  robust consultation process was conducted with
                                                  members of the NSC, and key governmental
                                                  institutions such as CONAFOR and CDI in order to
                                                  review the proposed project design. In particular,
                                                  the IPLC representative demanded for more
                                                  appropriate communication. The DGM preparation
                                                  and implementation attended this demand through
                                                  several key features: i) Participatory and regional
                                                  governance structure that allows to respond to
                                                  cultural and socio economics needs, ii) component
                                                  1 integrates a social window that not only
                                                  recognizes cultural needs but attends specifically
                                                  vulnerable groups, and iii) component 2 will
                                                  specifically aim at fostering cultural appropriate
                                                  communication through community driven learning
                                                  and knowledge and exchange among communities.
                                                  The ESMF was jointly reviewed, inputs
                                                  incorporated and continuously consulted and
                                                  reviewed with the NSC. As a result, no adverse
                                                  impacts are expected. Potential positive impacts of
                                                  the ESMF include the strategy of culturally
                                                  adequate communication, gender inclusion strategy
                                                  and monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.
                                                  Rainforest Alliance (NEA) will assume full
                                                  responsibility for the administration of grant
                                                  proceeds, compliance with the Bank’s fiduciary and
                                                  safeguard policies and procedures, and all project-
                                                  related monitoring and reporting, as well as the
                                                  design, and implementation of the Grievance
                                                  Redress Mechanism.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes         From a safeguard point of view, no involuntary

                                       Page 8 of 14
                                                         resettlement of population will result from any
                                                         activities financed by the project. In addition, the
                                                         beneficiaries of the DGM are ejidatarios,
                                                         comuneros, avencidados, producer organizations
                                                         and forest enterprises that must provide either proof
                                                         of land possession or title, or any arrangement and
                                                         approval by the community or land owner.
                                                         A Process Framework (PF) was prepared by the
                                                         project as a precautionary measure to ensure
                                                         compliance with the OP4.12, in the unlikely event
                                                         of any possible restriction of access to natural
                                                         resources originated by project activities within and
                                                         outside of protected areas. The PF must be adequate
                                                         and culturally appropriate consulted with
                                                         indigenous peoples and local communities within
                                                         the potential intervention sides.
                                                         In addition, the PF establishes actions to ensure the
                                                         provision of benefits to the most vulnerable such as
                                                         women and young (non-land tenure holders), and
                                                         those without land. The PF includes guidelines for
                                                         authorization from community/ejido (ejidos)
                                                         assemblies for such activities. The PF aims at
                                                         promoting the inclusion of the most vulnerable to
                                                         the IPLC governance structures.
                                                         The PF has been disseminated and consulted with a
                                                         wide range of stakeholders during several
                                                         subcommittee meetings. It was presented to the
                                                         NSC during its general assemblies in Chetumal and
                                                         Oaxaca in October and November 2016
                                                         respectively. PF has been revised and finalized
                                                         during the NSC’s meeting in Oaxaca, Mexico in
                                                         April of 2017. The DGM PF was designed in
                                                         compliance with the national and international legal
                                                         framework relevant in Mexico and applicable to the
                                                         project. For this reason, no relevant technical
                                                         observations were made during the consultation
                                                         process.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No          This policy is not triggered given that the project
                                                         will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                         dams nor will support other investments which rely
                                                         on the services of existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No         This policy should not be triggered because the
    7.50                                                 proposed project will not affect International
                                                         waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No          This policy should not be triggered because the
                                                         proposed project will not affect disputed areas as
                                                         defined under the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

                                              Page 9 of 14
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A comprehensive analysis of different social and environmental assessments and ESMF’s of several projects in
Mexico’s forestry and natural resource management sector with significant indigenous population components
was carried out (Forest and Climate Changeprogram financed by the IBRD, the Forest Investment Program, the
REDD+ Readiness and Emission Reduction Program under the FCPF) . The analysis included an extensive desk
review, field visits to several of the potential beneficiary regions in the targeted states, interviews and meetings
with a wide range of stakeholders and a presentation of the initial results to the NSC during its general assembly
in Chetumal in October 2016 and aimed at designing the project’s programmatic ESMF by the NEA with the
advice of the WB team. As a result of this, no potential indirect and/or long term impacts have been identified
due to activities in the project area. The following risks have been identified as part of the project preparation,
for all of which mitigation measures are presented in section 4 (Describe measures taken by the borrower to
address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the
measures described).
Social: The priority issues identified in the review of the existing social assessments and the overall preparation
process for the programmatic ESMF are: i) the need for social inclusion of indigenous peoples and communities,
ii) the need for culturally and socially appropriate means of communication, iii) capacity building activities for
the most vulnerable groups within ejidos and communities and for IPLC in general, and iv) consideration of
IPLC traditional knowledge and traditions during the project preparation and implementation. The Project is not
expected to result in any instances of land acquisition and/or displacement of people, regardless of indigenous or
non-indigenous populations.
Environmental: Overall, project implementation is expected to have a net positive impact on the environment
contributing to the benefits of forests, natural habitats and landscapes. It will also improve the living conditions
of vulnerable IPLC, which rely on forest resources for their livelihoods.
The most significant risk for the conservation of forests and biodiversity is represented by those activities that
are not carried out under principles of sustainability and within a sustainable rural development approach.
Specific activities include, but are not limited to: commercial agriculture, extensive cattle raising, illegal
logging, and forest fires. All of these activities are generally driven by economic, market, technical, or social
issues such as lack of incentives, poor community organization, lack of alignment in the implementation of
public policies, lack of competitiveness of sustainable forestry activities, deficiencies in technical assistance,
lack of financing schemes for the most vulnerable populations, government subsidies that favor productive
activities without long-term vision or environmental considerations with a landscape approach, positive
environmental externalities not included in the prices of forest resources, lack of employment opportunities, etc.
Those become important barriers for the implementation of activities that benefit forest dependent communities.
In order to foster sustainable activities for a low carbon sustainable rural development, the proposed project and
programmatic ESMF have included an integrated forest landscape management approach to promote sustainable
community-based activities. Specific examples include, but are not limited to land planning activities
(PPredial), sustainable forest management, protection of ecosystem services, increased carbon stocks,
agroforestry and sustainable use of non-timber products. Under the call for proposals a specific environmental
screening will be included.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The basic design of the DGM poses serious challenges in the Mexican context in terms of governance,
representation and gender parity. In terms of governance, due to the close and often overlapping relationship
between the members of the NSC and the potential project beneficiaries, maintaining a neutral separation
between the governance function of the NSC members and their personal and/or political relationships with the
potential beneficiaries at the community level and ensuring that there is no bias and a conflict of interest in the
selection of the subprojects could prove challenging. Implementation of some subprojects will be in remote

                                                Page 10 of 14
locations and involve numerous and relatively small transactions which makes management and implementation
more challenging.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
In terms of governance, representation and gender parity the risk will be mitigated by a tailor made Conflict of
Interest Guidelines and Policy that was approved by the NSC and defines specific situations under which there
is an obligation for abstaining from a decision, clear eligibility criteria for the selection of the subprojects and
beneficiaries. The NSC has also invited representatives of CONAFOR and CDI two key government institutions
to become members of the DGM’s NSC. The Conflict of Interest Policy will be included in the project’s OM.
The integration and constant support to Regional sSub-committees will ensure constant representation of IPLC
organization from targeted states. In terms of gender mainstreaming issues and inclusion of vulnerable
populations, the NSC and regional sub-committees have committed themselves to gradually include more
women to their members. Likewise, the Project design includes specific targeted beneficiaries including women,
and non-land tenure holders that lice within the ejido / community.
To contribute to overcome or, at least, minimize the implementation risk: the DGM proposes (i) broadly
participatory and empowering approach that ensures representation and participation of key stakeholders in the
different stages of project preparation and implementation; (ii) the design of an appropriate, clear, transparent
and broadly representative governance mechanism – the NSC – open to dialogue with other participatory bodies;
and (iii) selection of a National Executing Agency through a competitive process, which shall (a) assure World
Bank standards and procedures for project implementation (fiduciary, procurement, and safeguards), (b) assure
the capacity to provide technical assistance and training in all areas needed by the key stakeholder, and (c) have
experience in working with indigenous communities and “Ejidos”.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Social measures: One of the most important risks found in the review of the social assessments is the need for
social inclusion of indigenous peoples and communities in the project. This necessity is included in the Mexico
DMG objective, because the beneficiariesare the Indigenous People and Local Communities. In addition, the
assessment identified the need for culturally and socially appropriate means of communication, with cultural
appropriate training and materials, as well as the importance of taking into account their traditional knowledge
and traditions during the design and implementation of the project activities. To that regard, the ESMF includes
a strategy for culturally adequate communication, a gender inclusion strategy and monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. The DGM will provide financing through grants and matching grants to specific demand-driven
sub-projects from IPLC.
Environmental: The DGM ESMF aims at fostering best practices for integrated forest landscape management.
To achieve this objective mitigation measures will be incorporated to the list of eligible activities, and will be
reflected in the ESMP’s and Operational Manual to be developed by the NEA.
Implementation Capacity of the NEA: Part of the NEA’s selection criteria was its experience and capacity to
implement safeguards requirements. Rainforest Alliance (RA) was able to provide sufficient proof on its long-
standing experience working in the forestry sector and well known results. RA proposed a full time technical
staff dedicated to safeguards implementation, and train the “Promotores comunitarios” in different issues
associated with sustainable forest management, health and safety training, fire suppression, community
organization etc.
RA is a member of “La Alianza México para la Reducción de Emisiones de carbono por Deforestación y
Degradación (REDD+)” which aims at strengthening low carbon rural and forest development and social and
environmental best practices to underlie such development approach. The Alliance promotes and supports
knowledge and capacity building, mainly in rural and indigenous communities and organizations in the country,
as well as in government entities at regional, state and national levels. RA works with the communities and
owners of the forests, with local, state and federal governments, especially with the Ministry of the Environment
and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT) and with the National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR).


                                                Page 11 of 14
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
No large, significant irreversible social or environmental impacts have been identified in the Social Assessment.
The main beneficiaries of the Project are indigenous peoples and local communities (IPLC) from Mexico s FIP
and REDD+ Early Action Areas targeted states: the coastal watersheds of Jalisco, Oaxaca, and the Yucatán
Peninsula (Campeche, Yucatan and Quintana Roo).
For the purpose of this Project, IPLC is defined as any of the following indigenous peoples and/or local
communities located in the Member Country’s territory, including: ejido, agrarian community (comunidad)
(including individuals living in an ejido or agrarian community, including avecindados), associations or
organizations of producers, and legally established community enterprises. In addition to having a geographical
targeting, the project will also include a set of eligible activities under an integrated forest landscape
management approach and integration between communities and associations of producers and markets.
The architectural design of the DGM is based on a participatory process including relevant stakeholders in
forestry landscapes, including community leaders and representatives of ejidos and communities in the area of
influence of the DGM. The process of free, prior and informed consultation started in 2014 and a total of 16
consultation workshops have been held with key stakeholders, including two regional meetings with indigenous
representatives in the Yucatán Peninsula, Oaxaca and Jalisco. In addition, 6 consultation meetings (2014- 2015)
were conducted with each one of the regional sub-committees and general assemblies of the NSC in
Guadalajara, (Jalisco), Chetumal, (Quintana Roo) and Oaxaca. In addition, the Mexico DGM is conceived as a
pilot project and its design has been led by IPLC. The project aims at contributing to the implementation of the
national REDD+ program – including the FIP and the FCPF as well as the Forest and Climate Change project –
and particularly adds to the ongoing efforts to implement its operational pillars, the ENAREDD+ and the
emission reduction program under the FCPF. To that regard, Mexico’s overall REDD+ program provides an
open, participatory, inclusive, cultural appropriate and analytical consultation process. Particularly, under the
FCPF readiness grant a full national consultancy on the ENAREDD+ (2014 to 2015) was carried out that
included 4 modalities – indigenous people, sectorial workshops, working groups for vulnerable groups and on-
line – and more than 5,000 consulates.
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10-Mar-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07-Apr-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10-Mar-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07-Apr-2017
"In country" Disclosure
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10-Feb-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07-Apr-2017
"In country" Disclosure
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Y
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    14-Apr-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 07-Apr-2017
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective

                                               Page 12 of 14
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management               Yes [X]   No []    NA          []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes []    No []    NA          [X]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []    NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []    NA          []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning                  Yes []    No [X]   NA          []
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation
 with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes []    No []    NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes []    No []    NA          []
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []    NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []    NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No [X]   TBD         []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes []    No [X]   TBD         []

                                                Page 13 of 14
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          issues and constraints been carried out?
          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          overcome these constraints?
          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes []      No [X]      NA    []
          does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                   Name:Carlos Tomas Perez-Brito
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                    Name: Noreen Beg (SA)               Date: 12-May-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:              Name: Paul Jonathan Martin          Date: 12-May-2017
                                                (PMGR)




                                                         Page 14 of 14
