                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18799
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P125528
                            Project Name:       Dioxins Reduction from the Pulp and Paper Industry (P125528)
                            Task Team           Jiang Ru
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           01-Dec-2011                                  Estimated   29-Mar-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEN2A                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                            No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:          81.00              Total Bank Financing:                                        0.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              66.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                     15.00
                              Total                                                                                                 81.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are to: (a) demonstrate the result of adoption of best available
                           techniques and best environmental practices (BAT/BEP) in four selected non-wood pulp mills; and
                           (b) support China in developing and adopting a long-term action plan to guide the promotion of a
                           sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption.


                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                         Proposed New GEO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objectives are to: (a) demonstrate the result of adoption of best available
                         techniques and best environmental practices (BAT/BEP) in four selected non-wood pulp mills; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) support China in developing and adopting a long-term action plan to guide the promotion of a
                         sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption.
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: BAT/BEP Investment in Participating Mills and Promotion of BAT/BEP in Selected
                         Mills

                         This component will support adoption of BAT/BEP in the four selected non-wood pulp mills by
                         replacing the current elemental chlorine-based bleaching process by the elemental chlorine-free
                         (ECF) process in order to minimize releases of dioxins and furans. In doing so, construction,
                         renovation and rehabilitations of production processes and facilities (and associated engineering and
                         design works and civil works and acquisition and installation of equipment) will be carried out in the
                         participating mills to improve their overall environmental performance, including reducing pollution
                         load in effluents and increasing water conservation. Technical assistance to the participating mills
                         will be provided to support review of technical proposals and design of BAT/BEP and during trial
                         operations after the completion of the technological upgrades. An assessment of the results of the
                         BAT/BEP investment will also be performed. The selected four mills at appraisal were the Zhongye
                         Meili Paper Mill (Ningxia); Leshan Jinfu Paper Mill (Sichuan), Nanning Sugar Company Pumiao
                         Paper Mill (Nanning) and Yueyang Paper Mill (Hunan), each typifying the most common non-wood
                         fiber, straw, bamboo, bagasse and reed, respectively. A performance based financing (PBF) scheme
                         has been designed to incentivize the mills to carry out the agreed BAT/BEP investments, complete
                         needed trial operations to adjust the system to the specific production conditions, operate the new
                         facility for a one year period and achieve agreed performance targets.

                         First project restructuring was carried out in 2014 because two of the four selected mills - Ningxia
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zhongye Meili and Hunan Yueyang - withdrew from project implementation in FY13 due to market
                         reasons. Two replacement mills - Hunan Linyuan (reed) and Henan Baiyun (straw) Paper MIlls -
                         were identified and appraised in FY14. The two mills are committed to carry out the project
                         promoted BAT/BEP investments to upgrade their existing chlorine based non-wood pulp production.

                         Second project restructuring is carried out in 2016. In 2015, the Pumiao Paper Mill in Nanning City
                         dropped out from the project though it had substantially completed the planned BAT/BEP
                         investments, because its parent company decided to stop the mill➢❨ s operation permanently due to
                         poor market situation and its own financial difficulties. As of May 2016, the remaining three mills
                         have either been under stable operation or are ready for trial operation. The project hence is
                         restructured to include several technical assistance activities, including (a) promotion of BAT/BEP
                         investment in four additional pulp and paper mills by supporting the development of feasibility
                         studies and safeguard documents. These additional mills will be selected after careful evaluation of
                         the technical, financial and environmental performances of candidate mills. (b) scale-up of rapid
                         dioxins monitoring in selected provinces and cities.

                         Component 2: National Action Plan for Sector-Wide Replication

                         The objective of this component is to establish an enabling environment for the replication of the
                         BAT/BEP techniques and practices tested under Component 1, including the development and


                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         implementation of a national action plan to promote BAT/BEP for both wood and non-wood pulp
                         based production in pulp and paper mills. Based on the experience learned in the four demonstration
                         projects, the component will support (a) development, dissemination and implementation of general
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sectoral technical guidelines on BAT/BEP and specific guidelines for the non-wood pulp sector of
                         China; (b) development and promotion of implementation of a National Action Plan setting out a
                         detailed approach for the pulp and paper sector in China to progressively eliminate elemental
                         chlorine based bleaching production process, promote updated assessment standard of cleaner
                         technology and carry out a SIDA (Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency)
                         supported research of integrated permit and its case study; (c) adoptions of measures to encourage
                         sector-wide BAT/BEP adoption, including awareness-raising activities and promotion of good
                         practices for wood-based mills, and training of governmental officials and representatives of
                         industrial institutions on BAT/BEP adoption in the pulp and paper sector; (d) provision of capacity-
                         building support and training to local EPBs to conduct sampling and monitoring of dioxin release
                         from the operation of paper and pulp mills using rapid assessment methods; and (e) carrying out of
                         public awareness and outreach activities to raise awareness on good production practices for both the
                         non-wood and wood-based pulp and paper sectors, as well as among the general public.

                         Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation

                         Due to the pilot nature of the project, particular monitoring and evaluation emphasis will be placed
                         on evaluating the results of the investments supported by the project. This component will carry out
                         independent verification of baseline and sample results at the four mills to quantify reduction of
                         dioxins releases as well as water quality parameters and water savings achieved. In addition, dioxin
                         monitoring activities will be performed at selected wood mills that have adopted BAT/BEP to
                         evaluate BAT/BEP options for the wood pulp sector. In the four project provinces, the project will
                         support the four provincial EPBs? efforts to promote UPOP monitoring based on the 2008 standards
                         in their provinces. Such monitoring and subsequent enforcement will provide a fair regulatory
                         environment so that additional mills will be incentivized to take actions to adopt BAT/BEP for non-
                         wood mills demonstrated under this project or commercially available BAT/BEP options for wood
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mills. Project monitoring and evaluation activities will be carried out during the course of project
                         implementation.

                         Component 4: Project Management

                         This component will support provision of technical assistance to improve the capacity of FECO to
                         manage the implementation of the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         (a) Meili Paper Mill is located in Zhongwei City in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region in
                         northwest China. The area is close to deserts and present semi-dry continental weather. The mill
                         withdrew from the project in FY13.

                         (b) Jinfu Paper Mill is located in Leshan City of Sichuan Province in southwest China. The area is
                         mountainous and presents middle subtropical humid monsoon weather. The mill is by a major river
                         Dadu River which is the receiving water body of the effluent from the mill.

                         (c) Pumiao Paper Mill is located in Nanning City of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in south
                         China. The area is mainly hilly and plain and presents subtropical monsoon weather. The mill is


                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                           located close to a major river Yongjiang River which is the receiving water body of the effluent from
                           the mill.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (d) Yueyang Paper Mill is located in Yueyang City of Hunan Province in mid-south China. The area
                           is flood plain and presents humid continental-subtropical monsoon weather. The mill is by the
                           Yangtze River, which is the receiving water body of the effluent from the mill. The mill withdrew
                           from the project in FY13.

                           The newly appraised reed mill - Hunan Linyuan Paper Mill - is located in Yuanjiang City in Hunan
                           Province. The mill is by Dongting Lake, the second largest freshwater lake in China.

                           The second replacement mill - Henan Baiyuan Paper Mill - is located in Zhumadian City in Henan
                           Province. Located in central China, the province is the major wheat production area of China.

                           The location of four additional mills (included in the second restructuring in 2016) that would be
                           supported by the project for FSR preparation are not known and will be determined through careful
                           evaluation of technical, financial and environmental screening.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Meixiang Zhou (GSU02)
                           Ning Yang (GEN2A)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                                                       Page 4 of 10
               Public Disclosure Copy   Public Disclosure Copy




Page 5 of 10
                          Environmental

                         The project will result in significant environmental benefits by supporting four selected non-wood
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pulp and paper mills to adopt ECF based technical upgrading which will help minimize UPOPs
                         (dioxins and furans) releases, reduce water consumption and pollutant load in effluents, including
                         COD, BOD and TSS, etc. The project will also strengthen UPOPs monitoring and enforcement in
                         four participating provinces where the mills are located.

                         Potential environmental, health and safety (EHS) issues include, inter alia, the environmental
                         performance of the mills before and after the project, wastewater management, air emissions,
                         residuals and waste, noises ,construction impacts including decommissioning of old facilities,
                         health and safety, accidental breakdown of facilities and environmental risks. These potential
                         adverse impacts have been appropriately assessed and can be adequately avoided, minimized and/
                         or mitigated with measures developed either during project design or in the EMPs.

                         At appraisal, proposed investment activities include:
                         ➢❨¢ The Sichuan Jinfu Paper Mill will build a 52,000 ton/a bamboo pulp ECF bleaching line
                         and associated material preparation, cooking, bamboo joint removal, screening, oxygen
                         delignification, and a 4 ton/day chlorine dioxide generation facility. As of August 2014, the mill
                         has substantially completed the planned civil works. Installation of the new production line is
                         underway. Construction supervision and environmental monitoring have been conducted
                         following the project EMP and domestic regulations. No noncompliance was reported. The
                         impacts associated with the construction activities have been mitigated properly.
                         ➢❨¢ The Guangxi Pumiao Paper Mill has commissioned in 2012 a 98,000 ton/a bamboo pulp
                         ECF bleaching line and an associated 8 ton/day chlorine dioxide generation facility, and an 11,000
                         m3/d anaerobic wastewater treatment system for bagasse material preparation. As of August 2014,
                         the project has supported pilot operation of the completed ECF bleaching facilities with
                         successful results, Environmental monitoring of the mill➢❨ s effluent shows that its effluent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         quality has met applicable standards as stipulated in the EMP. Construction for the project
                         supported construction and operation of a 40,000t/d tertiary wastewater treatment facility has not
                         started.
                         ➢❨¢ The Ningxia Zhongye Meili Paper Mill will build a 68,000 ton/a straw pulp ECF
                         bleaching and associated 4 ton/day chlorine dioxide generation facility, and a 260 ton/day alkaline
                         recovery facility. The existing wastewater treatment plant will also be upgraded. This mill has
                         withdrawn from the project and is being replaced by the Henan Baiyuan Paper Mill.
                         ➢❨¢ The Hunan Yueyang Paper Mill will build a 61,200t/a reed pulp oxygen delignification
                         and ECF bleaching system, and associated chlorine dioxide generation facility. This mill has
                         withdrawn from the project and is being replaced by the Hunan Linyuan Paper Mill.

                         At the first restructuring in 2014, proposed investment activities for the two original mills - Jinfu
                         and Pumiao - remain unchanged while the proposed investments at the two replacement mills
                         include:
                         ➢❨¢ The Henan Baiyun Paper Mill will build a 37,000 ton/a ECF bleaching and oxygen
                         delignification system and expand the associated chlorine dioxide generation facility from a
                         capacity of 6 ton/day to 8ton/day.
                         ➢❨¢ The Hunan Linyuan Paper Mill will build a 51,000t/a ECF bleaching and oxygen
                         delignification system and an associated 3ton/day chlorine dioxide generation facility.

                         Environmental Assessment were conducted for each participating mill above-mentioned in
                         compliance with Chinese EIA regulations, World Bank OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment
                                                                  Page 6 of 10 (EHS Guidelines). The Bank has reviewed
                         and the Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines
                         draft environmental safeguards documents and found that the EAs have adequately addressed key
                         environmental issues through reviews of current mill operations and their EHS management
                         systems and performance, reviews of environmental baselines, study on before and after project
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Successful implementation of the proposed BAT/BEP investments will help the participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pulp and paper mills significantly reduce their water consumption and waste discharges/emissions
                           into the environment. These positive environmental impacts will benefit the project areas in the
                           long run. And it is expected that China will eventually replicate the demonstrated BAT/BEP
                           investments at the four mills within its pulp and paper sector. Such a sector wide adoption will
                           bring the sector➢❨ s environmental performance to an internationally comparable level.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Two BAT/BEP options - total chlorine free (TCF) and elemental chlorine free (ECF) processes -
                           were considered during Feasibility Study Report and EA process. The ECF option has a better cost
                           effectiveness than the TCF option. Technically, the Stockholm Convention BAT/BEP guidelines
                           define ➢❨ primary measures➢❨ and ➢❨ secondary measures➢❨ for best available techniques
                           ➢❨ chief amongst them the elimination of elemental chlorine by replacing it with chlorine dioxide
                           ➢❨ the ECF process. The ➢❨ totally chlorine-free➢❨ process (TCF) is presented as an
                           alternative. Moreover, the guidelines note that TCF ➢❨ has gradually lost its attraction because of
                           its weaknesses in fiber characteristics, lower pulp yield and higher energy consumption. The
                           elemental chlorine-free (ECF) process has taken over as the leading bleaching method. Some TCF
                           processes have started to lose their shares in the market and a number of TCF mills are converting
                           to ECF pulp production. The operating costs of TCF pulping are usually higher than those of ECF
                           pulping due to the higher chemical costs required to reach the same level of pulp brightness.➢❨
                           Finally, referring specifically to non-wood pulp, the guidelines further note that ➢❨ (b) because of
                           their poor bleachability, non-wood pulps cannot be satisfactorily bleached without chlorine
                           chemicals if the traditional alkaline non-wood process is used➢❨ . Following these guidelines, this
                           project supports China to demonstrate ECF based BAT/BEP in the selected four mills.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The main project impacts are expected to be positive. The project has implemented a four-fold
                           approach to achieve the expected environmental benefits and minimize environmental and social
                           impacts associated with construction and operation.

                          ➢❨¢ BAT/BEP design. The ECF based bleaching technology and other BAT/BEP such as
                          improved cooking, screening and thorough washing processes have been built into the project
                          design for each mill. These measures are fundamental for the mills to ensure compliance with the
                          more stringent national environmental standards and international practices.

                          ➢❨¢ Comprehensive environmental management plans. Site-specific environmental
                          assessments have been conducted by accredited EIA institutes for each participating mills. A
                          stand-alone EMP has been developed for each mill based on the findings of the EIA report. The
                          EMP details the environmental management and supervision organizations and their
                          responsibilities, mitigation measures, a capacity training plan, a monitoring plan, risk management
                          plan and budget estimates for EMP implementation for construction and operation stages as well.

                          ➢❨¢ Performance Based Framework (PBF). The project will support recruiting internationally
                          acknowledged independent dioxin lab to do dioxins sampling and analysis. Upon verification of
                          compliant dioxins discharge performance, the disbursement can be made to the participating mills.


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           The environmental performance of other wastewater discharge parameters are also built into the
                           performance based framework.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ Capacity building. At mill level, environmental management capacity building are built
                           into each mill➢❨ s environmental management system, including staff training and online water
                           and air emission monitoring. At regional level, the project will strengthen UPOPs monitoring and
                           enforcement in four participating provinces where the mills are located.

                           The MEP/FECO, through provincial EPBs, will be responsible for overall social and
                           environmental management during the project➢❨ s implementation. Each participating paper mill
                           will be responsible for the implementation of its site-specific technical upgrading and EMP.
                           Environmental management responsibility will be built into the project management structure
                           within MEP/FECO, provincial EPBs and participating mill management, through their existing
                           environmental management office and dedicated staff. Environmental mitigation measures
                           developed in the EMP will be fully incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts of
                           contractors, and environmental management systems of the participating mills.

                           The participating paper mills are fully aware of safeguard issues, relevant policies, regulations and
                           laws. They also received some training on involuntary resettlement and other related social
                           concerns. They will continue to comply with the safeguards regulations and policies. The project
                           team will monitor social safeguards issues of the mills➢❨ investment activities and provide
                           proper guidance and advice to the mills throughout the project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During EA preparation, public consultation was conducted in accordance with Chinese
                           regulations and Bank➢❨ s OP4.01, through a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings
                           in the project areas. Local communities, villagers, mill workers and other affected people were
                           consulted. Public concerns raised during the consultation have been incorporated into the design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the EIA, EMP and the ESMF.

                           The ESMF has been disclosed in accordance with the Bank➢❨ s policy and has been sent to the
                           InfoShop on June 27, 2016. Information disclosure of EA preparation has been carried out via
                           bulletins in the area of influence and internet. The drafts ESMF was made available locally on
                           June 20, 2016 at local government public information windows and Internet, and as such, are
                           accessible to the general public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       16-May-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          06-Oct-2014
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                          22-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure dates reported in this Restructuring ISDS are for the EA documents of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        two new mills.

                                         The original EA documents were received by the Bank on 30-Oct-2011, disclosed in
                                         China on 17-Oct-2011, submitted to InfoShop on 28-Nov-2011. The Original
                                         Executive Summary of the EA was submitted to the Executive Directors on 29-
                                         Nov-2011.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Jun-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       19-Jan-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                                30-Jan-2012
                           Comments: No new social safeguard document was prepared as proposed investments at the two
                                         new mills will be carried out within their existing facilities to upgrade their old
                                         production lines. As such, the dates reported in this Restructuring ISDS are for the
                                         original social safegaurd document disclosed at project appraisal.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jiang Ru
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 28-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                         Date: 26-Jul-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
