                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC18029

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ghana                 Project ID: P160138
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Emmanuel Nkrumah,Inga Afanasieva
                            Estimated Date 30-Dec-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                            Lending       IPF
                                                                      Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    3.2              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                           3.2
                            Environment         U - Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA)
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase access to clean, convenient and safe public toilets
                           for the population of Kumasi.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have two components:

                           Component 1: OBA subsidy to support construction and rehabilitation of public toilets by private
                           operators (US$ 3 million). This component will subsidize the cost of converting 70 public toilet
                           facilities to water closet technology (by means of demolishing the old facilities and building the new
                           ones) and rehabilitation of existing 38 public toilet facilities that use water closet system but require
                           renovation to meet the service standards.

                           Under this component, KMA will contract private operators to convert (demolish old facilities and
                           construct new ones) 70 public toilets to water closets and rehabilitate existing 38 water closets in
                           various parts of Kumasi. The client feels this is a reasonable number of toilets to pilot the PPP
                           arrangement. Based on the pre-feasibility study, it is assumed that the project will be implemented
                           under a BOOT arrangement. KMA will compile site packages (lots) of toilet facilities in urban and
                           residential areas. The facilities in each lot will range from poor residential areas to more affluent
                           urban areas with various levels of customer traffic to ensure fair distribution of lots that combine
                           sites with both high and low revenue potential. The high revenue sites are expected to compensate
                           the low revenue sites through some degree of cross-subsidization, but as overall coverage is needed,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           operators will not be allowed to bid for individual sites. Bidders will submit business plan proposals
                           for one or several contracts which will include estimates of project cost and the level of subsidy
                           required to build and operate the facilities under the BOOT arrangement. The final selection of
                           private operators will be made by KMA, and is likely to be based on an assessment of value for
                           money, such as lowest bid as calculated by project cost multiplied by percentage subsidy required.
                           The bids will also be assessed for technical feasibility, commercial viability, operator?s experience of
                           similar projects, ability to raise required capital, etc. The technical assistance for structuring and
                           evaluating the PPP process will be provided by IDA-supported PPP Project. The screening criteria
                           and project implementation support arrangements will be finalized during project preparation.

                           Component 2: Independent Verification (US$ 200,000). This component will support the
                           establishment of baseline and targets for private operators applying for OBA grants. The IVA will
                           assist in the setting of output targets; conduct output verification according to the technical standards
                           specified by KMA, including verifying billing and revenue collection at facilities under operation;
                           prepare output verification reports recommending subsidy payments to operators meeting targets;
                           and analyze socio-economic indicators before and after subproject investments.
                           Under this component, KMA will procure the IVA to verify that the outputs under the project meet
                           the technical standards. The Output Verification Reports (OVRs) prepared by the IVA will represent
                           the basis for disbursement. The OVRs will include information on public toilets design and
                           construction, operation and maintenance that will allow KMA to ensure that the private operators
                           meet the minimum technical specifications and quality service standards.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project location is a very urban environment- Kumasi- which is one of the largest towns in
                           Ghana, after Accra. In this setting, there are no forests and unlikely to be any natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower's capacity to implement safeguards remains low and although EPA exists at the
                           regional levels and certainly in Kumasi, they normally do not participate directly in projects due to
                           their work-load and mandate. The PIU for the project will therefore recruit an environment and
                           social specialist whose terms of reference would be to i) ensure that any environmental and social
                           clauses and specifications are put in the bidding documents for contractors; ii) ensure that the EMPs
                           and RAPs are completed (and in some cases implemented) prior to appraisal. iii) provide capacity
                           building/training to the contractors to ensure they are well aware of the safeguards requirements of
                           the project and have the relevant expertise to monitor safeguards during all phases of the
                           construction; iv) supervise the work of the contractors with enough regularity to ensure that any
                           negative impacts are mitigated appropriately and in a timely fashion; v) Monitor and report on all
                           environmental and social issues to the Bank and the Ministry in a timely manner to ensure that the
                           appropriate mitigation measures are put in place as quickly as possible.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01)
                           Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (GEN04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          This project has two components. Component 1
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                        will trigger an EA since it involves a number of
                                                                        subprojects that focuses on converting 70 public
                                                                        toilets facilities to water closet technology (by
                                                                        means of demolishing the old facilities and
                                                                        building the new ones) and rehabilitation of
                                                                        existing 38 public toilet facilities that use the
                                                                        water closet system. Possible negative impacts
                                                                        under component 1 will be related to waste
                                                                        management, drainage, water quality,
                                                                        construction noise, and worker health and
                                                                        safety. These issues will be further assessed in
                                                                        an ESMF since the particular sites remain
                                                                        unknown. All subprojects will be screened for
                                                                        likely environmental impact and an EMP
                                                                        prepared (generic or individual) to mitigate
                                                                        adverse impacts.

                                                                        Component 2 will not trigger any safeguards.
                                                                        There are no works under this component. The
                                                                        component largely focuses on capacity building
                                                                        and TA- for example, it will finance the
                                                                        establishment of baseline and targets for private
                                                                        operators applying for OBA grants. It will also
                                                                        assist in setting output targets and conducting
                                                                        output verification according to the technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        standards.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD          The OP for Natural Habitats is unlikely to be
                                                                        triggered since the projects are all sited in an
                                                                        urban environment (Kumasi). However, specific
                                                                        site visits will ensure that there are no natural
                                                                        habitat environments near or on site.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           Component 1 will finance works in Kumasi, an
                                                                        urban town. There are no forests in Kumasi.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           Pesticides are not to be funded
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD          It is possible that there are shrines, grave-yards
                         BP 4.11                                        and other physical cultural resources near or at
                                                                        the sites targetted by the project. This will be
                                                                        assessed and if so an inventory of the cultural
                                                                        resources potentially affected will be done,
                                                                        followed by a plan for consultation and
                                                                        mitigation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           There are no indigenous people in Ghana
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          Temporary loss of access to existing (working)
                         4.12
                                                                                             toilets and other facilities is likely to occur
                                                                                             during the works. In addition, it is possible that
                                                                                             short-term resettlement may occur as workers
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             access the work zones. An RFP will be
                                                                                             prepared as part of the project and RAPs will be
                                                                                             prepared (as necessary) and implemented prior
                                                                                             to the commencement of any works.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                               The project will not finance any dams
                           Projects on International        No                               The works are not on any international
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              waterways
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project is not in a disputed area
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  This is likely a Category B project and an appraisal stage ISDS is required.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  27-Jul-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              The appraisal stage ISDS should be completed after the ESMF is done. The project will recruit a
                              consultant to begin this process as soon as possible.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Emmanuel Nkrumah,Inga Afanasieva
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                         Date: 31-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)                                 Date: 03-Jun-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
