INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12561
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                  Project ID:  P153975
Parent        P126130
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing to TJ Health Services Improvement Project (P153975)
Parent Project Tajikistan Health Services Improvement Project (HSIP) (P126130)
Name:
Task Team       Wezi Marianne Msisha
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Apr-2015                 Estimated    25-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (53%), Other social services (47%)
Theme(s):       Health system performance (36%), Child health (32%), Population and
reproductive health (12%), Injuries and non-communicable disease s (12%),
Rural services and infrastructure (8%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.20             Total Bank Financing:    10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.20
International Development Association (IDA)                                   5.50
IDA Grant                                                                     4.50
Total                                                                        10.20
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 7


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of the coverage
and quality of basic primary health care (PHC) services in rural health facilities in selected
districts.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The revised Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of the
coverage and quality of basic primary health care (PHC) services in selected districts.
3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing to the HSIP would extend activities that already constitute the
original Project as follows:
Component 1: Performance-based Financing. This component would support the implementation of a
performance-based financing (PBF) pilot at the PHC level in one additional rayon (district) in
Khatlon Oblast and one rayon in RRS. The costs associated with the first level verification and
independent verification of the PBF scheme would also be covered. Additional technical assistance
to support the implementation of comprehensive PHC financing reforms, including fine tuning the
model for implementing PBF in central rayon health centers and city PHC facilities would also be
financed. Lastly, to strengthen social accountability and improve outcomes, discussions between
communities and PHC providers of feedback received through citizen scorecards (CSCs) would be
undertaken and facilitated by local non-government organizations (NGOs).
Component 2: Primary Health Care Strengthening.
Sub-component 2.1: Quality Improvement. This sub-component would: (i) expand the activities
aimed at improving the skills and competencies of PHC personnel through training in the six-month
Family Medicine program and continuous medical education on clinical protocols on maternal and
child health (MCH) care, and selected non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
Sub-component 2.2: Physical Infrastructure Improvements. The sub-component would support the
improvement of PHC facility infrastructure through reconstruction of additional rural health centers
and provision of basic medical equipment to additional primary health care facilities in the existing
eight Project districts and two new districts, according to previously agreed criteria. Minor
rehabilitation of and provision of teaching equipment to the Khatlon and Sogd Family Medicine
Training Centers would also be supported.
Component 3: Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation. The component
would support the expenses associated with the implementation and management of the Project at the
central, regional and district levels. These would include recurrent costs, office equipment and
furniture, vehicles for Project supervision, consultant salaries, travel expenses, study tours to enhance
the knowledge on PBF, PHC reforms and management, and training for the Coordination Group
(CG) members and project implementation staff at regional and district levels, monitoring and
evaluation, and project audits. All activities would also cover the two new districts included through
Page 2 of 7


﻿the AF.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The HSIP is currently being implemented in eight out of 68 cities and rayons (districts) four districts
each in Khatlon and Sogd Oblasts (Regions) in Tajikistan. The Additional Financing to the HSIP
would extend the same project activities to one additional district in Khatlon Oblast and one district
in the Rayons of Republican Subordination (RRS). The two new additional districts will cover a
population of 245,271.
The Project would support civil works to improve the physical infrastructure of selected Rural Health
Centers, to upgrade them to basic levels of functionality to be able to provide satisfactory health
services in accordance with the Project Development Objective. A preliminary assessment indicates
that the facilities are substantially degraded and would need significant rehabilitation and civil works
to improve the availability of basic utilities and services including water, sewerage, sanitation and
electricity. Older building structures may contain asbestos, which would require sound management
during dismantling and disposal. While there is no foreseen substantial increase in the quantities of
medical waste, or change in waste types or composition, site specific assessments would be
undertaken to determine appropriate waste disposal options, which will be provided to facilitate the
sound management of infectious waste. Given the above environmental issues related to the proposed
project activities, OP4.01 is being triggered.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Environmental issues related to construction and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                rehabilitation of healthcare facilities and waste
management (construction debris, asbestos and infectious
waste) necessitate triggering OP 4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples, as defined in OP 4.10,
BP 4.10                              in the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No          Civil works will take place on the existing footprint of
OP/BP 4.12                           these facilities and the project will not finance any
activities that will result in land acquisition, and/or
restriction in access to physical assets, resources or
services.
Page 3 of 7


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.12 is not triggered as no related impacts are expected. Safeguard issues and impacts did not
change in their nature and their scope from the parent project. The project would support civil
works to improve the physical infrastructure of Rural Health Centers (RHC), to upgrade them to
basic levels of functionality to be able to provide satisfactory health services in accordance with
the Project Development Objective (PDO). While there is no foreseen expansion of the
constructed area or substantial increase of capacity, the current situation of the facilities are quite
degraded and will need significant rehabilitation and civil works to improve availability of basic
utilities and services including water, sanitation and electricity. An environmental assessment of
sample facilities indicates that none of them have access to safe and adequate drinking water.
Water is brought carried in buckets from neighborhood residential areas and office buildings. The
water is then boiled prior to use, using water heaters. Sewage systems are inadequate, and are
essentially non-concrete pits dug out in the RHC backyards. Once filled, such pit lavatories are
covered up and new pits are dug, resulting in potential gradual soil and groundwater
contamination. Most RHCs have restricted power access and utilize potbelly stoves which are
expensive to operate and inefficient with poor heat retention. The use of quality fine blend coal is
poor which results in harmful indoor air emissions and, charcoal-black deposition inside buildings
all of which is harmful for staff and patients. Due to the shortage of coal, firewood is used as an
alternative, resulting in degradation of neighboring bushes and forests. Most of these older
building structures may contain asbestos, which would require sound management during
dismantling and disposal. Waste disposal facilities are inadequate, and all categories of healthcare
waste are collected in first aid boxes and burned in pits located within the premises. New pits are
routinely dug, after others are filled, further resulting in soil and air contamination (mercury,
dioxins and furans) and hazards due to scattered sharps. While there is no foreseen substantial
increase in quantities of medical waste, or change in waste types or composition as a result of
refurbishment, the new constructions will still aim to address environmentally sound ways of
disposing infectious waste generated from healthcare services. Site specific assessments would be
undertaken to determine the characteristics and suitability of existing waste disposal facilities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Localized soil and water contamination due to poor sanitation and inadequate waste management.
Toxic air emissions due to poor incineration/burning practices of unsegregated waste.
Contamination due to poor management of construction waste and indiscriminate disposal of
asbestos.
No such impacts with regard to social safeguards.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Page 4 of 7


﻿impacts.
The project will not finance any activities that will result in land acquisition, and/or restriction in
access to physical assets, resources or services.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MOHSP has undertaken an assessment of a sample of the additional 16 RHC facilities totaling
in 28 facilities and has prepared an updated EMF. The EMF defines critical mitigatory measures to
be taken to address environmental impacts prior to and during the construction phase. These
include issues related to design, water supply, sanitation and sewerage, power supply and waste
management including construction debris and asbestos. Worker safety during construction,
occupational safety and healthcare waste management during facility operations are also addressed
in the EMF. Site-specific Environment Management Plans will be prepared and approved when
the detailed facility architectural design plans are available and prior to commencement of civil
works and mobilization of equipment to the site and EMP requirements will be included into the
civil works bidding documents. In addition to regular monitoring and supervision requirements
during and after construction, the EMF also requires a third-party independent assessment to be
carried out 8 months prior to the end of the Project life.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project's main beneficiaries are the general population and specifically, women and children.
The stakeholders will include healthcare workers, and staff from the MOHSP and the RHCs, the
Environmental and construction management agencies which will be involved in providing
clearances and undertaking the civil works, the neighborhood communities residing near the RHCs
and those who utilize the services of the RHCs.
The MOH has translated and re-disclosed an updated EMF on their website and in the central level
and regional health department offices on March 19, 2015. As consultations were held with
relevant public sector agencies, CO (Community Organizations), NGOs and medical professionals
starting from April 29, 2013 to get feedback on the EMF of the parent project and because the
nature and the scope of activities will not change as a result of the re-structuring, it was agreed
with the regional safeguards adviser (RSA) that public consultations are not required for the
updated EMF. However, public consultations will be required for the site specific EMPs with the
affected communities to discuss proposed facility design, scheduling of construction hours,
habitat/ecosystem management and waste management. These will include neighboring
communities, patients, residents, healthcare staff and workers, local businesses and neighboring
shops and local authorities. Grievance mechanisms need to be instituted to ensure that
communities can provide feedback or voice their concerns, if any.
There are no persons who will be affected by Involuntary Resettlement. The project will focus on
poorer rural women as a major beneficiary group through emphasis on maternal health services in
the Primary Health Center facilities in underserved areas in the country. The improvements in
infrastructure will also enhance the experience of visiting the PHCs for women due to availability
of facilities like toilets, waiting areas etc. On the supply side, focus on improving nurse training
and post-graduate experience would also target women in the area of service delivery, as the
majority of nurses in Tajikistan are women. Children and infants are also a specific target
beneficiary group. The Project Development Objective indicators show the strong focus on
outcomes related to children's health. The focus on underserved rural areas will directly target
Page 5 of 7


﻿children from poorer families. Improved child health will have a direct positive impact on
benefiting women who are the primary care givers, as well as school attendance rates.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             25-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tajikistan                                                 19-Mar-2015
Comments: The updated EMF was publicly disclosed on March 19, 2015 on the MoHSP website:
http://www.health.tj/ru and at the Khatlon & Sogd Oblast Health Departments.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA[]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Wezi Marianne Msisha
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Daniel Dulitzky (PMGR)                Date: 31-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


