INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA15081
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Western Africa            Project ID:  P153111
Parent       P126974
Project ID:
Project Name: Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project Add. Fin. (P153111)
Parent Project Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project (P126974)
Name:
Task Team       Andreas Blom
Leader(s):
Estimated       31-Aug-2015               Estimated     14-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GED07                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (70%), Central government administration (10%), Vocational
training (10%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (10%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (75%), Regional integration (15%),
Technology diffusion (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     30.00            Total Bank Financing:    15.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               15.00
Total                                                                     30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project Development Objective is to support the Recipients to promote regional
specialization among participating universities in areas that address regional challenges by
strengthening the capacities of these universities to deliver quality training and applied research.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The project consists of two components. Component 1 will aim to strengthen the capacity of selected
institutions to establish Africa Centers of Excellence (ACE). These ACEs will deliver regional,
demanded, quality training and applied research in partnerships with regional and international
academic institutions and in partnership with industry. Component 2 consists of regional activities
for the ACEs and their governments to build capacity, support project implementation, monitor and
evaluate, and develop regional policies. Further, component 2 will, in a demand-driven manner,
finance ACE support to selected countries in West Africa without Centers of Excellence.
Component 1: Strengthen Africa Centers of Excellence - IDA US$ 98 million (90 percent)
Component 1 will seek to strengthen around 15 competitively selected institutions to produce highly
skilled graduates and applied research to help address specific regional development challenges. An
institution can submit and be awarded up to two separate Centre of Excellence proposals. The
maximum grant amount for a Centre of Excellence grant will be US$ 7 million. The centers of
excellence will primarily support capacity building within the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math, as well as the agriculture and health sciences, but should be multidisciplinary as per the needs
to comprehensively address the development challenge of the proposed center.
The institutions to receive an African Center of Excellence (ACE) grant will be selected through an
open, transparent and merit-based selection process. The selection process will entail four main
standard steps: (i) call for proposals to institutions, (ii) submission of Center of Excellence proposals
through their government to the regional facilitation unit; (iii) evaluation of proposals by independent
African and international experts according to pre-defined criteria, and (iv) selection of institutions
by the steering committee and a no objection by the World Bank.
Selected institutions will implement their own Centre of Excellence proposal aiming to help address
a specific regional development challenge through preparation of professionals (education), applied
research and associated outreach activities with partners. The institutional-specific proposal
encompasses the following five elements:
* Enhance capacity to deliver regional high quality training to address the development
challenge. This could include: Update curricula of existing programs or create new education
programs to meet the development challenge; meet international benchmarks for quality education
(e.g. international accreditation); deliver short-term courses for professionals; attract a regional
student body; training of faculty to introduce new approaches to teaching and learning; enhance
work-place learning such as internships; upgrading of qualifications of faculty; improve learning
resources, including lab equipment, and minor rehabilitation or extension of existing facilities.
* Enhance capacity to deliver applied research to address the regional development challenge.
This could include: faculty development and staff training, scholarships and post-docs, networking
Page 2 of 8


﻿activities with national and international partners, hosting and participating in conference s, research
equipment and materials and lab refurbishment, and patenting or other Intellectual Property Rights-
related costs.
* Build and use industry/sector partnerships to enhance impact of the Center on development
and increase relevance of the centers education and research. The activities include industry advisory
boards, internships, industry lectures, training of trainers for sector training institutions (such as
polytechnics, nursing, agricultural colleges etc.), joint research, and other activities to interact and
reach out to the sector/industry.
* Regional and international academic partnerships to raise quality of education in other
institutions in the region, preferably including institutions in fragile countries, and to raise the
Centers' own capacity. The activities include joint delivery of education programs, professional
courses for regional faculty, faculty exchanges/visiting faculty, joint research, joint conferences,
sharing of specialized equipment and library resources etc.
* Enhance governance and management to improve monitoring and evaluation, administration,
fiduciary management, transparency, ability to generate resources, and project implementation.
Upon selection, each institution will sign a performance and funding contract with the government
for the implementation of the selected project. At least 15 percent of the funding must be invested in
the partnerships, and at least 10 percent must be invested in partnerships activities with non-national
African partners. Further, civil works will be limited to 25 percent of the grant. This agreement will
include the government's planned commitments for continued funding of institutional staff as part of
the funding and performance agreement.
Component 2: Enhancing Regional Capacity Building, Evaluation, Facilitation and Collaboration -
IDA US$ 11 million (10 percent)
Component 2.1 Enhancing Regional Capacity Building and Evaluation. This sub-component will
support: (i) capacity building, knowledge sharing and coordination between the ACEs, for example
through joint lessons learning as well as implementation of a communication plan; (ii) undertake
regional monitoring and evaluation activities to improve and assess the performance of the selected
institutions. This includes tracer studies, technical audits, collection of academic data, and topic-wise
evaluations; (iii) ECOWAS, and potentially other regional bodies, to prepare policy studies on
relevant higher education issues and build capacity for regional policy making, and (vi) activities
required for regional project facilitation and steering.
Component 2.2 Demand-driven Regional Education Services. This sub-component will finance the
provision of higher education services by the Centers of Excellence assisted under Component 1 to
countries in the region without Africa Centers of Excellence. Up to three non-ACE hosting countries
(The Gambia, Sierra Leone, and Liberia) would negotiate a plan of required services to institutions
and civil servants. These services could include short-term specialized training to government
officials, short-term merit-based scholarships to young talent, faculty development for non-ACE
institutions, visiting faculty, and curriculum development provided by any of the ACEs to a non-
ACE institution.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Page 3 of 8


﻿The Project will be located in multiple institutions of higher learning in the disciplines of STEM,
Agriculture, and Health sciences. These institutions will be spread across eight countries ( Nigeria,
Ghana, Senegal, Togo, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon and most recently Cote d'Ivoire through the
additional financing). The selected Centers are:
Nigeria:
* African Centre of Excellence for Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Redeemers University,
Mowe, Ogun State/University of Ibadan, Nigeria
* PAN African Materials Institute (PAMI), African University of Science and Technology,
Abuja, Nigeria
* Centre for Agricultural Development and Sustainable Environment, Federal University of
Agriculture, Abeokuta, Nigeria
* Centre of Excellence on Neglected Tropical Diseases and Forensic Biotechnology, Ahmadu
Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria
* Phytomedicine Research and Development, University of Jos, Nigeria
* Centre for Excellence in Reproductive Health and Innovation, University of Benin, Nigeria
* ACE Centre for Oil Field Chemicals, University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria
Ghana:
* West African Center for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens (WACCBIP), University of
Ghana Legon
* Developing WACCI into an African Centre of Excellence for training plant breeders, seed
scientists and seed technologists, University of Ghana, Legon
* Regional Centre of Excellence for Water and Environmental Sanitation, Kumasi, Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
Senegal: Centre d'Excellence pour la formation et la recherche en Sciences et Technologies de l'Eau,
I'Energie et l'Environnement en Afrique de l'Ouest et du Centre, Universit6 Cheikh Anta Diop
Dakar-Fann, S6n6gal.
Togo: Centre d'excellence r6gional sur les sciences aviaires (CERSA), Universit6 de Lom6 Lom6,
Togo
Benin: Centre d'Excellence Africain en Sciences Math6matiques et Applications du B6nin,
Universit6 d'Abomey- Calavi (UAC), Porto-Novo, B6nin
Burkina Faso: Centre d'Excellence pour la formation et la recherche en Sciences et Technologies de
l'Eau, I'Energie et l'Environnement en Afrique de l'Ouest et du Centre, International d'Ing6nierie de
l'Eau et de l'Environnement (2iE), Fondation 2iE, Ouagadougou - Burkina Faso
Cameroon: Centre d'excellence en Technologies de l'information et de la Communication (CETIC),
Universit6 de Yaound6 I Yaound6, Cameroon.
Cote d'Ivoire:
- West African Center of Excellence in Construction and Mining, INP-HB, Cote d'Ivoire
- Center of Excellence in Climate Change and Adaptation, U-HB, Cote d'Ivoire
- Center of Excellence in Statistics - National University of Statistics and Applied Economics, Cote
d'Ivoire
Page 4 of 8


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          There will be rehabilitation of some academic/research
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                institutions and minor construction in few of the
campuses, and these are expected to be of small scale,
therefore the environmental and social impacts are not
expected to be significant. An Environmental
Management Plan checklist (EMP checklist) was prepared
for each one of the chosen institutions to manage
environmental and social impacts; in some cases, the civil
works are minor and localized and they will be done
according to national and local laws and procedures. The
impacts and mitigation measures stated in these ESMP
checklist will have to be closely monitored and evaluated
and the project must ensure to include an environmental
section their reporting system to report the impacts and
the mitigation measures which should be in conformity
with part B (general construction/rehabilitation activities),
F (toxic materials), H (disposal of medical waste) of the
checklist.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project will include rehabilitation and minor
4.04                                 construction within existing university/institution campus
grounds, and thus natural habitats will not be affected by
project activities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           This policy is not triggered because the project will not
involve forestry activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project activities will not involve the use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No           The project will be implemented within the existing
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 university campuses and will not involve excavations or
other earthworks and is not likely to be located in, or in
the vicinity of, recognized cultural heritage sites.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project screening process indicated that the sub
BP 4.10                              projects will not affect or involve indigenous communities
since the project footprint is limited to existing campus
grounds.
Involuntary Resettlement No          Project activities focus on quality improvements and not
OP/BP 4.12                           on expanding capacity to more students. All civil works
will take place on existing campus grounds, i.e. within
existing physical footprint, and therefore do not require
any land taking nor will they cause involuntary
resettlement, loss of assets and/or restriction of access to
resources or livelihoods.
Page 5 of 8


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large scale or irreversible impacts are anticipated to be associated with the project. Although
most of the impacts of the ACE project are envisioned to be positive, the maintenence of centers
of excellence, laboratories, workshop etc may have some environmental and social impacts.
Potential negative environmental impacts are those typical or remodeling and renovation activities
associated with existing structure. Particularly important is the need to manage construction
activities so as to minimally disrupt the academic environment: however some disruption is
unavoidable. Construction impacts will be limited to the duration of construction activities. In
some cases, the works are so minor and localized that environmental measures may be carried out
in accordance with national and local laws and procedures.
No land acquisition is envisioned as part of the ACE project. Civil works are only expected to be
focusing on quality improvements of existing facilities and not on expanding capacity to more
students. All civil works will take place on existing campus grounds, i.e. within existing physical
footprint.
All the proposed activities under the proposed Additional Financing for Cote d'Ivoire are
consistent with the activities of the parent project thus there are no implications for the project risk
category which will remain as B. Further there are no implications for the triggering of any
safeguard policies which were not triggered under the parent project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project has produced Environmental and Social Management Plan checklists to be disclosed
in-country and at the Infoshop before appraisal. These provide a set of templates to be used by
each participating institution to develop Environmental and Social Management Plans to guide
identification and implementation of safeguards mitigation measures within individual project
proposals. Any institution selected and confirmed as a center of excellence (ACEs) has to meet the
fiduciary requirements including on environmental and social management and demonstrate
compliance with the World Bank safeguard policies and capacity to implement ESMPs.
Page 6 of 8


﻿Adherence to the safeguards policies and plans for the parent project, and the supervision thereof,
has been adequate. The Borrowers have carried out there environment and safeguards
responsibilities in a satisfactory manner. There are no unresolved environmental or social issues
associated with the parent project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project stakeholders include (1) the higher education institutions (ACEs) which will be responsible
for strategic planning and implementation of their institutional proposal, monitoring, evaluation
and reporting on environmental and social guidelines. (2) Regional Facilitation Unit is set up as a
regional body with at least 4 professional staff established in the secretariat that deals with project
coordination and facilitation, support to ACEs for monitoring and evaluation and various technical
assistance as necessary. (3) National Project Performance and Review Committee. The fiduciary
capacity available within higher education or related project would provide implementation
support and possible oversight for ACE. (4) Project Steering Committee (PSC) whose main task is
to set implementation guidelines, review results and progress, oversee the RFU and assist ACEs to
ensure the achievement of project objectives.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10-Jan-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             29-Jan-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cote dIvoire                                               27-Aug-2015
Comments: Disclosed on Institutional websites
Cameroon                                                   03-Feb-2014
Comments:
Ghana                                                      30-Jan-2014
Comments:
Nigeria                                                    31-Jan-2014
Comments:
Senegal                                                    03-Feb-2014
Comments:
Togo                                                       03-Feb-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 7 of 8


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andreas Blom
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                 Date: 28-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)               Date: 28-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


