                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15536

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Honduras                       Project ID:       P157795
                            Project Name:        Honduras PPCR Phase 1 Grant
                            Team Leader(s):      Marco Antonio Aguero
                            Estimated Date       18-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GWA03                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.4                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                 1.4
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           28.      The proposed PDO is to formulate a Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) and
                           its investment plan, as well as to establish the enabling environment and conditions for the
                           integration of climate resilience into development planning and implementation.
                           C. Project Description
                           31. In the context of Honduras, the program will focus on the following several priority areas , which
                           were identified in the Expression of Interest submitted by Honduras to the PPCR in March 2015, and
                           further confirmed during the March 2016 PPCR Joint Mission:

                           ➢❨¢Institutional strengthening and strengthening of legal/policy framework on climate change
                           ➢❨¢Improved knowledge and understanding of risks and processes for monitoring, analysis,
                           evaluation, and alert/early warning systems
                           ➢❨¢Improving resilient agriculture.
                           ➢❨¢Promoting water security, including integrated water resources management and water &
                           sanitation.


                           32. The PPCR Phase 1 Grant is expected to be implemented through four components, consistent
                         with the Phase 1 proposal approved by the PPCR/CIF in March 2016. The components are as
                         follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢     Component 1: Risk analysis to strengthen climate resilience programs and policies.

                         Improving knowledge on climate risks at the territorial and sectoral levels: (a) establishment of
                         damage and loss scenarios associated with climate-related and hydrological hazards; (b) distribution
                         of vulnerabilities, and analysis of future trends that will have impacts nationwide as well as in
                         specific areas; (c) diagnosis and formulation of proposals for strengthening hydro-meteorological and
                         climate services..

                         ➢❨¢ Component 2: Information for the design of policy reforms and for institutional
                         strengthening.

                         (a) Review and formulation of proposals to strengthen the regulatory framework to and improve
                         inter-institutional coordination mechanisms related to climate change strategies and their
                         mainstreaming in priority sectors, such as: (i) water security, including water resources management,
                         water supply and sanitation; (ii) agriculture, food and nutrition security; and (iii) disaster risk
                         management.

                         (b) Institutional Analysis to inform capacity building needs and strategies, and help institutionalize
                         and mainstream resilience across prioritized sectors through participatory processes.

                         Based on the results of the institutional analysis outlined above, some of the following capacity
                         building activities will be prioritized and carried out:

                         ➢❨¢ Development of institutional capacities for climate variability and change at the sectoral
                         level. This may include sharing of international best practices or south to south exchange related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the integration of adaptation to climate change for prioritized sectors.
                         ➢❨¢ Development of institutional capacities of SEFIN and MiAmbiente to monitor and evaluate
                         the achievement of objectives and expected results in terms of climate resilience to consolidate
                         existing M&E systems in the NCCS and NAP.

                         ➢❨¢ Component 3: Design and implementation of a participatory consultation at an institutional
                         level, in the context of SPCR development.

                         (a)Development of a participatory consultation process to be undertaken in the country, including
                         effective communication of key messages on the results of analytical studies undertaken in the PPCR
                         context, and on proposals for action on climate variability and change to be included in the SPCR.

                         (b)Awareness raising activities in relation to environmental issues, climate change, and disaster risk,
                         with a focus on specific stakeholders, including communities and populations most affected by
                         climate variability and change in the country, NGOs, CSOs, academia, private sector, among others.
                         Efforts to identify communication gaps at the institutional level , which may hinder awareness
                         raising efforts, understanding of climate risks and the formulation of priority actions, will be made.
                         This will include the perspectives of women, youth, indigenous peoples, local communities, and
                         other vulnerable social groups
                         ➢❨¢ Component 4: Formulation of the SPCR accompanying strategic investment plan built under
                         a participatory process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Formulation of the SPCR to integrate climate resilience into national development policies, including
                         a portfolio of strategic projects (investment plan) for priority areas will be developed, conducting
                         technical pre-feasibility studies for the identified priority investments. The studies and identified
                         priority investments (investment plan) will take into account the National Development Plan (Vision
                         de PaÃ-s), the NCCS, the NAP and other existing planning instruments.
                         The technical criteria for the prioritization of investments that are to be considered within the SPCR
                         investment plan will take into account environmental and social dimensions.

                         Synergies will also be sought with other CIF programs in Honduras (SREP and FIP), as well as with
                         other ongoing initiatives related to climate change in the country.

                         33.     Tasks associated with the technical coordination of the Phase 1 of the PPCR, financial
                         management and procurement, monitoring, evaluation, and presentation/dissemination of results will
                         be financed through this grant.


                         34. Through this work, the PPCR is expected to produce the following and results:

                         ➢❨¢Improve convergences between climate model predictions, enhancing baseline information on
                         climate-related risks in vulnerable sectors, and strengthened evidence on the impacts of climate
                         change across Honduras.
                         ➢❨¢Consensus on strategies to build resilience to climate change and an appropriate action plan to be
                         included in the SPCR, with clear identification of the priority areas in the short, medium, and long
                         term.
                         ➢❨¢Identification of the institutional framework and policies (and strengthening needs), in order to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilitate greater access to financing for initiatives that promote development that is resilient to the
                         effects of climate change across selected sectors and territories.
                         ➢❨¢Strengthened capacity of the CTICC for inter-institutional coordination.
                         ➢❨¢Strengthened capacity for the execution and management of financial resources in MiAmbiente
                         and the Ministry of Finance (SEFIN).
                         ➢❨¢Increased level of awareness and information on climate risks and climate change adaptation at
                         the national level, as well as across selected sectors and territories. The assessment places emphasis
                         on water security, which raises the need for complementing the water demand analysis, including the
                         current physical state of the basins, water quality and hydro met networks.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         42. The Investment Plan/ Strategic program for climate resilience preparation is assigned an EA
                         category of ➢❨ C➢❨ as this activity poses low or no safeguards risk and specific Safeguards policies
                         will not be triggered as it is not possible to make an accurate assessment of the extent of safeguards
                         risk of project ideas proposed at this stage. There is no expected project preparation at this stage only
                         strategic higher level planning and policy changes.

                         Thus, no safeguard policies will be triggered The project will integrate the principles of the following
                         policies during the design of the SPCR:
                           -       Related to Policy OP 4.10: Given a high presence of the indigenous groups and Afro-
                           descendent in the country and as part of the scope of components 2 and 3 of the project and national
                           coverage of the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) it will be necessary to ensure an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           informed participation of these communities during the formulation of the SPCR;, therefore, the
                           design of the SPCR will ensure Indigenous Peoples take part in the process, considering the
                           consultation protocol of each ethnic group involved.

                           -        Related to Policy OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: The components of the project
                           envisage the preparation of a strategic program for climate resistance and an investment plan; the
                           results are strategic documents for the country and the project does not provide for the
                           implementation of investment projects that required the involuntary restriction of land, housing or
                           livelihood, so it does not require to be activated. However, the project will integrate the principles
                           and guidelines defined in policies OP 4.12 WB in the policy of resistance to climate change and its
                           components.

                           Gender and Inclusion of Vulnerable Groups

                           As the SPCR focuses on sustainable development, reducing gender inequality the integration of
                           vulnerable groups, that normally are those which have the least resilience mechanisms, will be
                           considered during the project. The PPCR Phase 1 project will promote an active participation during
                           the design of the strategy and its investment program. The principles of social equity and citizen
                           participation in the PPCR Phase 1, will be consistent with the Climate Change Law (Decree No.
                           297-2013) and the National Policy on Women. The latter considers gender participation during the
                           sustainable use and control of biodiversity and natural resources . Therefore, during the forthcoming
                           preparation of the SPCR, best practices will be identified in this regard that could later inform the
                           implementation phase of the PPCR.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           43. The Recipient, including the proposed implementing agency are implementing similar Bank-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financed operations in a manner acceptable to the World Bank.

                           44. Safeguard policies will not be triggered during the preparation of the SPCR as the consultations
                           for the design of the strategy will be targeted at the institutional level and prioritized sector
                           institutions. There is no expected project preparation at this stage only strategic higher level planning
                           and policy changes, although the principles of the policies will be considered.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mariela Mena (GWADR)
                           Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (GEN04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The Investment Plan/ Strategic program for
                           BP 4.01                                               climate resilience preparation is assigned an EA
                                                                                 category of ?C? as this activity poses low or no
                                                                                 safeguards risk and specific Safeguards policies
                                                                                 will not be triggered as it is not possible to make
                                                                an accurate assessment of the extent of
                                                                safeguards risk of project ideas proposed at this
                                                                stage. There is no expected project preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                at this stage only strategic higher level planning
                                                                and policy changes.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   No physical intervention on natural habitats will
                                                                be financed with the proceeds of the project.
                                                                Thus, the policy is not triggered. While OP 4.04
                                                                on natural habitats is not triggered, climate
                                                                resilience strategies potentially can include
                                                                infrastructure strategies, in this case their
                                                                development will consider the principles of
                                                                these policies when being undertaken.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   No physical intervention on forests will be
                                                                financed with the proceeds of the project. Thus,
                                                                the policy is not triggered.While OP 4.36 on
                                                                forests is not triggered, climate resilience
                                                                strategies potentially can include forestry
                                                                strategies, in this case their development will
                                                                consider the principles of these policies when
                                                                being undertaken.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   No physical intervention will be financed with
                                                                the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   No physical interventions will be financed with
                         BP 4.11                                the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   Although no indigenous peoples will be affected
                                                                with the proceeds of the project. Given the
                                                                nationwide focus of the proposal, the project
                                                                will integrate the principles of the policy in
                                                                regard to informed consultations to be carried
                                                                out at an institutional level only, regarding
                                                                climate resilience strategies and policies that
                                                                could affect indigenous communities, resources,
                                                                and welfare of IPs in the formulation of the
                                                                SPCR.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   No physical interventions will be financed with
                         4.12                                   the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                not triggered. There will be no direct impacts
                                                                associated to the involuntary taking of land.
                                                                There is no expected project preparation at this
                                                                stage only strategic higher level planning and
                                                                policy changes. The project will integrate the
                                                                principles of the policy during the design of the
                                                                polciies and strategies.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   No physical intervention will be financed with
                                                                                             the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                                             not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International                    No                   No physical intervention will be financed with
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                                             not triggered.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               No physical intervention will be financed with
                           7.60                                                              the proceeds of the project. Thus, the policy is
                                                                                             not triggered

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Marco Antonio Aguero
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 26-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: David Michaud (PMGR)                                         Date: 28-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
