                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC15070

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Afghanistan                   Project ID:     P157104
                            Project Name:       AF: AREDP Additional Financing
                            Team Leader(s):     Kamran Akbar,M Haroon Chakhansuri
                            Estimated Date      31-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:      GFA06                         Lending         Lending Instrument
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Animal production (10%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                                (10%), Microfinance (40%), Other non-bank financial intermediaries (20%),
                                                Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Gender (20%), Rural
                                                markets (15%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Other rural
                                                development (5%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.7                          Total Bank Financing: 0
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                   4.7
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           A. Original Project Development Objective (Parent Project)

                           To improve employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of
                           targeted local enterprises

                           B. Proposed Project Development Objective - Additional Financing "Not changed sameas parent
                           project".

                           To improve employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of
                           targeted local enterprises
                           C. Project Description
                         The Afghanistan Rural Enterprise development Program (AREDP) is a six years program which
                         started with an initial phase in five provinces in June 2010, under the financing agreement between
                         Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) and International Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Association (IDA), (Grant No. H531-AF) which was approved in January 2010.
                         The overarching objective of the program is to increase employment and income in rural Afghanistan
                         through the support to rural economy by strengthening potential value chains and key agro and non-
                         agro sectors. Based on experiential learning in the unique Afghanistan context, over the last two
                         years the program has evolved into a unique indigenous model of economic development and
                         employment generation. The turn around was brought in by restructuring the project in December
                         2013 to change the delivery model to private sector oriented. The restructuring also led to
                         cancellation of US $ 9.772 million of the ARTF Grant 98045. The model developed and facilitates
                         local resource mobilization, for instance the rural poor communities in the project villages saved
                         more than USD 3.5 million and redeployed the same for productive purposes such as business
                         enhancement and establishing new enterprises. The program design has led the rural economies just
                         in five provinces created more than 30,000 direct jobs and over 20,000 indirect and seasonal jobs.
                         Further, the program has created linkages between rural and urban economy with over 320
                         transactional relationships recorded in two year. The program has also provided rural entrepreneurs
                         and SMEs the access to urban, national and international market.
                         The program is continuously delivering these phenomenal results in line with the economic
                         development vision of the government. The program is well synchronized with the political and
                         economic transitions that the country is going through for creating sustainable jobs at the rural level
                         of Afghanistan.
                         The new Afghan government places greater emphasis on the rural economic development as the key
                         driver for national economy and, therefore, the President has desired MRRD programs to transform
                         into one flagship program with key strategic focus on rural economic, social and governance
                         development. This transformation being ‘work in progress’ will see all the MRRD programs
                         becoming one large national level program. This being work in progress needs substantial home
                         work so that gains made in AREDP for rural job creation and economic development are not lost.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Hence, based on recommendations of the MoF, AREDP has already been extended up to December
                         29, 2016.; it is expected that by that time way forward for MRRD joint program would have been
                         clarified. Additional financing of USD 4.7 million to cover the period and further strengthen the
                         milestones achieved by this program is proposed. The AREDP-AF similar to parent project, consist
                         of the following components:

                         Component A: Community-based Enterprise Development
                         Sub-component A1: Community Facilitation
                         Sub-component A2: Support to Enterprise Group
                         Sub-component A3: Access to Finance

                         Component B: Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Development
                         Sub-component B1: SME Facilitation
                         Sub-component B2: Business Development Support for SMEs
                         Sub-component B3: Access to Finance for SMEs

                         Component C: Program Implementation
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The additional financing will be used to continue the project activities in the existing five provinces
                           which have been identified during the parent project. The provinces are Parwan, Nangrahar, Bamyan,
                           Balkh and Herat which have been selected considering their potential for enterprise development,
                           security and accessibility, significant number of good quality Community Development Councils
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (CDCs) created by NSP and track record of implementing NSP.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) has over the years gained considerable
                           experience and improved capacity in managing proper implementation supervision and monitoring of
                           safeguard issues in projects. MRRD has been implementing several World Bank funded project such
                           as NSP, Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP), as well as the parent AREDP project, and has
                           long history of working with the donors. MRRD has established separate unit for safeguards
                           implementation, which consist of social and environmental safeguard specialists and has trained staff
                           to implement the environmental and social concerns from both the managerial and technical
                           perspectives. The environmental and social management framework (ESMF) for the screening of all
                           subprojects under AREDP has been adjusted based on the existing ESMF for AREDP, which means
                           that MRRD staff has already gained experience in implementing ESMF and are aware of its
                           requirements.

                           The safeguards staff have specific terms of reference and are capable to conduct trainings on various
                           aspects of the ESMF to ensure full awareness and smooth implementation. PMU has also appointed
                           safeguards focal points at provincial level to do implementation supervision and monitoring of the
                           ESMF as well as ensure compliance with safeguards policies at the field.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is
                           BP 4.01                                              triggered due to likelihood of some adverse
                                                                                environmental and social impacts from the
                                                                                activities related to enterprise and borrower
                                                                                activities planned under the proposed AF and
                                                                                assigned EA category “B”.
                                                                                An ESMF has been prepared for the parent
                                                                                project which will be applicable for the AF. Site
                                                                                specific EMPs are being prepared for fishery,
                                                                                brick industries and plastic factories under the
                                                                                parent project, while EHS requirements are also
                                                                                stipulated in the ESMPs and ESMF of the
                                                                                original project. The ESMF has been has been
                                                                                disclosed to infoshop on 08 June 2009. And the
                                                                                new ISDS will be redisclosed on November 13,
                                                                                2015.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No                   This policy is not triggered, because the project
                                                                                             components are not expected to be in the area of
                                                                                             any natural habitat or will not have any impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             on it.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No                   The project activities do not impact forests in
                                                                                             any way, as defined by the policy.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No                   The project will neither finance pesticides nor
                                                                                             will they be used in the project.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there is no
                           BP 4.11                                                           indication of presence of physical cultural
                                                                                             resources within the selected sites for the
                                                                                             additional financing.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                                                             Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/
                                                                                             BP 4.10 within the project area that could
                                                                                             potentially benefit or be adversely affected by
                                                                                             the Project’s activities.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   No involuntary land acquisition is expected in
                           4.12                                                              the AF project since there will be no
                                                                                             construction work. The main focus areas of the
                                                                                             project are economic development and
                                                                                             employment generation in the rural areas.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project does not have any activity involving
                                                                                             dams.
                           Projects on International        No                               The project does not involve any activity that
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              will affect international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project does not involve any activity in any
                           7.60                                                              known disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Kamran Akbar,M Haroon Chakhansuri
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                                           Date: 09-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                                         Date: 09-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
