                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR17698
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                                        Project ID:           P102329
                            Project Name:      Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods Project (RRLP) (P102329)
                            Task Team          Adarsh Kumar,Pushina Kunda Ng'andwe
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                                       Estimated   11-Jan-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA06                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (55%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                               forestry sector (37%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing and forestry
                                               (8%)
                            Theme:             Rural non-farm income generation (45%), Rural policies and institutions (43%),
                                               Other rural development (5%), Climate change (4%), Ru ral services and
                                               infrastructure (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       183.80           Total Bank Financing:                                      162.70
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   21.10
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         162.70
                              Total                                                                                               183.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 9
                         Enhanced economic opportunities, access to basic amenities, and participation in community
                         decision-making for the poor, with a focus on women and marginalized
                         groups in 17 targeted districts of Rajasthan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         Enhanced economic opportunities, access to basic amenities, and participation in community
                         decision-making for the poor, with a focus on women and marginalized
                         groups in 17 targeted districts of Rajasthan.
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Institution Building and Social Empowerment. The objective of this component
                         would be to help the poor mobilize themselves into Self Help Groups, and gradually develop their
                         own capacity to initiate and expand sustainable livelihoods activities.

                          Component 2: Community Investment Support. The objective of this component would be to
                         support asset creation of SHGs and their federations and identify and support innovative approaches
                         to improve the livelihoods of the rural poor.

                          Component 3: Skills Development and Employment Promotion. The objective of this component
                         would be to support beneficiaries to capture new employment opportunities through the
                         establishment of a structured mechanism for skill development and job creation.

                          Component 4: Project Implementation Support. The component will facilitate various
                         implementation, coordination, learning and quality enhancement efforts.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environment: The RRLP project will be implemented in 17 select districts of southern and eastern
                         Rajasthan. Some of the salient environmental characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          - Water resources: Groundwater status has been categorized as critical or overexploited in 16 RRLP
                         districts. Nearly all the project districts experience drought once in 4-6 years.
                          - Agriculture: Soil fertility in the project districts is poor with low levels of nitrogen. The project
                         districts have saline and alkaline soil ranging from 0.02% (Churu) to 12.48% (Dausa) of the total
                         land area. The main source of irrigation is tubewells.
                          - Pasture lands and fodder for livestock: Rajasthan has 11% of the country's total livestock. All the
                         project districts have livestock density exceeding the carrying capacity of land available for grazing.
                         The availability of fodder is a problem, especially in pre-monsoon months. Degraded pasture lands
                         and encroachment of community grazing land aggravate the fodder problems.
                          - Forest cover: The forest cover in the state is low (9.53%, as compared to 20.6% of India's forest
                         cover) and comprises of tropical thorn, tropical dry deciduous, and central India subtropical hill
                         forest types. Six of the project districts have significant forest cover. One national park and 19
                         wildlife sanctuaries are in the project area.

                         Social: More than 17% of Rajasthan's 56 million people belong to the Scheduled Caste (SC),
                         making it among the highest proportion of SC population in India. It also has a high proportion of
                         Scheduled Tribe (ST) population at 12.4% (7.10 lakh as per the 2001 census). The state of Rajasthan,
                         with over seventy seven percent of the total population residing in rural areas, is among the poorer
                         States in India today. It has consistently been ranked low on human development. Nearly all the
                         RRLP districts rank lower than the state average in human development index values in 2007; the


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         lowest being in the predominantly tribal southern districts of Dungarpur and Banswara.

                          Rajasthan has 12 broad categories of Scheduled Tribes as per the census of India. Though the tribal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         population is scattered throughout the state, a major portion is concentrated in southern part of the
                         state. The RRLP districts of southern Rajasthan (Bhilwara, Rajsamand, Banswara, Udaipur,
                         Chittorgarh, and Dungarpur) a re predominantly rural as well as tribal. The Major Tribes which
                         reside in the area are Bhil, Meena, Damor and Gharasia. These are typically hilly, forested reg ion
                         with mostly rainfed agriculture. The region is marked by the social and geographic isolation of the
                         ST communities, characterized by lacked of productive land, irrigation facilities, industrialization,
                         skills and higher incidences of illiteracy and poverty.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mridula Singh (GSU06)
                         Varun Singh (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The project involves household/small group activities and
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      investments in agriculture, livestock and non-farm
                                                                    sectors, with scope for some community or cluster level
                                                                    sub-projects. The cumulative impact of these
                                                                    interventions is considered low. The Environmental
                                                                    Assessment and Environment Management Framework
                                                                    are applicable to enable screening, assessment, mitigation
                                                                    and management of the cumulative, small scale, localized
                                                                    and reversible environmental impacts that are expected to
                                                                    be caused by such activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            The southern and eastern part of Rajasthan has about 25
                         4.04                                       Protected Areas (21 Wildlife Sanctuaries and 4 National
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Parks). The RRLP involves small scale livelihood
                                                                    activities by organized self help groups of the rural poor.
                                                                    The EMF involves provisions to ensure that these
                                                                    activities do not result in any conversion or degradation of
                                                                    these critical natural habitats (for example, land clearing,
                                                                    replacement of natural vegetation, etc.).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes            The southern and eastern districts of Rajasthan contain
                                                                    most of the state’s forest cover. The RRLP could involve
                                                                    livelihood activities involving extraction of forest
                                                                    resources by the local communities – for example, fodder
                                                                    for livestock, non-timber forest produce collection, etc.
                                                                    These activities will be small-scale and involve
                                                                    community-level management. The EMF includes
                                                                    provisions to ensure that requisite permissions are taken
                                                                    from the Forest Department and sustainable extraction is
                                                                    practiced.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The project does not involve any procurement of
                                                                    pesticides, spraying equipment and will promote the use
                                                                    of non-chemical pesticides, where possible



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                            Physical Cultural           No             Project does not involve any activities that adversely
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       affect existing physical and cultural property and
                                                                       resources .
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            The project triggers OP/BP 4.10 since IPs (scheduled
                            BP 4.10                                    tribes) are present in many project districts, but more
                                                                       significantly in districts of southern Rajasthan.
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No             Project does not involve any involuntary acquisition of
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 private land and/or public/common lands with squatters.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             Not Applicable.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             Not Applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             Not Applicable.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Environment: The environmental assessment study identified the following key environmental
                              issues concerning livelihoods: frequent drought, depletion of ground water, low soil fertility, lack
                              of fodder resources.

                               Social: The key issues identified by the social assessment in the project area are: low human
                              development attainment, low incomes and high livelihood vulnerability, weak social capital in
                              rural communities, social discrimination against the scheduled castes, marginalization of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              scheduled tribes, marginalization of women from social, economic and institutional processes,
                              poor access to social services and infrastructure, and weak capacity of existing community groups
                              and local self governance structures to address poverty reduction. The project interventions will
                              address these issues through direct and leveraged interventions and benefit 4 lakh rural poor
                              households in the 17 selected districts of Rajasthan to come out of poverty with enhanced quality
                              of life. Project will facilitate an d nurture around 33,000 SHGs, and would also provide skill
                              upgrading and job training to about 17,000 youth. No land acquisition is envisaged by project
                              interventions.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               Environment: No long term negative impacts on environment aspects are likely to occur as a
                              result of the program interventions.

                              Social: The project interventions will help the targeted beneficiaries to enhance and sustain
                              incomes and quality of life. No long term negative impacts on social aspects are likely to occur as
                              a result of the project interventions.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.



                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                            Environment: Several mitigation alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts are
                          proposed in the EMF such as:
                           #       Emphasizing adherence to country systems (national and state forest legislation) that are
Public Disclosure Copy




                          known to be comprehensive and capacity building of local community institutions for sustainable
                          management of the resource.
                           #       Not supporting activities that are not permissible in forests and in protected areas, ensuring
                          that requisite permissions are taken for proposed livelihood activities, ensuring sustainable use of
                          forest resources (capacity building, regulations, etc.).
                           #       Mitigation measures include clear institutional arrangements and capacity building at all
                          levels for project staff and community institutions.
                           #       Periodic assessment of cumulative impacts at the village level and implementation of the
                          identified mitigation measures.
                           #       Demonstration of the feasibility and advantages of good environmental practices in
                          livelihood activities through a pilot.

                            Social: Based on the social assessment, the GOR has finalized a tribal development framework,
                           which includes a range of provisions for ensuring comprehensive and continuous inclusion and
                           informed participation of the tribal communities in the project areas with significant tribal
                           population. These key measures are: focused project implementation in identified tribal areas;
                           capacity building and promotion of federations of the tribals; and targeted financing of the tribal
                           SHGs and their livelihood plans. The social development staff in the SPMU (state), DPMU
                           (district) and PFTs (block) level will carry out effective implementation of the TDF. One of the
                           key measures would be capacity building and sensitization of all project staff working with tribal
                           communities.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environment: An environmental assessment study was undertaken by the government of
                           Rajasthan through a consultant for the proposed RRLP project. The study was conducted with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           objective of understanding the environmental conditions and                  the related legal/
                           regulatory framework, and to prepare an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to
                           minimize any adverse impact on the environment and to promote sustainable livelihoods. The
                           main components of the EMF are:
                            #       Environmental Management toolkit: Procedures for integrating environmental aspects into
                           the livelihood plan development have been detailed out. Preliminary screening of the SHGs#
                           livelihood activities, cluster development plans, and business plans of producer organizations is
                           done and the activities are categorized as having negligible (like sewing, retail sale), low (like
                           agriculture, horticulture, dairy, NTFP, stone carving), and medium (irrigation well, brick making)
                           and high environmental impacts. Considering the nature and scale of the activities to be supported
                           under the RRLP, the environmental impacts are most likely to be small and localized, and
                           manageable by implementing mitigation measures. Following screening, environmental appraisal
                           is undertaken as part of the livelihood pl an/cluster investment plan/business plan development
                           process by the field-level project facilitation teams (PFTs) with the participation of the SHGs/
                           CDOs/POs. Environmental Guidelines (EGs) have been prepared to assist in this process stating
                           the potential impact, required mitigation measures, and the possible government schemes for
                           convergence.
                            #       Promotion of proactive environmental subprojects: Environment-friendly interventions
                           such as rainwater harvesting, organic farming, etc., will be promoted to demonstrate/showcase the
                           feasibility and advantages of good environmental practices in livelihood activities; and to identify


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         the type and level of intervention required for scaling up. It is planned that these activities will be
                         implemented at a pilot scale in each district.
                          #       Institutional arrangements: The institutional structure has been detailed out with overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         responsibility and roles at the state, district, block, and village levels for the implementation of
                         EMF.
                          #       Monitoring: Periodic and regular internal monitoring by the project staff at district and
                         state levels have been proposed through both desk review and field visits on the implementation of
                         the EMF. The six-monthly internal monitoring includes the process of assessing cumulative
                         environmental impacts of any livelihood activity/cluster development plan or POs# business plan.
                         Two independent external audits are proposed to identify ways to strengthen the EMF and identify
                         the b est practices. A set of performance indicators has been developed to monitor the
                         effectiveness of EMF implementation.
                          #       Capacity building: Trainings have been proposed at various institutional levels for
                         capacity enhancement of project staff and beneficiaries to ensure efficient implementation of EMF.

                          Social: The Social Assessment study has recommended social inclusion mechanisms and
                         developed the Tribal Development Framework and the Gender action Plan with the objectives of
                         minimizing any adverse impact on the communities and to ensure inclusion of these social groups
                         in the complete project cycle and promote sustainable livelihoods. The social, gender and tribal
                         inclusion strategy of the project includes the following provisions:
                          #       Participatory social and vulnerability assessment for identification of excluded and
                         vulnerable households
                          #       Saturation coverage and inclusion of all poor, vulnerable and tribal households in project
                         villages
                          #       Facilitation and capacity building of community based institutions of the poor
                          #       Special focus and allocation of resources (financial and human resources/staffing) for the
                         tribal dominated areas and geographical pockets of vulnerable communities
                          #       Representation and Participation of scheduled tribes in community institutions
                          #       social audit and participatory monitoring of project by the community institutions
Public Disclosure Copy




                          #       periodic consultations with SHGs and their federations, particularly the tr ibal federations
                          #       M&E and MIS to report on inclusion of the tribals
                          # periodic reporting and supervision by the SPMU

                          The project component on #Institution Building and Social Empowerment# will facilitate
                         formation and strengthening of community institutions of the identified poor households. It will
                         support in identifying and mobilizing the poorest househhlds through a participatory process;
                         empowering the poor communities to organize themselves and advocate their development
                         priorities through local governance structures; and in building the capacity of the community
                         institutions to participate in, and benefit from, the project interventions. Other components of the
                         project will create credit linkages between the organizations of the poor and financial institutions,
                         promote livelihood strategies that benefit the poor, improve access to social security/ protection
                         including food security, fodder security and health risk.

                          Institutional arrangements: The institutional structure has been detailed out with overall
                         responsibility and roles at the state, district, block, and village levels for the implementation of the
                         social, gender and tribal inclusion framework. Periodic and regular internal monitoring by the
                         project staff at district and state levels have been proposed through both desk review and field
                         visits on th e implementation of the TDF. A set of performance indicators has been developed to
                         monitor the effectiveness of TDF implementation. Trainings have been proposed at various

                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           institutional levels for orientation and capacity enhancement of project staff and beneficiaries to
                           ensure efficient implementation of social inclus ion strategy and TDF. Specific capacity building
                           and sensitization of field staff working with the tribals, including primitive tribes, is proposed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Current Implementation Status and Lessons from Implementation:

                           The social management framework and tribal development plan are being implemented in
                           alignment with the core project components. Participatory identification, pro-poor beneficiary
                           targeting, social mobilization and financial inclusion of the poor households in project institutions
                           and investments activities have ensured a strong focus on the traditionally marginalized groups
                           such as scheduled castes, scheduled tribes (particularly vulnerable tribal groups), single women
                           and women headed households, persons with disabilities (PWD), landless, migrant laborers and
                           minority communities. Overall, more than 40% of the project beneficiaries are tribal households.
                           The key lesson learnt is the need for adopting an integrated, slower paced and locally sensitive
                           approach to mobilizing tribal communities. The participatory planning exercise carried out in
                           project villages has highlighted the development deprivations and gaps in tribal and other areas
                           which need to be addressed by convergence of various government programs and the project has
                           initiated work to undertake such convergence.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environment: The key stakeholders including SHGs, federations, NGOs, and line departments
                           were consulted during the Environmental Assessment study and the development of the EMF.
                           Overall, three levels of consultation with stakeholders were held: Focus group discussions and
                           interviews were held with members of 62 SHGs/CIGs across 31 villages in the seven selected
                           districts. Consultation meetings were held with the NGOs, research institutes, and federation to
                           solicit their comments and suggestions on the structure of the EMF. Two multi-stakeholder
                           workshops were conducted at Jaipur and Sawai Madhopur, where representatives from line
                           departments, research and academic institutes, NGOs, federations, and SHGs were invited to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provide their feedback and suggestions on the draft EMF report.

                            Social: The primary stakeholders and targeted beneficiaries of the project are the poorest and most
                           vulnerable households residing in the rural areas of the 17 project districts. These include
                           households below poverty line (BPL), the scheduled castes (SCs), the scheduled tribes (STs), other
                           backward castes, women headed households, persons with disabilities and women members of the
                           existing self help groups (SHGs).

                            The social assessment involved household interviews and consultations with the primary
                           stakeholders in 24 villages across 12 development blocks in 6 project districts, including
                           communities in the predominantly tribal districts. Focus group discussions and consultations were
                           also held with other stakeholders, including officials of the department of rural development and
                           Panchayati Raj, elected representatives and officials of the Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs), and
                           other government departments dealing with schemes on rural livelihood, poverty reduct ion, and
                           social welfare. NGOs working with these social groups, representatives from academics, activists
                           and community leaders besides government departments # at state, district, block and village
                           levels were part of consultations. Two consultation and disclosure workshops (in Banswara and
                           Udaipur) and one state level workshop at Jaipur were organized on 13-15 September 2010 to
                           disclose the findings of the social assessment study, and the action plans on tribal inclusion an d
                           gender, and invite feedback and suggestions. The feedback of all these consultations have helped


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           in drafting the TDF, GAP and the overall Social assessment report. The core intervention of the
                           project, mobilization and capacity building of the rural poor, aims at building the participation of
                           the poor in the project interventions, and involves a process of continuous consultations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Disclosure of the social assessment report and the tribal development framework through the
                           website of the Department of Rural Development and Panchayati Raj and on the Bank InfoShop is
                           planned before appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        23-Aug-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Nov-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        17-Nov-2010
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Sep-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Nov-2010
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Adarsh Kumar,Pushina Kunda Ng'andwe
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)            Date: 11-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)               Date: 11-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
