                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18441
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Tonga                                        Project ID:           P113184
                            Project Name:       Pacific Regional Connectivity Program (P113184)
                            Task Team           Natasha Beschorner,Sean David Michaels
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           13-May-2011                                  Estimated   30-Aug-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI09                                        Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Telecommunications (97%), Public administration- Information and
                                                communications (3%)
                            Theme:              Regulation and competition policy (4%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                                (48%), Infrastructure services for private sector developm ent (48%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        34.00           Total Bank Financing:                                        17.20
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     6.60
                              IDA Grant                                                                                             17.20
                              Asian Development Bank                                                                                 9.70
                              Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                                                    0.50
                              Total                                                                                                 34.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         The objective of the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program is to reduce the cost and increase the
                         availability of international bandwidth for participating coun                               tries,
                         and thereby facilitate the development of a wide range of ICT application
Public Disclosure Copy




                         s to support social and economic development in the Pacific region.

                          The objectives of the proposed Project (Phase 1-Tonga-Fiji Connectivity Project) are to improve the
                         enabling environment for telecommunications and ICT in Tonga
                         #including greater competition and increased access to infrastructure and servic
                         es by reducing the costs of international connectivity and strengthening the tel
                         ecommunications regulatory framework. Access to the capacity on this new infras
                         tructure will be available on an open-access basis. Expected sector-specific out
                         comes are: (a) increased international connectivity; (b) improved enabling envi
                         ronment; and (c) increased access to ICT services.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The objective of the Pacific Regional Connectivity Program is to reduce the cost and increase the
                         availability of international bandwidth for participating coun                               tries,
                         and thereby facilitate the development of a wide range of ICT application
                         s to support social and economic development in the Pacific region.

                          The objectives of the proposed Project (Phase 1-Tonga-Fiji Connectivity Project) are to improve the
                         enabling environment for telecommunications and ICT in Tonga
                         #including greater competition and increased access to infrastructure and servic
                         es by reducing the costs of international connectivity and strengthening the tel
                         ecommunications regulatory framework. Access to the capacity on this new infras
                         tructure will be available on an open-access basis. Expected sector-specific out
                         comes are: (a) increased international connectivity; (b) improved enabling envi
                         ronment; and (c) increased access to ICT services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         Phase 1.
                          Component 1. Submarine Cable System (US$32.6 million). This will finance the construction of an
                         827 km repeatered cable linking Nuku'alofa (Tonga) with Suva
                         (Fiji) plus a landing station in Tonga. The cost includes cable materials, marine survey and laying
                         costs, and cable equipment. In Fiji, the cable will be connected to the existing SCCN landing station
                         in Suva. The Southern Cross Cable connects Fiji with Australia (Sydney) and the US (Hawaii).

                         Component 2. Enabling environment, ($1.0 million) will finance technical assistance for the
                         Ministry of Information and Communications on
                         (i) telecommunications policy, legal and regulatory development, and on the legal and regulatory
                         environment for Internet and e-transactions, and (ii) regulatory capacity building.

                         Component 3. Project administration ($0.4 million) will provide administrative support to Tonga
                         Cable Ltd and to the Ministry of Information and Communications in the areas of project
                         management, procurement, financial management, communications strategy and audit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The restructured project will fund a domestic cable link between Nuku➢❨ alofa on Tongatapu and


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         the outer island groups of Ha➢❨ apai and Vava➢❨ u, in Tonga. The cable will be laid entirely within
                         Tongan waters. Between the island groups the cable will be laid on the sea floor. A marine survey
                         has confirmed the route, which avoids sea mounts and hydrothermal vents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the Ha➢❨ apai group, the beach man hole and landing station will be located in the village of
                         Pangai. The location is a public-access beach, used to anchor small fishing vessels and other local
                         craft. The proposed location of the beach man hole is within the property of the Ministry of Justice
                         and terrestrial trenching will be within public road reserve. The landing station will also be on
                         government land that has been allocated for ICT purposes. The inshore cable route crosses a reef
                         area dominated by sand /gravel with patches of coral and seagrass.

                         In the Vava➢❨ u group the beach man hole, landing station and TCL office will be constructed in the
                         village of Neiafu. The landing point is on the western side of Halaevalu Wharf under the
                         management of Ministry of Fisheries. A new building is proposed on government land to the north
                         of the wharf, to house the landing station and TCL offices. The inshore route follows a narrow
                         harbor inlet with sands, gravels and coral rock seabed.

                         In Nuku➢❨ alofa the cable will be connected to the beach man hole and laid in the same along the
                         same inshore route as the Tonga-Fiji cable. In Nuku➢❨ alofa, the inshore cable route will disturb sea
                         grass and sea cucumber beds that are reestablishing after the 2013 disturbances associated with the
                         Tonga-Fiji cable. This area is expected to naturally regenerate following the works, over a 2 -3 year
                         period. There are no land based works required in Nuku➢❨ alofa.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nicholas John Valentine (GENDR)
                         Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental               Yes
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                         Physical Cultural           No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                         OP/BP 4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                                     No



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                According to the EIA, there are no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts. The
                              project may have the following potential minor adverse environmental and social impacts:
                              temporary disturbances to the inshore and foreshore habitats, temporary (1-2 day) disruption of
                              access to fishing and gleening grounds, short term (1-2 year) impacts on populations of sea
                              cucumbers (subsistence and commercial species) along the 2m wide trench between
                              Nuku➢❨ alofa beach man hole and the outer reef, contact with mature and calf whales, changes to
                              mooring locations in the Ha➢❨ apai and Vava➢❨ u inner harbor, and nuisance impacts (noise,
                              dust) during construction of buildings. The Environmental Management Plan attached to the EIA
                              has adequate mitigation and monitoring measures to minimize the impacts. This includes TCL
                              providing 3 moorings in the vicinity of each of the Ha➢❨ apai and Vava➢❨ u landings to
                              encourage moorings away from the cable, and the implementation of a specific ➢❨ Marine
                              Protected Species Protocol➢❨ for any works completed during the humpback whale migration
                              period (July through October).
                              The following impacts will be avoided due to the selection of the route and the methods of cable
                              laying: avoidance of damage to hydrothermal vents and sea mounts through remote sensing of
                              route; avoidance of damage to live corals through diver-guided cabling and avoiding trenching in
                              live coral areas. No physical cultural resources, conservation areas or other sensitive sites will be
                              impacted by the project.
                              The land required for the laying of cable in the foreshore and sea bed is owned by the government
                              no permit for cabling is required. The land required for the beach man holes, landing stations and
                              the TCL office are all owned or leased by government agencies and TCL will be given the rights
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to occupy the land. There will be no involuntary resettlement as a result of this project.

                              Indigenous peoples are not located in the project area.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                There are no significant long term adverse environmental impacts from the infrastructure. There
                              will be long term social and economic benefits from improved reliability and speed of Internet for
                              homes and businesses.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Alternative landing sites were assessed at Ha➢❨ apai and Vava➢❨ u. They were discounted due
                              to a combination of land ownership issues, higher potential for beach erosion, and other technical
                              issues relating to beach access and the location of terrestrial infrastructure.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The project will be commissioned and operated by Tonga Cable Ltd (TCL) which will also be the
                              Implementing Agency. TCL has commissioned a suitably qualified and experienced
                              environmental consultant to prepare the EIA and EMP and conduct stakeholder consultations. The


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           requirements of the EMP will be included in the contractor's contract and will be supervised by
                           TCL. TCL will implement the operational EMP requirements into their business practices once
                           the infrastructure is installed and operational.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders and potentially affected people and organisations in Nuku➢❨ alofa, Ha➢❨ apai
                           and Vava➢❨ u were consulted during the EIA preparation process in 2014, and their
                           considerations were included in the final EIA. Meetings were held with the following
                           stakeholders:

                           Ministry of Environment and Environmental Assessment Committee; Ministry of Lands and
                           Natural Resources; Ports Authority; Whale Watch Commercial Operators; Tonga Whale Watch
                           Operators Association; WWF South Pacific, Fiji; Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, Fiji;
                           Marine and Ports, Vava➢❨ u; Vava➢❨ u Environmental Protection Association, Vava➢❨ u;
                           Ministry of Fisheries, Vava➢❨ u Town Officer and nearby residents, Vava➢❨ u,; Ministry of
                           Fisheries & Fishing Community, Ha➢❨ apai; Ministry of Environment, Vava➢❨ u.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-May-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tonga                                                            30-Jan-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Feb-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Mar-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tonga                                                            03-Mar-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                   Page 5 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Natasha Beschorner,Sean David Michaels


                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                         Approved By
                         Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)          Date: 10-Jun-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/     Name: Boutheina Guermazi (PMGR)   Date: 10-Jun-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 7 of 7
