INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO29
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Nepal                      Project ID:   P150801
Project Name:    Nepal Health Sector Support: Towards UHC (P150801)
Task Team        Preeti Kudesia,Vikram Menon
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-Apr-2016                Estimated      15-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Health (50%), Non-compulsory health finance (10%), Compulsory health
finance (10%), Public administration- Health (30%)
Theme(s):        Health system performance (50%), Public expenditure, financial management
and procurement (25%), Managing for development results (2 5%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1850.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             1330.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     100.00
UK British Department for International Development
o                                                        80.00
(DFID)
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                               340.00
Total                                                          1850.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Improve the efficiency, effectiveness and accountability of public sector management and public
spending in the health sector to reduce inequality in access to health services and increase financial
protection.


﻿C. Project Description
The proposed project aims to assist Nepal to move towards Universal Health Coverage (UHC) by
improving the efficiency, effectiveness and accountability of public sector management and public
spending in the health sector to reduce inequality in access to health services and increase financial
protection through the following two components:
Component I. Results based financing to support the move towards UHC by:
a       (A) Improved efficiency, effectiveness and accountability of public sector management and public
spending in the health sector; and
(B) Supporting the achievement of results of key initiatives implemented under NHSP 3 focusing on
reducing inequity and improving financial protection; and
Component II. Advisory services and analytic activities.
Under Component I, results based financing will provide incentives for undertaking critical public
management reforms in the health sector and achieving results of key interventions to reduce
inequality and improve financial protection. Results-based financing will be disbursed to
Government of Nepal against the execution of an agreed to Eligible Expenditures Program (EEP) and
the achievement of key results as measured by Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). The
indicators and verification protocols measuring the results will be defined and agreed during the
preparation of the project. Details on sub-components A and B are provided below:
A.      Improved efficiencies in public sector management and public spending will be achieved by
focusing on the following:
(i) Improved Public Financial Management: The project will support improved public financial
management for better systems performance focusing on the key challenges identified. The project
will focus activities in the following key result areas:
0
Development of a medium term health financing plan, with the goal of improved equity,
access to quality and affordable health services thereby ensuring adequate financial protection.
*      Strengthen capacity to prepare comprehensive sector budgets
*      Enable comprehensive and timely reporting of sector expenditure
*      Improve compliance with applicable internal controls and regulations
(ii) Improved Public Procurement: The project will support reforms along the value chain of
procurement as articulated by the Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) in a Procurement
Action Plan. The project will focus on activities in the following key result areas:
*      Strengthen the capacity of LMD with the right mix of professionals;
*      Establish the use of standard specifications for the basic package of drugs;
*      Institute the use of e-procurement for the entire procurement process through the Public
Procurement Monitoring Office (PPMO) portal;
*      Establish a functional logistics and supply chain management system;
*      Strengthen quality assurance system for drugs
B.     Supporting the achievement of results of key initiatives focusing on inequity of access and
financial protection. In order for Nepal to demonstrate its movement towards UHC, the project will


﻿focus on supporting:
(i) Achievement of results for the following activities that will be implemented/scaled up under
NHSP 3:
0
Piloting and scale up of the national health insurance scheme
*      Nation-wide implementation of the gender equity and social inclusion strategy
* Expanding performance based grants to hospitals
(ii) Enhanced citizen engagement
While the above result areas focus on supply side aspects of sector governance there are a number of
demand side barriers that need to be addressed if Nepal is to meet its goal of equity. Based on the
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) strategy, strengthened citizen engagement can improve
access by: (i) providing citizens with the information and capabilities they need to access a given
service; and, (ii) capturing information from citizens, via voice and feedback, to improve state
responsiveness in addressing access constraints. Improved accountability can help ensure that service
providers 'supply' the service as agreed, thus ensuring that affordable access is provided and
maintained. This component will focus on informational asymmetries and develop appropriate
citizen feedback mechanisms which combine various social accountability tools. The project will
focus activities in the following key result areas:
a.     Developing a focused IEC strategy to fill specific information gaps in order to achieve the
PDO.
b.     Developing a locally appropriate multi-channel feedback mechanism to support better
planning and resolution of institutional bottlenecks and measure out of pocket expenditures.
c.     Strengthening social accountability tools to hold local providers more accountable for
service deliver. This could include social audits and strengthening existing channels for redress.
Under Component II, specific advisory services and analytic activities would focus on:
(i) Supporting the achievement of the key results under DLIs.
(ii) Activities related to measuring and monitoring of key initiatives to be implemented/scaled up
a       during NHSP 3.
(iii) Additional specific activities identified during project preparation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
As a project that seeks to assist Nepal in achieving UHC, project related activities will potentially be
carried out across all the 75 districts of Nepal. The geographical contexts of these 75 districts range
from the mountainous areas to foothills and flood plains of the Terai region of Nepal. However, to
meet the project's stated objectives, IDA financing would be used by the government for institutional
system strengthening by improving the accountability and efficiency of public sector management,
better measurement and monitoring of inequity in access to health services and financial protection.
The project does not envisage direct support to activities relating to infrastructure development and
as such negative environmental and social impacts are not anticipated. However, issues such as the
management of health care waste (HCW) or increase in the volume of waste, which the ongoing
Nepal Health Sector Program (NHSP II) has tried to address, may have adverse impacts.


﻿Given that the exact location of project activities will be known only during implementation, and the
precise nature of impacts are unavailable at this stage, a Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) has been proposed to assess the potential environmental and social impacts of
proposed project interventions.
o
Considering this, the World Bank's Environmental Assessment Operational Policy OP 4.01 is
triggered and the project is categorized as "B".
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The implementing agency, the Ministry of Health and Population, has limited implementing capacity
for safeguards, especially environmental safeguards. The effective oversight and management of
health care waste by the MoHP remains an area requiring strengthening. While the government has
initiated efforts to replicate good health care waste management practices in several additional
tertiary care hospitals, more remains to be done in terms of establishing, implementing and
monitoring a functioning hospital waste management system throughout the country. MoHP has
developed a health care waste management plan, and will need enhanced capacity to implement the
plan. This issue is reflected in the NHSP 3 documentation and will receive support from other
development partners.
On the social side, the MoHP has taken a number of steps and initiatives to improve social outcomes
related to the project, including preparation of guidelines for voluntary land donation and a Gender
Equality and Social Inclusion strategy. Considering that one of the main objectives of the project is
to assist Nepal reduce inequality in access to health services, the project will focus on strengthening
the institutional capacity of the health sector related agencies in improving the social impact related
to the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
O
U       Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         While the proposed project will not finance any
OP/BP 4.01                              rehabilitation or construction, a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will
be prepared to assess both potential positive and
negative impacts of proposed project interventions.
In addition, the study will identify, analyze and
assess the existing legal and institutional aspects and
the safeguard issues in the health sector and
recommend broad measures to strengthen the
environmental management in the sector. Based on
this analysis, appropriate action plans will be
developed as needed.


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
a
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
a
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The proposed project would not negatively impact
4.10                                      Indigenous Peoples (IPs) but they are intended
beneficiaries. As such, OP 4.10 is triggered and an
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) that
draws on the Gender and Social Inclusion strategy of
the MoHP will be prepared to account for their
inclusion and to target them and other vulnerable
disadvantaged group in the consultation and
feedback mechanism.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          The project will not cause any involuntary
BP 4.12                                   resettlement as defined in the Bank's OP 4.12.
Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
O
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The following safeguards related documents will be prepared prior to Appraisal: i) a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan that
draws on the existing Gender and Social Inclusion Strategy of the MoHP.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Preeti Kudesia,Vikram Menon
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                  Date: 16-Apr-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Albertus Voetberg (PMGR)                  Date: 17-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


