                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC13816

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Africa                         Project ID:       P156195
                            Project Name:        Promoting Youth Employment in Comoros
                            Team Leader(s):      Andrea Vermehren
                            Estimated Date       29-Apr-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSP01                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Vocational training
                                                 (20%), Other social services (60%)
                            Theme(s):            Improving labor markets (50%), Other human development (10%), Other rural
                                                 development (20%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                 (10%), Social Inclusion (10%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Japan Social Development Fund                                                                  3
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to improve access to income generation
                           opportunities for targeted youth in Comoros.

                           Specifically, the project will promote entrepreneurship among Comorian youth through access to a
                           comprehensive menu of technical, business and life skills and start-up capital. This approach builds
                           on successful and innovative youth employment initiatives in Africa and Latin America which
                           combine the development of soft and technical skills with the provision of financing and inputs to
                           promote entrepreneurship and self-employment among less educated youth.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will directly benefit about 4,000 targeted youth aged 18–30 years, of which at
                           least 50 percent will be female. Given the strong draw of remittances, this project will prioritize
                           youth who are motivated and can demonstrate at least 6 months work experience in any field (such as
                         household enterprises in the informal sector or formal sector employment). The poverty focus of the
                         project is, inter alia, reflected in that 70 percent of beneficiaries will be selected from poor rural
                         communities under Component 1, while 30 percent of beneficiaries will be chosen from urban areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in all 3 islands of Comoros under Component 2.

                         The income generation capacity of Comorian youth in both rural and urban areas is constrained by;
                         (i) lack of skills that are relevant to growing sectors of the economy, particularly construction,
                         tourism, and agriculture, (ii) high inflow of remittances (which reduces the opportunity cost of under-
                         and unemployment), (iii) lack of formal sector jobs (the preferred employment option of many
                         Comorian youth), (iv) high risks related to the returns to entrepreneurship, and (v) stringent credit
                         terms that constrain access to financing. This project will support self-employment among youth by
                         providing access to skills training and start-up capital (specifically financing and inputs) in viable
                         sectors of the Comorian economy. This approach builds on successful youth employment initiatives
                         in Africa and Latin America which combine the development of soft and technical skills with the
                         provision of start-up capital to promote self-employment among youth.

                         The project is innovative because it enables synergies between active labor market programs and
                         safety nets in Comoros. Evidence from other safety net projects (such as the graduation model
                         developed initially by BRAC in Bangladesh and promoted by the Ford Foundation), demonstrates
                         that beneficiaries who receive both safety nets and activation services enjoy sustained increases in
                         welfare after project interventions. Thus, while the Cash for Work initiatives under the Comoros
                         SSN project provide short term income and consumption support through cash transfers for
                         households, this JSDF provides a package of services to youth in the same rural communities to
                         boost livelihoods in the longer term.

                         The proposed Project will include 3 components as follows:

                         a.      Component 1: Income Generation Support for Rural Youth
                         b.      Component 2: Income Generation Support for Urban Youth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         c.      Component 3: Program Management and Capacity Building of Service Providers

                         Component 1: Income Generation Support for Rural Youth (US$ 1.75 million)

                         The objective of this component is to support the initiation or expansion of small scale agribusinesses
                         by targeted rural youth. This will be achieved through the provision of technical, business and life
                         skills training, as well as tools and equipment to support youth enterprises in food crops and
                         livestock production. The component will benefit poor rural youth who will be selected from the
                         extremely poor and rural communities chosen to benefit from the Comoros SSN project. These JSDF
                         beneficiary communities (a subset of the SSN communities), as well as the youth quotas for each
                         community, will be determined using criteria that include poverty rates, existence of qualified service
                         providers to undertake training, availability of technical support by the Ministry of Agriculture, and
                         population density of youth (to take advantage of economies of scale in the delivery of training and
                         inputs). Youth with at least 6 months prior work experience (either self-owned or on a family farm)
                         will be prioritized for selection. If the community quota remains unmet with this cohort, motivated
                         youth with no prior experience who successfully complete the application process would be
                         considered for selection. The communities will be rolled onto the program in phases, with 40% of
                         youth reached during the first year and 60% during the second year of implementation.

                         Youth will be selected through an on-demand selection process to identify beneficiaries who would
                         be supported to expand an existing agribusiness or initiate a new enterprise. The selection process for
                         the youth beneficiaries will proceed as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Community sensitization on the objectives of the project;
                         •        Call for proposals for investments in agriculture through a community meeting and local
                         stakeholders/community groups to identify potential beneficiaries;
                         •        Interested youth submit an agribusiness proposal;
                         •        Scoring and shortlisting of proposals according to pre-determined criteria, including access
                         to land, profitability, and availability of viable markets for the produce;
                         •        Shortlisted youth will be interviewed by a professional assessment panel to further evaluate
                         the youth’s past experiences, potential to execute the proposal, and their understanding of the
                         opportunities and constraints of their proposal;
                         •        Youth who meet the minimum scores for the interviews will be validated with a Community
                         Committee to verify peer and community endorsements of shortlisted youth;
                         •        Final selection and announcement of beneficiaries.

                         Access to land is a pre-condition for participating in this component. The project will formalize
                         youth’s access to land through Memoranda of Understanding between each youth group and
                         community or family land owners. The MOU will detail the terms of the use of the land, including
                         duration and ownership of proceeds. After the selection process, the selected youth would be allowed
                         to form groups of up to 5 members, according to their common areas of interest. Each group would
                         then be facilitated to develop a detailed implementation plan for their joint business venture,
                         including training milestones and inputs required over a two-year period. A detailed menu of
                         preferred activities (sub-projects) to be supported will be developed for each island, tailored to the
                         unique climatic, socio-economic and environmental conditions, soil quality, accessibility of markets,
                         and availability of expertise to provide technical training in each location. A preliminary list of
                         eligible and ineligible sub-projects to be supported is included in annex 1. Proposals that are not part
                         of the menu of opportunities will be considered and approved by the project implementing agency on
                         a case by case basis, depending on the strength of the proposal, qualifications for the youth, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         availability of technical expertise to support implementation.

                         A customized package of business, technical and life skills training, an apprenticeship (inclusive of
                         transportation allowances), and start-up capital (e.g. small agricultural tools/equipment, improved
                         seedlings, and small ruminants/chicks for livestock or poultry farmers) that are relevant to the youth
                         group’s chosen area of investment will be delivered in 2 phases over the 3 year implementation
                         period of the intervention in each area. The first phase of 6 months will be composed of the
                         following; (i) business skills in the management of a small farm (basic management and accounting,
                         record keeping, profit-making, and marketing); (ii) technical skills training on improved techniques
                         in undertaking selected agricultural activities (e.g. land preparation and cultivation, nursery
                         development, rearing of poultry/small ruminants); (iii) life skills, focusing on conflict resolution,
                         communication, decision making and problem solving; and (iv) an apprenticeship with skilled
                         farmers to gain practical training and insights from experienced masters.

                         The performance of youth at the end of Phase 1 will be assessed by the apprenticeship provider and
                         an independent expert from the Agricultural Chamber of Commerce to determine competence and
                         readiness for the youth to proceed to the next stage. Phase 2 of the project will be implemented over
                         18 months, during which each youth group will continue to be supported by coaches/counselors who
                         would provide business and technical guidance, and evaluate the achievement of the agreed
                         milestones of the implementation plan. In addition, the inputs approved in the sub-project
                         implementation plan will be released in tranches to the youth according to the achievement of each
                         milestone to facilitate the initiation/expansion of the agribusinesses. Further details of the
                         implementation processes of this component will be provided in the Project Implementation Manual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (PIM).


                         Component 2: Income Generation Support for Urban Youth (US$ 750,000)

                         The objective of this component is to support the initiation or expansion of small scale enterprises
                         among urban youth by improving access to skills training and start-up capital. This component will
                         be implemented as a pilot, since the approach of combining skills training with access to financing
                         has been largely untested in Comoros. This component will be targeted towards educated urban
                         youth who are either new entrants and youth in existing businesses. This target group has been
                         selected to develop and test this model for Comoros, before being scaled up to reach more vulnerable
                         populations. Beneficiary youth will be provided with skills training, specifically; (i) business skills
                         (including development of the business implementation plan and target milestones, entrepreneurial
                         skills, basic accounting, management, growth and profit strategies, and marketing), (ii) technical
                         skills in their selected vocational area of interest; and (iii) life skills support (focusing on conflict
                         resolution, communication, decision making and problem solving). In addition, the participants will
                         carry out an internship with a well-established enterprise within their proposed sub-project sector.
                         The component will also provide tools, equipment and financing for the initiation or expansion of
                         youth enterprises. 3 urban localities (one on each island) will be selected in the first year of
                         implementation, to enable learning to inform the design of subsequent 2 years of implementation.

                         An on-demand selection process will be used to target youth under this component, and would
                         include the following steps:

                         •       A call for youth to present business proposals, which would include a Public Information
                         Campaign with advertisements in the local press, youth organizations, local leaders, CSOs, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial institutions in the target localities;
                         •       Interested youth submit a business proposal using the approved template;
                         •       Shortlisting of proposals according to pre-determined criteria, including feasibility, literacy
                         and numeracy competencies, competitiveness, profitability, utilization of appropriate market data,
                         and identification of potential markets;
                         •       Shortlisted youth will be interviewed by an assessment panel to further evaluate the youth’s
                         understanding of the opportunities and constraints of their proposal, past experiences, and their
                         potential to execute the proposal presented;
                         •       Final selection and announcement of beneficiary youth.

                         A preliminary list of eligible and ineligible sub-projects to be supported under is included in annex 1.
                         These sectors are in line with the National Employment Policy, whose strategic goals include the
                         promotion of productivity of private companies in the major essential and productive sectors of the
                         economy (particularly agriculture, livestock, tourism, and construction). Support for enterprises in
                         other sectors such as information technology has been included based on successes of existing
                         programs and businesses in these sectors for youth. As with component 1, proposals that are not part
                         of the menu of opportunities will be considered and approved by the implementing agency on a case
                         by case basis, depending on the strength of the proposal, qualifications for the youth, and availability
                         of technical expertise to support implementation.
                         In developing the training program, the project will undertake stakeholder consultations with both
                         formal and informal sector employers to identify their skills demands, as well as youth to express
                         their training needs in their areas of livelihood interest. The training sessions will be undertaken in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groups of 10-15 youth, aggregated based on their common areas of interest. Upon successful
                         completion of approximately 6 months of training and internship experience, youth will then be
                         provided with intensive one-on-one mentorships, refresher courses, coaching sessions, start-up tools/
                         equipment, and financing to support the establishment and growth their business enterprises. The
                         amount of financing per youth will be determined based on the existing lessons on the minimum
                         amount capital required to receive on-the-job training and start a household enterprise. The capital
                         will be released in tranches to the participants according to the achievement of each milestone of the
                         business implementation plan over the remaining 18 months implementation period. Further details
                         of the implementation processes will be provided in the PIM.

                         Component 3: Project Implementation and Capacity Building of Service Providers (US$ 500,000)

                         The objective of this component is to support activities related to project management, evaluation
                         and coordination of the Project which will be implemented by the Fonds d'Appui au Developpement
                         Communautaire (FADC). This includes procurement of technical assistance, project-related
                         equipment, goods and services, and operating costs for the implementation of the project. The
                         component will also finance the training of experienced local/regional organizations, which will be
                         competitively selected to manage the selection and training of beneficiaries, and the delivery of start-
                         up capital to youth in the targeted communities. As such, this component will include capa        city
                         building to selected trainers and service providers on methods of coaching disadvantaged youth
                         through a training of trainers (ToT) model utilizing the Train-Teach-Train (TTT) approach to
                         encourage the full absorption of training materials. These trainings will include capacity building on
                         methods, best practices and content based on needs identified by the NGOs and CSOs. A curriculum
                         for training of trainers will be developed and piloted through this project, which could be utilized in
                         the future programming as applicable with the NGOs and CSOs taking the lead on curriculum design.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Finally, the component will include support for a monitoring and evaluation system for the project.
                         The objective of the project M&E system is to: (a) monitor progress and results of project
                         interventions at the community, island and national levels, (b) strengthen the national capacity to
                         conduct and manage relevant M&E activities, and (c) use the information generated in evidence-
                         based policy-making. A strong, gender-sensitive M&E system is an integral part of the project
                         activities and provides management with a timely decision-making tool. The M&E system is crucial
                         for the learning and thus success of the project as it will ensure that problems are identified and
                         solved as they emerge, lessons learned are incorporated into the project design, and project outcomes
                         are ultimately assessed. A tracking evaluation and beneficiary assessment of both components will
                         also be undertaken to assess the project’s effect on employment and earnings of youth, as well as
                         their level of satisfaction with the design and implementation of the program.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in both rural and urban areas in all three islands of the Union of
                         Comoros. The geographical distribution of resources will be based on a distribution formula for the
                         national budget that has already been agreed between the island governments. According to this
                         formula, Grande Comore will receive 45 percent, Anjouan 42 percent and Moheli 12 percent of the
                         funds available for promoting youth employment.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The FADC has a good track record of complying with social and environmental safeguards, and
                           there have been no major issues till date. That said, poor design of employment interventions can
Public Disclosure Copy




                           create social degradation and jeopardize implementation. Insufficient attention to gender-relevant
                           sub-projects may also be discriminative against women. To mitigate these risks, there will be
                           additional capacity building for the FADC safeguards team to keep up with the social risks that could
                           be introduced through these sub-projects. In addition, the training and internship activities will be
                           undertaken in a gender-sensitive manner in close consultation with the communities stakeholders, to
                           ensure that women and men, including vulnerable groups, are supported equitably (e.g. ensuring
                           gender-sensitive timing of activities ).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
                           Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No              No civil works will be financed by the proposed
                           BP 4.01                                             project. The project will be focused by the
                                                                               capacity building and training sessions to the
                                                                               youth Comorian in both rural and urban areas in
                                                                               all three islands of the Union of Comoros.
                                                                               Environmental and social impacts are
                                                                               negligible. The project has included gender
                                                                               dimensions in its design and activities.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The project is not being implemented in natural
                                                                               habitats and does not affect them
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project does not involve forests or forestry
                                                                               and does not affect them.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project activities under the technical skills
                                                                               training on improved techniques in undertaking
                                                                               selected agricultural activities(e.g. land
                                                                               preparation and cultivation, nursery
                                                                               development, rearing of poultry/small
                                                                               ruminants)will promote organic fertilizers
                                                                               (manure and composts) without using chemical
                                                                               fertilizers and pesticides (which would in any
                                                                               case be very expensive, inaccessible to the poor
                                                                               beneficiaries and not available in all project
                                                                               areas)
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The Policy is not triggered. No civil works and
                           BP 4.11                                             project activities will not affect Cormorian
                                                                               Physical Cultural Ressources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The Policy is not triggered. No indigenous
                                                                               people in Comoros Islands.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The Policy is not triggered. No resettlement or
                           4.12                                                              land aquisition could be met the project
                                                                                             activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                               The project will not construct or rely on dams.
                           Projects on International        No                               The project activities will not affect
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project is not located in a disputed area.
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Andrea Vermehren
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                                         Date: 04-Sep-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                                        Date: 04-Sep-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
