                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR22288
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 30-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Tonga                           Project ID:               P150113
    Project Name:                      Tonga Cyclone Ian Reconstruction and Climate Resilience Project (P150113)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Michael Bonte-Grapentin,Artessa Saldivar-Sali
    Estimated Appraisal                03-Apr-2014                     Estimated Board           28-May-2014
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GSU08                           Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                       Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           15.89                              Total Bank Financing: 12.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                           2.09
    Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                                1.80
    IDA Credit from CRW                                                                                                6.00
    IDA Grant from CRW                                                                                                 6.00
    Total                                                                                                             15.89
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
Tropical Cyclone Ian (TCI) hit the South Pacific region in January 2014 and had a devastating impact in
Tonga. On January 11, 2014, it passed directly through the Ha'apai Islands Group, intensifying to a Category
5 system with winds of over 200 km per hour. It was the most powerful storm ever recorded in Tonga. One

                                                      Page 1 of 8
person died and 14 suffered minor injuries as a result of the cyclone. In response, the Government of Tonga
(GoT) declared a state of emergency in Ha'apai and Vava'u on the day of the storm. Good preparedness
measures had been in place and GoT's response was rapid and likely prevent d more fatalities and injuries to
human life.

The GoT's National Emergency Management Office (NEMO),jointly with the Bank and in collaboration with
other development partners, subsequently undertook a rapid assessment of the damages and losses in
accordance with the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology. Of the 6,616 people (2011 census)
living in Ha'apai, some 5,500 people in 18 villages across six islands in the group were affected. The DaLA
estimated the combined physical damage and economic losses to be USD49.5 million (about 11 percent of
Tonga's Gross Domestic Product, GDP). The immediate physical damage, particularly on housing stock,
transport infrastructure, and agriculture, was estimated at USD39.4 million. TCI is expected to cause a
potential income loss for the·Ha'apai Island Group of around40 percent for 2014, and a significant increase in
the poverty level of the affected persons via the destruction of subsistence agricultural crops, inputs for
handicraft production, and disruption to private sector business activity.

The housing sector bore the brunt of damages and losses from TCI as reflected in the National TCI Response
Plan which outlined the immediate relief and recovery priorities. The plan included the need to reconstruct
and rehabilitate some 800 homes, with an urgent priority to assist affected families move out of tents and
evacuation centers and into safe housing with adequate water and sanitation facilities.

The project will assist with the TCI emergency recovery effort through the following:
• Component A: Housing and Key Community Facilities Repair, Reconstruction and Climate Resilience
(USD 12.97m including contingencies and taxes)
• Component B: Technical Assistance and Training for Enhanced Disaster and Climate Resilience (USD 1.58
m including contingencies and taxes)
• Component C: Project Support (USD 1.34 m including contingencies)
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                  relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in the Ha'apai Island Group in the Kingdom of Tonga.

The Kingdom ofTonga consists of 169 Islands with a total population of around 120,000. The country lies in
the South Pacific and stretches over a distance of about 800 kilometers fro north to south, covering a total
land area of748 square kilometers with an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of about 700,000 square
kilometers. The population is primarily Polynesian, with a literacy rate close to 99 per cent and a relatively
low incidence of poverty. However, its small size, geographic dispersion and isolation, and limited natural
resources provide a narrow economic base. Agriculture, fishing and tourism account for most export earnings
and it has a high dependency on external aid (approximately 15% of Gross National Income, GNI).
Remittances from an estimated 100,000 Tongans abroad have historically been equivalent to about
40%ofGNI.

The Ha'apai economy is built around subsistence agriculture: 23% of the population is estimated to live
below the basic needs poverty line. TCI is expected to cause a short-term increase in poverty due to the: (i)
destruction of subsistence agricultural crops and lost fisheries and agricultural output; (ii) destruction of
inputs for handicraft production; and (iii) disruption to private sector business activity. The scale of losses is
very substantial relative to current incomes, given the under-developed nature of the Ha'apai economy, and
suggests a Ha'apai income loss of around 40% for 2014. The.other pillar of the economy, tourism related to
whale watching, has been seriously affected, but since TCI happened outside of the season, the impact is
lower than it would otherwise have been.


                                                    Page 2 of 8
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the               Team
 Ross James Butler( GSU02 )

6. Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes            About 80% of the project expenditure has been
                                                        directed to facilitate the provision of housing
                                                        and basic services, repair of affected housing
                                                        stock and key public buildings, and
                                                        undertaking climate resilience improvements
                                                        to undamaged housing. The project has
                                                        facilitated safe removal and disposal of
                                                        asbestos waste and reuse, recycle and disposal
                                                        of Construction Demolition Waste (CDW).
                                                        Waste was disposed of in a manner certified by
                                                        a licensed asbestos management consultant
                                                        from New Zealand.

                                                        The Policy is triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No             The Lifuka and Foa Islands, where most of the
                                                        reconstruction work is taking place does not
                                                        have any critical or non-critical natural
                                                        habitats, nor will the project affect critical or
                                                        non-critical natural habitats. Therefore, the
                                                        policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             The Project will not affect any forests. The
                                                        policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The Project does not involve procurement or
                                                        use of pesticides. The policy is not triggered
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No             The Project involves replacement or
                                                        reconstruction of destroyed or damaged
                                                        housing. Given the coral nature of the islands,
                                                        physical culture resources are not expected.
                                                        Nonetheless, a chance find procedure is
                                                        included in the Environmental Management
                                                        Plan.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             The population is 97.5% indigenous Tongan or
                                                        part Tongan, is homogeneous and does not
                                                        conform to the Bank's definition of Indigenous
                                                        Peoples. The policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            The principle adopted by the project was to
                                                        replace housing on existing sites/allotments
                                                        wherever possible. Accordingly, there was an
                                                        expectation that the need for houses to be
                                                        constructed on sites other than the site where
                                                        the destroyed house was located would be
                                                        unlikely. Nevertheless, because there was a


                                              Page 3 of 8
                                                         possibility that relocation of some houses may
                                                         be required and therefore that some alternative
                                                         land would need to be identified by the
                                                         Government.

                                                         These relocations may be due to safety, legal or
                                                         occupancy security reasons.
                                                         Accordingly, OP 4.12 was triggered to ensure
                                                         appropriate safeguards were, and remain in
                                                         place. A Resettlement Policy Framework was
                                                         prepared to document the process agreed for
                                                         ensuring compliance with OP 4.12. The key
                                                         purpose of the RPF is to protect any people
                                                         owning or using the alternative land that may
                                                         be identified by the Government to
                                                         accommodate houses funded by the project.
                                                         The principle was, and remains, that any people
                                                         affected by the project such as people who own
                                                         or use the alternative land needed to
                                                         accommodate the houses for beneficiaries must
                                                         be afforded full protection of the Bank
                                                         safeguard policies.

                                                         To date (May 2017) all houses funded under
                                                         the project have been built on the land where
                                                         the beneficiaries lived. However, there remains
                                                         some houses where the land owners have not
                                                         consented to the construction of a house on
                                                         their land to be occupied in perpetuity by
                                                         another person/family. To address this issue,
                                                         the restructuring proposes that the house be
                                                         owned by the land owner and that the
                                                         beneficiary be able to live in the house for four
                                                         years to allow them time to recover from the
                                                         impacts of the cyclone. A part of the purpose of
                                                         this is to incentivize land owners to allow
                                                         houses to be built on their land, thereby
                                                         significantly reducing the potential need for
                                                         alternative land.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No              The Project does not involve dams. The policy
                                                         is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No             The Project does not involve international
7.50                                                     waterways. The policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No              The Project is not located in disputed areas.
                                                         The policy is not triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                               Page 4 of 8
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key physical aspect of constructing housing has not created substantive environmental issues, and
construction impacts have been effectively managed. The two key aspects requiring safeguarding were the
management of asbestos products and CDW, as well as the issues associated with the provision of basic
services. The project will improve public health by facilitating the provision of basic services, improving
housing conditions by facilitating the replacement or repairing damaged houses or retrofitting undamaged
housing to cyclone resilience standard, thus leading to general improvements in the environment. Works will
also be undertaken to improve sanitation.

The likely environmental issues are:

• Some of the buildings damaged by TCI contain asbestos products (asbestos roofing sheets, tiles, or
gutters). A firm specializing in asbestos waste management has been hired by the Ministry of Infrastructure
(Mol) to prepare an asbestos management and removal plan and subsequently identify, remove, secure and
dispose of asbestos products in an appropriate and safe manner.
• Ha'apai lacks a properly engineered landfill site. Much of the cyclone and CDW will be re-used (timber,
iron sheeting, plastic piping/reticulation, some bricks and masonry) or recycled (bricks and masonry can be
crushed to be used in the reconstruction). Asbestos waste was disposed of in accordance with the advice and
supervision of a certified asbestos consultant from NZ.
• The project will facilitate the provision of water and sanitation services, which may include some septic
tanks and soak pits. There will be minor excavation for new concrete pad footings and septic ,tanks and soak
pits. Some of the excavated material will be reused in constructing soak pits, with the remainder spread in
gardens or used in pothole filling or road construction. All construction material for housing will be sourced
locally, from Tongatapu, or imported from overseas.
• All groundwater on the islands is saline and contaminated and is not fit for drinking or cooking. The
islanders use rainwater or bottled water for drinking and cooking purposes. Tap water is used for bathing,
cleaning and flushing toilets. Since the project does not involve heavy construction and civil works requiring
lot of water, there adequate non-potable water supply readily available for construction use, except in
condition of draught when pumping of the groundwater aquifer may be restricted.

The likely social safeguard issues relate primarily to issues around ensuring land is available for the
reconstruction of housing. As outlined above, it is expected that in most cases, houses will be constructed or
repaired on the same allotment. At the time of appraisal, the situation in terms of land availability was as
follows:

• Approximately 40% of lands have clear land title in favor of the beneficiaries.
• For the remaining approximately 60% of beneficiaries, some owners are absent, cannot be identified or
contacted, and others have no formal or informal occupancy arrangements. In the Tongan context, where
communal and/or familial sharing of land assets underpins much of the traditional land management
arrangements, this is common. The Ministry of Lands, Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources
(MLECCNR) worked to achieve a level of certainty for all beneficiaries by identifying the formal title
holders and to confirm that the beneficiaries have consent to remain on the allotment and construct a
replacement house and basic services on the land.
• If identified informal arrangements are disputed by the registered title holder and consent is not granted to
reconstruct on the land, the GoT will consider other measures, specifically the identification and preparation
of alternative land, which will provide a security of occupancy to the beneficiary for the design life of the
building (approx. 30 years) in accordance with the process defined by the Resettlement Policy Framework.
• The Act of Constitution of Tonga Clause l 09 Beach Frontage includes a 17 meter (50 feet) foreshore
building line from the high-water mark to establish a foreshore protection area. Some of the houses damaged

                                                  Page 5 of 8
by TCI are located within this protection area. Where land is available on the same allotment, the
replacement houses will be located on that part of the allotment setback from the foreshore building line. In
the event that land outside the protection area is not available on the allotment, the GoT will consider other
measures to identify land and to provide a security of occupancy to the beneficiary in accordance with the
process defined by the Resettlement Policy Framework.

The discussion in the Table above under OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, provides an update of the current
situation and the process proposed under the restructure to address current issues.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The construction of housing, improved water supply and sanitation services, repairs to damaged housing and
retrofitting of undamaged housing, the removal and safe disposal of asbestos products and CDW, and
institutional strengthening, will all have net positive environmental, health and social benefits for the
residents of the affected Ha'apai Islands.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Given that this is an emergency project in response to a natural disaster, options available to reduce social
and environmental impacts are limited. The two exceptions are: (i) disposal of asbestos and CDW, and (ii)
the location of any housing outside existing allotments, if required.

After considering options for establishing a landfill in the Ha'apai Group, the Government of Tonga decided
to utilize the existing engineered landfill in Tongatapu to receive asbestos and CDW under this project. This
will minimize any negative environmental impacts from disposal, and is consistent with the current GoT
preferences. Measures to minimize the impacts from disposal of asbestos and CDW are presented in the
agreed Environmental Management Plan.

The likelihood of land for housing outside existing allotments be required is considered to be very low.
Notwithstanding this, if land is required, alternative sites will be identified as assessed based on the
requirements of the agreed Resettlement Policy Framework.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project has been implemented by the Mol through the Transport Sector Consolidation Project Support
Team (PST). The PST is implementing the World Bank and Australian Aid funded Transport Sector
Consolidation Project and has gained experience and developed competencies to address safeguard policy
issues. A dedicated Project Management Unit was established in Ha'apai for on the ground implementation.
The project provided funds for social and environmental safeguards support and oversight, including funds
for a suitable qualified individual who will be appointment to be based in the PMU in Ha'apai by the
commencement of project implementation.

During preparation of the project, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed both in-country and in Infoshop on April 14, 2014. The EMP
covers mitigation measures to minimize the impacts from,the construction of housing units, water supply and
sanitation associated with the new houses and existing infrastructure, and the removal of asbestos and CDW.
The document also covers the cumulative impacts from other donors and projects on the environment,
provides details on the Tapuhia Landfill in Tongatapu, and suggested monitoring actions of the key
construction/recovery issues. The EMP also provides links to the World Bank Group Environmental, Health,
and Safety Guidelines and the World Bank Group 2009 Guidance Note on Asbestos Management.

The RPF establishes the principles, objectives, procedures and rules to be used in the preparation abbreviated

                                                  Page 6 of 8
resettlement action plans (ARAP), as well as identifying risks and associated impacts and adopted approach
of resettlement under the project if resettlement is required as a result of the government finding alternative
land if “in situ” solution cannot be found whereby the project funded houses are built on the land where the
original house sat. It is expected the borrower will take all necessary measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate
and compensate for adverse social impacts, including, but not limited to, those impacts associated with
involuntary resettlement. Every viable alternative project design should be explored to avoid, where feasible,
or minimize involuntary resettlement. If involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided altogether, sufficient
resources will be made available to implement resettlement activities as sustainable development programs,
in close consultation with displaced persons.

The project restructure – by incentivizing land owners to allow the house to be constructed on the original
site – is one such effort proposed by the Government to avoid the need to identify and prepare alternative
land (which would almost certainly result in some involuntary resettlement impacts to be managed by OP
4.12).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Given the nature of the project as an emergency response, consultations have taken place and will continue to
take place to ensure that project affected people participate actively in the project activities. During project
preparation a series of consultations with various groups of stakeholders including the project affected people
were undertaken. The preparation of safeguards instruments were part of the consultations. Results of the
ongoing consultations process will be captured in a Stakeholders' engagement plan to be developed during
implementation to guide Mol's engagement with beneficiaries throughout the entire project, and incorporated
into the Operational Manual and safeguards instruments as needed. The EMP was disclosed in Infoshop on
April 14, 2014 and in-country on May 8, 2014. Revisions to the RPF have been discussed with beneficiaries
during consultations in January - February 2017, along with the new land consent forms. The revised RPF,
which includes the new land consent forms as an annex, was sent to Infoshop for disclosure on May 31, 2017
and the PST have confirmed it will be disclosed in country within the week.

During implementation, additional information about the project will be disseminated by Town Committees
established under the project via public media in accordance with the project Communications Plan. Intended
beneficiaries and communities will be further consulted and engaged in community meetings to discuss
planning and implementation of the provision of houses, repair of damaged homes, and in planning works
related to public facilities by the Town Committees. There will be a comments and complaints process (see
below) through the Governor's office in Pangai, Lifuka Island.

Furthermore, consultation will be carried out during implementation once the preliminary assessment of the
volume of wastes and an assessment of suitability of sites have been completed to include the identification
of suitable temporary site(s) on Lifuka and/or Foa islands for the temporary storage of asbestos waste and
CDW where it cannot be re-used, prior to transport and end disposal in Tapuhia landfill in Tongatapu. This
will involve consultations with the residents of Lifuka and Foa Islands and involvement of the Ministry of
Health, MoI, MLECCNR.
.




 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::




                                                  Page 7 of 8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes   [X]     No []       NA    []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes   [X]     No []       NA    []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes   [X]     No []       NA    []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes   [X]     No []       NA    []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes     [X]     No []       NA    []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes   [X]     No []       NA    []
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):        Name: Michael Bonte-Grapentin,Artessa Saldivar-Sali
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                Date: 02-Jun-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)            Date: 02-Jun-2017




                                                Page 8 of 8
