                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13034
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pacific Islands                    Project ID:    P155542
                            Project Name:      Pacific Resilience Program (P155542)
                            Task Team          Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-Mar-2015                        Estimated   19-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (60%), Public administration- Financial Sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (60%), Climate change (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:           2.22               Total Bank Financing:          1.32
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   1.32
                              Special Climate Change Fund                                                                 0.90
                              Total                                                                                       2.22
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Program is to strengthen early warning, resilient investments and financial
                           protection of participating countries.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         Since 1950, the Pacific Island Countries have incurred approximately $3.2 billion dollars in damage
                         costs as a result of climate change and natural disasters. The Pacific Islands remain one of the most
                         vulnerable regions of the world to climate change. Hence, there is widespread acceptance of the need
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to strengthen disaster early warning and preparedness, and to mainstream disaster risk and climate
                         change into development planning and financing. Accordingly, a draft Strategy for Climate and
                         Disaster Resilient Development (SRDP) has been prepared through a comprehensive and ongoing
                         engagement process, and involves national and regional stakeholders representing a wide variety of
                         interests across the Pacific Islands region. The PREP will facilitate current Pacific regional efforts
                         which are aimed at ensuring that climate change and disaster risk issues are given prominence in the
                         sustainable development agenda and will directly support the implementation of the SRDP, which in
                         turn, provides a strong framework for the PREP.

                         The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) is a political grouping of 16 independent and self-
                         governing states, with a mission through the Framework for Pacific Regionalism of ensuring the
                         effective implementation of the Leaders’ decisions for the benefit of the people of the Pacific. PIFS
                         is chair of the Council of Regional Organizations (CROP) and co-chair of the CROP Executive Sub-
                         Committee on Climate Change and Disaster Resilient Development and plays a key coordination role
                         for the SRDP. PIFS engages in, and monitors, the region’s efforts to combat climate change and its
                         impacts and has thus been a strong advocate of the region’s needs for increased support from the
                         international community to assist in efforts to overcome the challenges posed by climate change.

                         The PIFS will be responsible for implementing regionally implemented project initiatives under
                         PREP Components 3 (Disaster Risk Financing) and 4 (Regional Program Management and
                         Coordination) as follows:


                         A.      Disaster Risk Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will provide Technical Assistance and finance the preparatory activities which will
                         be required to better define a medium and long term disaster risk financing framework (e.g., mutual
                         insurance fund), which is envisaged would be financed and implemented in Phase II of the Program.
                         It will also provide technical assistance to assess the country capacity and as needed help prepare
                         them to access to global climate funds, especially the Green Climate Fund.


                         B.      Regional Program Management and Coordination

                         The objective of this sub-component is to provide efficient regional coordination of the different
                         country Projects and the coordination and implementation of activities that will be executed at the
                         regional level. This will be achieved through the establishment of a Regional Coordination Unit
                         (RCU), which will be established within the PIFS. The RCU will provide overall coordination for the
                         Program, report on the overall Program implementation status to the Regional Steering Committee,
                         provide monitoring of the regional and countries performance indicators, liaise with the main
                         stakeholders on relevant issues related to the Program and provide information and communication
                         on the Program’s achievements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The PIFS component of PREP will provide technical assistance. There are no relevant salient


                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                           physical characteristics as all activities will be administrative. All activities with potential safeguard
                           implications will be nationally implemented under separate Project IDs. While the PIFS will provide
                           technical assistance to the participating countries this does not extend to safeguards management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which will be the responsibility of the individual countries.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
                           Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No              The PIFS component of PREP does not involve any
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       environmental or social interactions. All safeguard issues
                                                                        will be managed by participating countries.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The PIFS component of PREP will provide technical assistance only, with no safeguard issues or
                              impacts anticipated. Responsibility for safeguards implementation rests with the participating
                              countries who must comply with the requirements of the program ESMF.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Indirect environmental or social impacts are not anticipated from the proposed PIFS activities
                              under PREP. Responsibility for safeguards is devolved to the participating countries who will be
                              subject to the requirements of the program ESMF.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                          Page 3 of 4
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies was undertaken in the individual participating
                              countries. During implementation, PIFs will have a role in the grievance redress mechanism, with
                              grievances able to be elevated to the PIFS Regional Coordination Unitfor resolution.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                Date: 27-May-2015
                            Manager:



                                                                       Page 4 of 4
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
