INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16495
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Western Africa             Project ID:   P079736
Project Name: CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)
Task Team       Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Feb-2007                Estimated     26-Jun-2007
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO1                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (59%), Railways (25%), Central
government administration (10%), General transportation sect or (3%), Ports,
waterways and shipping (3%)
Theme:          Trade facilitation and market access (29%), Infrastructure services for private
sector development (29%), Regional integration (14%), Tax policy and
administration (14%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (14%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
U        Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     276.00            Total Bank Financing:   201.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              75.00
International Development Association (IDA)                    147.00
IDA Grant                                                       54.00
Total                                                          276.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 12


﻿2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC member states
and improve the Central African Republic, the Republic of Camero
on's and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
O
The project development objective is to facilitate regional trade among the CEMAC member states
and improve the Central African Republic, the Republic of Camero
on's and the Republic of Chad's access to world markets.
3. Project Description
General initial project and program description
The original credit amount of the CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation Project was approved
by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors on June 26, 2007, became effective on December 5,
2007 with a closing date of January 31, 2013 for a total amount of SDR1 32.9 million (US$201
million equivalent) of which SDR97.2 million were to be spent in Cameroon (Credit 4337-CM),
SDR16 million were to be spent in Central African Republic (Grant H314-CA) and SDR 19.7 million
were to be spent in Chad (Grant H315-TD).
A first Additional Financing (AF1) was approved on November 5, 2009, became effective on April
8, 2010 with a closing date of January 31, 2015, for an amount of SDR138.6 million (US$217
million equivalent) of which SDR95.8 million was for Cameroon (Credit 4659-CM) and SDR42.8
million for Central African Republic (Grant H522-CF).
A second Additional Financing (AF2) was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors on June
23, 2011 with a closing date of January 31, 2016, for an amount of SDR 70.7 million (US$112
million equivalent) for Cameroon (Credit 4987- CM).
0
A third Additional Financing (AF3) was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors on July 26,
2012 with a closing date of January 31, 2016, for an amount of SDR 80.7 million (US$125 million
0
equivalent) for CAR (Credit H798-CF and Grant 5146-CF).
This comprehensive program tackles most of the transit facilitation dimensions along the two
targeted corridors: road rehabilitation, railway modernization, customs reform, transport regulation,
support to the Douala single window and - though to a more modest scale, port modernization. A key
project's objective is to reduce the dwell time in the Douala port (around 20 days) and the transit time
from Douala to N'Djamena (15 days) and from Douala to Bangui (10 days). In addition to the IDA
support, this program is also supported by the AfDB and the European Union.
The original project and its first two additional financings have three components to be implemented
in Cameroon, CAR and Chad:
(i) First component: Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement. Activities include: (a) periodic
maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected road section along the corridors; (b)
paving of existing gravel road sections; (c) harmonization and enforcement of axle load control
policies; (d) construction and improvement of rest areas; (e) rehabilitation of critical rail
infrastructure; and (f) implementation of HIV-AIDS awareness and mitigation measures. This
Page 2 of 12


﻿component finances in particular the rehabilitation of the following road sections: in Cameroon:
Mb6r6 - Ngaound6r6 (86 km), Ngaound6r6 - Garoua (275 km) and Dabanga-Kousseri (78 km); in
Chad: Bongor - Er6 - Kelo (131 km); in CAR: Famb616 - Bamboua (34 km), Famb616 - Bouar (33
kin) and Bossemb6-Yalok6 (10 km). It also finances the rehabilitation of 175 km of railway tracks
O
in Cameroon (Batchenga - Ka'a).
(ii) Second component: Transit and Transport Facilitation Investments. Activities include: (a)
communication between stakeholders, especially within the port community, including Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) interfacing; (b) transit regime and border crossing
improvements through cargo tracking, border posts constructions and improvement; (c) port safety
and security strengthening; and (d) improvement in intermodal interfaces. This component finances
in particular the improvement of multimodal platforms in Ngaound6r6 and Douala (Cameroon) and
the construction of a bus station in Bouar (CAR).
(iii) Third component: Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
Building. Activities include: (a) CEMAC Customs Union and national customs strengthening; (b)
institutional support for transport facilitation institutions; and (c) coordination and management of
the project's activities. This component finances in particular the improvement of local customs'
offices in Garoua Boulai - Touboro and Kousseri (Cameroon) and in Belabo (CAR), as well as the
construction of a training center for the Cameroonian customs and of new offices for the "cellule
BAM-BAD", the project implementing unit in the Cameroonian Ministry of Public Works.
The third additional financing includes the following additional activities to be executed in CAR:
*      Full rehabilitation of Bouar cross over road and of Bouar - Doaka road, including
reconstruction of bridge at the exit of Bouar (full design study under way);
*      Routine and basic maintenance to be performed on selected sections of the corridor. The
exact description of these activities will be refined during project preparation but are likely to
include: (i) perio dic maintenance of most deteriorated sections between Bossemb616 and Bossent616,
with recycling of existing surface dressing and application of a single asphalt layer; (ii) a 3-year
performance-based maintenance contract, including the operation of weight control stations, on the
sections Garoua Boulai - Bouar, about to be rehabilitated; as well as a (iii) basic maintenance of the
road Doaka - Baoro;
a         *     Improvement of Bangui by-pass (urban traffic survey to be performed to determine the
optimal option; the objective is to divert some of the existing traffic of heavy vehicles entering the
city from the highly-congested "avenue de l'Ind6pendence" road).
*      Some transit facilitation activities consisting mostly in capacity building, institutional
strengthening and technical assistance activities.
The proposed Level II Restructuring of the CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation Project
(CEMAC TTFP) supports (a) the extension of the Project's closing date by 36 months in order to
allow for completion of activities, (b) the inclusion of specific execution arrangements for a
designated Force Account in Cameroon, and (c) the reallocation of Credit/Grant proceeds for CAR,
Cameroon, and Chad. The poor security in CAR and Northern Cameroon over the last three years has
hindered the execution of all the civil works and routine maintenance activities as originally planned
under the Project on both the Douala - Garoua BoulaY - Bangui and Douala - N'Djam6na corridors.
The proposed restructuring should allow the completion of all of the relevant civil works and other
activities funded under the project that are required to achieve the PDO. Moreover, considering the
critical importance of the two corridors (Douala - Ndjamena and Douala - Bangui), which cover
Page 3 of 12


﻿about 75% of CAR's and Chad's international trade, the completion of the IDA funded road works
are essential for both countries. In addition, despite the challenging security conditions on the
ground, the project objectives remain fully relevant and it would be difficult to mobilize the
resources available. Finally, the project is also key to Cameroon to improve the connectivity and
O
)         integration of the Northern regions to the rest of the country, and create an easier access to the port of
Douala, where operation and transactional dwell times have been reduced, and which is critical to
national and regional economies.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The initial project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad,
including: (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to Douala that
need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon between Yaound6 and
Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a number of trade-related investment
and technical assistance in the three countries. To date: (a) safeguards issues concerned relatively
minimal environmental and social impacts resulting from the road, railway and bridge investment
components of the project in Cameroon, and (b) in general, key social issues relevant to the project
objectives are mostly in relation to social impacts of the road improvements in Cameroon. This is not
likely to be modified under the restructuring since (a) the Project area remains the same, and (b) the
proposed restructuring should allow the completion of all of the relevant civil works for which the
environmental and social impacts have been already assessed, are already taken into account in the
civil works contracts, and have not induced an EA category change so far. Moreover, to further
ensure the achievement of the project PDOs, the proposed restructuring also (a) drops activities that
are no longer relevant; and (b) adds some quick implementing high impact trade and transport
facilitation activities that would further strengthen the achievement of the PDO with minimal
environmental and social impacts.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arbi Ben Achour (GSU1 1)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)
Robert A. Robelus (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Yes
Page 4 of 12


﻿Involuntary Resettlement
tOfdWP  I1ams OP/BP     No
4.37
O
U         Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project finances activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad, including
(a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to Douala that need
upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon between Yaound6 and Belabo
and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a number of trade-related investment and
technical assistance in the three countries.
Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impact resulting from the
road, bridge and rail investment components of the project in Cameroon, CAR and Chad, and to a
more limited extent by some of the trade facilitation activities. Specific safeguards instruments
have been prepared. In particular:
- When the original project was prepared, three separate environment and social impact
assessment studies (ESIAs) were prepared, one for Cameroon, one for Central African Republic
and one for Chad. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared, based on
the ESIAs.
U- Regarding the railway works, an Environmental and Safety Management Plan (ESMP) has
been updated in 2007, based on the ESMF prepared for the purpose of an earlier IDA-financed
project to support the railway concession.
o           -      When the original project was prepared, three separate resettlement action plans (RAP)
were also prepared, one for each country. These RAP were implemented in the satisfactory manner
- When the first additional financing was prepared, it was determined that the Kousseri by-
pass required a specific environmental and social management plan (ESMP). This ESMP was
already prepared and was expected to be implemented just before the sudden security threats from
Boko Haram attacks, which resulted in the stop of activities. The ESMP will be fully implemented
once the activities are re-launched.
The Environmental Assessments of the road, bridge and rail track works has not revealed any
significant direct environmental impacts. Most of the mitigation measures were satisfactorily
implemented. Formal allocation of 4 hectares within the Benoue National Park is still awaited; the
draft decrees were sent to the Prime Minister's office in 2014, and the signature of these decrees
will continue to be followed by the Team. Thus far no encroachment of the national park area nor
human settlement have been observed s based on the second hand information received (security
concerns prevent the team to visit the site at the moment).
Page 5 of 12


﻿The studies that have been prepared for the purpose of the original project have been disclosed
both in country and in the Bank's Infoshop on February 15, 2007. The Kousseri by-pass study was
disclosed in country on September 1st, 2009 and in the Bank's Infoshop on September 2, 2009.
o
For the second additional financing, the following safeguards were prepared:
(a) Regarding the Magada - Maroua road: An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) - including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared to mitigate the
negative impacts caused by the rehabilitation of the Magada road. This ESIA was submitted for
disclosure to the World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 2011 and published in country on March 23,
2011. A field mission of the Ministry of Public Works' environmental and social unit confirmed
that no involuntary resettlement were expected prior to or during works' execution.
(b) Regarding the Tilde Bridge: An abbreviated RAP (ARAP) was prepared by the Ministry of
Public Works in order to mitigate the negative impacts caused by the displacement of 13 families
as a result of the Tilde Bridge reconstruction works. This ARAP was disclosed in country on
March 23rd, 2011 and submitted for disclosure to the World Bank Infoshop on March 18, 2011.
The Tilde Bridge is located on the road section Dabanga - Kousseri (78 km) which is being
rehabilitated, together with the Kousseri by-pass, as part of the 1st Additional Financin g to the
CEMAC Transport and Transit Facilitation Project. The corresponding ESIA and ESMP were
prepared and disclosed in country on September 1st, 2009 and in the World Bank Infoshop on
September 2nd, 2009.
For the purpose of the third additional financing, the following OPs were triggered:
Environmental Assessment: OP/BP 4.01 was triggered and an advanced draft of the Environment
and Social Impact Assessment study for the rehabilitation of the corridor road section between
Bouar and Baoro was already prepared by the Government. The Environmental Assessment of the
road works has not revealed any significant direct environmental impacts in this section. OP 4.04
(Natural Habitats) and 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) have been triggered as some of the road
works may take place near natural habitats and there may be some cultural artifacts; the ESIA/
ESMP includes mitigation measures. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was also prepared,
a          consulted and disclosed for the same road section.
All safeguards documents (Environmental & Social Management Framework; resettlement Policy
Framework) have been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in country and at INFOSHOP
prior to appraisal.
The Overall Safeguards Rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory due to the long pending signing of
the following two decrees in Cameroon:
(a)    Allocation to the Benou6 National Park of a four hectare parcel of land with same
ecological characteristics as the one affected by the project. In July 2011, the Ministry of Forestry
& Wildlife alerted the Ministry of Public Works that the process would be long because of its
complexity and, as a precaution, both the Ministries of Environment and of Forests & Wildlife
issued a waiver to start the civil works while awaiting the signed decree. Therefore, in compliance
with the national law: (a) the GoC publicly informed of the declassification/allocation process in
November 2011; (b) technical works and consultations with the various stakeholders in the area
were carried out between 2012 and 2013; and (c) the draft decrees were sent to the Prime
Page 6 of 12


﻿Minister's office in 2014.
The government has delayed in fulfilling the covenant in the Financing Agreement that required
that the allocation of the land be completed within 18 months of the effectiveness. To monitor the
O
status and compliance with the relevant covenant during implementation, the task team will follow
up and agree on action plan with the government. The covenant is likely to be completed by the
GoC within the extended period of the Project implementation.
(b)    Compensation of people affected by the proposed Kousseri by-pass road construction
works. In light of the delays in the signing of the decree required to compensate Project Affected
People (PAP) living along the Kousseri bypass Right-of-Way (ROW), the proposed restructuring
will substantially reduce the social and environmental impact of the project through the adjustment
of the scope of the civil works to be executed. For that purpose, the current single carriage way
improvement works that were planned will remain in the current ROW, instead of upgrading the
road to a dual carriage way . No civil works will start without the prior payment of any
compensation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
During the construction phase, negative environmental and social impacts may include the
destruction of physical habitat and the logging of fruit-trees along the road. However, no new road
section will be constructed and the widening of some sections will only affect very partially the
local agricultural activity and local habitat. Air quality in works areas will be somewhat degraded
by intensive use of gas-powered machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution
will be temporary. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soils physical properties.
After pavement, the road will become a waterproof strip that can considerably modify water
streaming.
The ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs were prepared and disclosed in each country per the requirements of
the policy. Proper environmental measures can avoid most of the negative environmental impacts
resulting from the physical works and these measures will be included in all the procurement
documents. For instance, strict water sanitation and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid
important changes in rainfall runoff causing erosion. A specific budget has also been allotted for
the environmental mitigation measures to be undertaken in the three countries. A RAP was
prepared in each country to address some small trader housing displacement issues. In particular, a
RAP was prepared to mitigate the negative impact of resettlements to proceed with the Kousseri
by-pass works at the border with Chad. That RAP would need to be updated with regards to the
adjustment of the scope of works. As indicated above, an additional ESIA/EMP, and Abbreviated
RAP have been prepared for works financed under the second and third Additional Financing.
A major environmental benefit of the pavement of roads in this region lies in reduction of dust
generation, particularly important on dirt roads during the dry season.
Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and accident risks
due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS propagation. High attention will be paid to road safety
improvement. A dedicated part of the financing from the development partner community has
been allotted to sensitize the local population to fight against HIV and promote road safety and
environmental conservation. The second and third additional financing include specific resources
to improve the road safety condition along the targeted corridors. These actions will be closely
Page 7 of 12


﻿coordinated with other initiatives aiming at improving road safety, in particular with other
activities implemented by the EU and a new launched initiative between the World Bank and
TOTAL Corporation in Africa.
O
Other possible long term adverse impacts identified by the ESIA in Cameroon and CAR include
the potential increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal logging and the
bush meat trade. Through this project, the relevant ministry in both Cameroon and CAR has
received assistance to acquire equipment (motorcycles and/or a vehicle) to ensure a better control
of such illegal activities. The various Governments have also indicated their willingness to send
more field staff in the project region. Furthermore, during the civil works phase, the team will
ensure that sensitive areas and natural habitats like national park or protected areas will not be
encroached by the project activities.
As the ESIA does not identify any sensitive cultural/archeological sites around the project area, all
mitigation measures will be taken in case of a fortuitous finding of any archeological remains or
high value cultural site.
The project team will also ensure that contractors are compliant with the applicable International
Labor Organization recommendations, especially regarding child labor.
On the Cameroon Railway component, the wooden creosote sleepers' disposal was identified as an
emerging environmental issue on which several options will need to be explored. So far Camrail
has not yet moved on safe storage but plans to identify them soon in the works areas. Regulation is
now preventing any use of Creosote, so Camrail has taken the option to use another product which
is allowed. As the disposal of wooden creosote products is not only specific to railways in
Cameroon, the extension of the closing date of the project will give the opportunity to open a
dialogue with the authorities and other stakeholders on the best way to handle this concern.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Under the proposed restructuring, and for the specific case of the Kousseri by-pass, the scope of
the civil works to be executed is adjusted to substantially reduce the social and environmental
impact of the project. As for road investments, the operation consists mainly in a rehabilitation of
O
existing roads so no alternative plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical
option has then been chosen with respect to the project's available resources. The project will
*           ensure that all mitigation measures are taken to reduce or avoid environmental and socials
impacts/risks.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In each of the three countries, national institutions have been identified and strengthened to
ensure the proper implementation of the safeguards instruments that have been prepared for the
purpose for the original project and its three additional financing:
-In Cameroon, the Ministry in charge of Environment is responsible for the approval of the ESIA,
the ESMP, the RAP and the ARAP. Since the beginning of the 1990s, the government of
Cameroon has significantly improved the legal framework for environmental management. Law
no. 96/12 of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for environmental matters. The decree no.
2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides guidance for the EIA. The creation of the Ministry
of Environment and Nature Protection in 2004 has reinforced the institutional capacity of the
government to monitor environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial commission exists through the
Page 8 of 12


﻿96 Environment Law and plays its role in term of approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of Public
Works has a special unit for environmental and social issues - the Division de la Protection du
Patrimoine et de l'Environnement (DPPER). This Unit presents all competencies able to ensure the
implementation of the process with the monitoring of the Ministry of Environment and Nature
O
Protection and its creation was set up through IDA funding under the Transport Sector Project.
This unit closely coordinates with the Ministry of Fauna and Forest (MINFOF) regarding the
control of bush meat trade and other environmental mitigation activities (tree planting in
particular). The members of this Unit receive training financed by the project in the area of Bank
social safeguards to allow them to properly monitor the implementation of the ESIAs and RAPs.
The project also provides capacity-building targeting the Ministry of Environment and Nature
Protection, and the Ministry of Forests and Wildlife. So far, the country has performed a good
follow up of environmental and social dimensions in the project, fact that is very encouraging.
Nevertheless, this performance has to be further continued and strengthened through the present
additional financing.
- In CAR, implementation is supported by the Unit6 Environnementale et Sociale (UES) within
MED, in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment (MEFCPE). A specific attention is
brought to the issue of timber trade. For instance, the project supports the internet publication of
the timber trade data being provided by MEFCPE. The UES has been also actively engaged in
preparing and supervising the implementation of a detailed action plan to address some social and
environmental issues detected in the execution of the Fambele - Baboua works.
- In Chad, the project is building capacity in the Ministry of Infrastructure, in coordination with
the Ministry of Environment and Water.
Consequently, the project has provided targeted technical assistance and institutional strengthening
to the identified social and environmental institution in the three countries.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders have been identified in the ESIA and RAP. These also include representatives
from the following entities, State at different levels, private sector, NGOs, local communities,
elected authorities and development partners. The Consultation Mechanisms were as follows:
0
All safeguards instruments were carried out on the basis of a participative approach. Individual
interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the execution of the
study and will be planned during the approval process. The project contents, in terms of economic,
social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as mitigation impacts and compensations measures
were developed and discussed with diverse stakeholders.
In Cameroon, a consultation was organized during the preparation of Magada-Maroua road section
and Tilde bridge design and the associated ESIA and ARAP. Regarding the Tilde Bridge, a
consultation was organized with community leaders from the Tilde village. Translation in local
language (Kotoko) was ensured. During the consultation, local stakeholders raised the issue that
many owners did not have official land titles and that some affected people may be renting the
land. Measures in line with the World Bank policy on involuntary resettlements (OP 4.12) were
included in the ARAP to address these issues. Regarding the ESIA, a consultation of local
stakeholders was performed by the Social and Environmental Unit of the Ministry of Public
Works during the period February 7-14, 2011. Consultations highlighted the benefits that the
proposed rehabilitation of the Magada - Maroua road would bring to the local populations and the
Page 9 of 12


﻿strong support for the project expressed by the local authorities.
In CAR, a consultation was organized during the preparation of the safeguards documents for the
proposed Bouar and Baoro road rehabilitation works with community leaders from the project
O
area.
The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues on a regular basis
during project implementation. Supervision missions will be the opportunity to assess the whole
process. The HIMO activities under implementation are also environmentally and socially
reinforced. During the project extension period, the UES staff will continue to be trained and
enforced in the Environmental and social safeguards monitoring.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               ///
Date of submission to InfoShop                            ///
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                    04-May-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               //
Date of submission to InfoShop                            //
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                    16-May-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Page 10 of 12


﻿If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes     No        NA    X
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[       NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[     NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
o          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 26-Jan-2016
Page 11 of 12


﻿Practice Manager/     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)        Date: 26-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


