                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA16561
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P154283
                            Project Name:      Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks (P154283)
                            Task Team          Mohua Mukherjee
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Apr-2016                         Estimated   25-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE06                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (70%), Other Renewable Energy
                                              (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Other public sector
                                              governance (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     400.00           Total Bank Financing:                   150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        150.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                         50.00
                              Total                                                                                        400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is “to increase solar generation capacity through the
                           establishment of utility-scale solar parks in the country.” This will contribute to the achievement of


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         GoI’s target of installing 100GW solar power by 2022.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         GoI is specifically targeting 20GW of solar power from such solar parks and has allocated solar
                         parks in different states to ADB and the World Bank, respectively. During the identification phase,
                         consultations about the Bank financing going to solar parks were carried out with various
                         stakeholders like MNRE, SECI and relevant state agencies. It was requested that the World Bank
                         should fund internal infrastructure in the selected solar parks along with building capacity of the
                         involved stakeholders (SECI and JVs).

                         Principally, the proposed project will have the following two components:

                         (a) Solar Park Infrastructure (Estimated Cost - US$ 195 million). This will cover financing for shared
                         infrastructure such as security, access roads, water supply and drainage, telecommunications, and
                         pooling stations (with 220/66/33 kV or as may be suitable switchyard and respective transformers)
                         inside the solar parks and transmission lines connecting these internal pooling stations to 400/220 kV
                         sub-station (to be located by POWERGRID or STU at the periphery of the solar park for evacuation
                         of power to either National Grid or the state grid). Solar project developers will be responsible for the
                         interconnection of each plot in the solar park with pooling stations through suitable voltage
                         underground or overhead cable.

                         The first set of Solar Parks, to be financed under this proposed project, has been identified at
                         Pavagada (Tumkur District) in Karnataka (the land is adequate to support total solar generation
                         capacity of 2000 MW) and Rewa Solar Park in Madhya Pradesh (the land to support total solar
                         generation of 750MW has been identified). Additional parks may also be identified in these states
                         during the course of project preparation. Further, the solar parks are also being identified in other
                         states, especially Andhra Pradesh (AP) and Telangana, under MNRE solar park scheme that will be
                         supported appropriately for park development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) Technical Assistance (Estimated Cost - US$ 5 million). The technical assistance will be towards
                         the following activities:

                         (i)      Institutional Strengthening of SECI and JVs: SECI was formed in 2011 as the main agent for
                         the management and implementation of the JNNSM Phase II. As part of this mandate, SECI is to
                         invest in JV Companies for solar power plants and solar site developments. But given the challenge
                         of the massive solar deployment in India by 2022, SECI’s organization and institutional practices
                         need to be strengthened. Similarly, SNAs and JVs, which have just been formed, are also not fully
                         equipped to take on the challenges of meeting their mandate in solar energy. The Technical
                         Assistance component will aim to enhance core competencies of these organizations across functions
                         such as human resource, project management and monitoring, procurement and contract
                         management, operations and maintenance, financial management and implementation of enterprise
                         wide IT based on the comprehensive business plan/capacity building and institutional strengthening
                         plans to be carried out during the preparation of the project.

                         (ii)     Project implementation support to SECI and JVs: This component will provide project
                         management support in implementation of the investment components indicated above. This will
                         entail setting up of project management unit (PMU) within MNRE or SECI to facilitate coordination
                         between different agencies and to supplement project implementation wherever necessary. For
                         instance, in Karnataka where a JV between Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         (KREDL) and SECI has been formed to oversee the development of solar parks in the state, is keen
                         on getting exposure to the latest tools and technologies in the area of solar power development and
                         using the association with the Bank to improve its technical and organizational capacity as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adopting the highest standards of safeguards and fiduciary compliance and management. The specific
                         interventions will be designed and agreed with respective implementing agencies during project
                         preparation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The candidate states for the Solar Parks currently eligible for Bank support are Andhra Pradesh,
                         Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and Telangana. The potential sites are located in sloping areas, and are
                         uninhabited. During the project preparation, MNRE may add more states to the given list.

                         The first set of Solar Parks, to be financed under this proposed project, has been identified at
                         Pavagada (Tumkur District) in the state of Karnataka (2000 MW) and Rewa Solar Park in the state of
                         Madhya Pradesh (750MW). Additional parks may also be identified in these states during the course
                         of project preparation. Additional salient features of sites with key environmental and social aspects
                         will be added as the locations are finally firmed up.

                         The environmental and social impacts will not only be confined to the solar parks area, but also for
                         the transmission line that will evacuate the power to the National Grid as an associate facility. Some
                         of these transmission line will be integral to the project and handled through separate project
                         supported by the Bank but not all. While government plans to utilize state-owned unproductive land
                         for solar parks to the extent possible, resettlement of communities settled on government land may be
                         required in one or more of the four states that have been assigned to the World Bank for support to
                         solar park development. A detailed safeguards baseline/assessment study will be carried out to assess
                         the magnitude of such aspects and mitigation plan will be charted out accordingly. In some cases,
                         leasing of privately owned land is expected for solar parks and the transmission infrastructure. In
                         Karnataka, the joint venture between SECI and State Nodal Agency of Karnataka (Karnataka
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Renewable Energy Development Limited, KREDL) plans to lease the land required for solar parks
                         for 25 years from private landowners in Pavagada Taluk in Tumkur District of the state of Karnataka.
                         For the Rewa solar park, RUMS plans to acquire land once all land parcels are identified and firmed
                         up. Appropriate assessment studies will be carried out for all states and sites that will be included in
                         the project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (GEN06)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSU06)
                         Pyush Dogra (GEN06)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The installation of the shared infrastructure is expected to
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      have some impacts on the environment. Hence, an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                     (ESMF) has been prepared to ensure that the requirements
                                                                     of the policy are met.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            While none of the current candidate locations are known
                          4.04                                       Natural Habitats, the ESMF will have the necessary


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                                      guidance for subsequently identified sub-projects to
                                                                      comply with the policy, if and when required.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes           No large scale deforestation is currently expected, but the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      policy requirements are built into the guidance in the
                                                                      ESMF in case future sites are identified involving such
                                                                      activities.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           Yes           This policy is triggered as there is a possibility that
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      cultural properties could be affected by project activities.
                                                                      In addition, the construction of the park facilities could
                                                                      also involve chance-finds. The ESMF addresses these
                                                                      issues and has guidance for procedure to be adopted for
                                                                      such situations.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           Baseline studies shows presence of indigenous
                            BP 4.10                                   community in both the candidate park areas. Hence OP
                                                                      4.10 on indigenous peoples has been triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              According to the baseline analysis, there will be need for
                            OP/BP 4.12                                private land acquisition in Rewa, which will result in loss
                                                                      of livelihoods / sources of livelihood. There may not be
                                                                      any involuntary resettlement as only agricultural land is
                                                                      being acquired. Even in Pavagada where land will be
                                                                      taken on 30 years of lease on consent basis, will have
                                                                      impact on landless farmers working on the land parcels
                                                                      that will be taken on lease.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed solar park in Pavagada is spread over 12,171 acres. The baseline study shows 1422
                              landowners will be impacted by the project of which nearly 50 percent are small and marginal
                              farmers. Land owners in the vicinity of the proposed site have also expressed their interest in
                              giving land on lease for solar power plant.     Instead of acquiring private land, KREDL has
                              proposed to take the entire land on a voluntary lease basis for a 30 year period. Project
                              information has been disseminated in the project area. The farmers will receive INR 21,000 per
                              acre per year with a 5 percent raise every alternate year. The lease amount and subsequent raise
                              has been disseminated in public meetings as well as through local newspapers. Though land will
                              be leased out on voluntary basis, some landless labourers dependent on these land parcels will be


                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                          adversely impacted.

                          The proposed Rewa solar park in Madhya Pradesh is spread over 1500 ha in 5 villages of Gurh
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Tehsil in Rewa District. Of this, 1255 ha is government owned and is already in possession of
                          RUMSL. The remaining 245 ha of land is privately owned. The social baseline for the proposed
                          Rewa park area has been completed in April 2015. The project is likely to have impacts on the
                          livelihood for private owners who are losing their land. During the baseline study, discussion with
                          stakeholders clearly established that land proposed for acquisition has very limited agriculture
                          potential in the absence of any irrigation facility. Majority of the land parcels are not even used
                          for cultivation as they are very small and thus economically non-viable. The marginal land parcels
                          along the drainage network have topsoil and water retention, and are used for limited cultivation.

                          On the environmental issues, important issues include land use change and impact of the project
                          activities on areas outside the site boundaries – due to removal of vegetation and trees,
                          channelization and leveling/grading of land for installation of plant and its ancillary infrastructure,
                          potential hindrance to movement of fauna across the site, impacts on health safety of the workers
                          during installation of the plant infrastructure, safety of nearby community during the period of
                          construction. During the post-commissioning or operation phase, potential impacts will arise when
                          waste material is generated from the plants – either solar panels that cannot be used in the plant, or
                          chemicals like transformer oil need to be handled and disposed safely.
                          Handling of solar panels, especially those that cannot be used either due to damage or end-of-life,
                          is a potential long term issue. Currently, regulation covering this area is evolving and final form
                          will determine the extent of additional effort needed to comply with these.

                           Land-use change is a long-term issue associated with the project activities. There are few other
                           significant impacts of the project activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           None.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for safeguard
                           management in the project requires analyzing various alternatives for each sub-project while
                           carrying out respective Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA). As per the agreed policies
                           of ESMF, these ESAs will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approving the sub-
                           projects for implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Considering the significance of project interventions, the borrower through independent
                           consultants has prepared an Environmental and Social Profile of candidate sites which formed the
                           basis for the preparation of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the
                           project. The ESMF details out the policies, procedures and institutional responsibilities for
                           assessing and managing the potential environmental and social risks and impacts that may come
                           up throughout the project cycle of various sub-projects, and is intended for use and application by
                           the agencies responsible for the execution of the investment sub-projects to be implemented under
                           this facility.



                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                           The ESMF provides detailed guidance, and sample terms of reference and reporting structures, for
                           compliance. Each subproject will screened to identify further risk mitigation measures, including
                           the preparation of a detailed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Social Impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Assessment and/or Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) as applicable. The ESMF will be applied to
                           all investments under this facility. ESMF further includes the following: (1) a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF); (2) an Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF); (3) a Gender Development
                           Framework (GDF); (4) an integrated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (5) Specific
                           procedures on public consultation and disclosure; (6) Environmental and Social Monitoring
                           Arrangements covering selection, appraisal and implementation of sub-projects; and (7) a plan to
                           augment institutional capacity of the implementing agencies to manage environmental and social
                           issues in the project. A negative list describing activities / types of locations that will not be
                           supported has been included to avoid significant impacts on sensitive environmental receptors like
                           recognized protected areas for wildlife.
                           The project will be implemented by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) through
                           Joint Venture companies to be set up specifically for implementation in each of the sub project.
                           The mandate and primary function of these agencies will be to generate and transmit solar power
                           through a mix of regulatory, institutional and financial tools. These agencies do not employ
                           environmental and social professionals. There is skill gap and lack of capacity for addressing
                           environmental and social safeguard issues and will depend on the relevant state departments to fill
                           up the gap.

                           The ESMF has identified areas and opportunities for augmenting the capacity to manage the social
                           and environmental issues. Staffing plan include E&S specialist for environmental management
                           and social development at both JV level as well as with the developer. These staffing, training and
                           continuing skill development programs, other resources that will be required for effective
                           management of the environmental and social issues, and the required budget had been
                           recommended and described in the ESMF. All investment specific ESIA, EMP and RAP/IPP will
                           be reviewed and cleared by the Bank before bids are invited.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF and its specific instruments provide guidelines and procedures for further consultations
                           during implementation, in particular in defining and designing subprojects and specific works. The
                           consultation frameworks provide systematic guidance to address potential risks and to enhance
                           quality, targeting, and benefits to the communities. Dialogue and disclosure actions during the
                           assessment and execution process of a subproject are designed to ensure that those stakeholders,
                           irrespective of whether they benefit from or are adversely affected by the project interventions, are
                           well informed and are able participate in the decision-making process. The ESMF procedures
                           consider the level of environmental and social risk of each sub project in allocating time and
                           resources to be dedicated for stakeholder consultation.

                           Local level consultations were carried out in both the candidate sites focusing on specific issues
                           related to the potential subprojects and environmental and social issues associated with such
                           subprojects. Over 150 participants from potential project cities participated in these consultations
                           and provided inputs to the preparation of ESMF. The ESMF and a summary of ESMF will be
                           translated in local language and disclosed on the websites of the MNRE and state governments (JV
                           Companies). The ESMF will also be disclosed in the Bank’s Info shop.
                           Consultation being a continuous process, the ESMF’s disclosure on the websites of new JVs will
                           continue during project implementation. The EMPs, RAPs and IPPs for individual sub projects


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           will also be disclosed as per the principles and procedures of described in the ESMF. The draft
                           EMPs and RAPs will be disclosed, followed by discussion with the affected community (including
                           any individual adversely impacted by such intervention); and final EMP and RAP will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and disclosed only after incorporating reasonable and relevant suggestions from the communities
                           in the design of the investments. The copies of the EMPs and RAPs will be placed at the offices of
                           developers, district magistrate and contractors’ offices, enabling easy access of any community or
                           individual. The executive summary of EIAs and RAPs for all particular investments will be
                           translated in local language and will be placed in the office of local self-government body (village
                           panchayat) of the village(s) where the sub project is located. The list of affected persons, if any,
                           will be pasted on the conspicuous place in all the affected towns/villages, usually at the prominent
                           roadside entry to the investment site.

                           Disclosure: National and state level in-country disclosure of the ESMF was completed on
                           February 2, 2016 (http://mnre.gov.in/file-manager/UserFiles/Draft-ESMF.pdf). The ESMF was
                           disclosed in Bank’s InfoShop on February 10, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Jan-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mohua Mukherjee
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                         Date: 31-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
