INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1059
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Serbia                     Project ID:  P152104
Project Name: Serbia Competitiveness and Jobs (P 152104)
Task Team       Thomas Edward Haven,Dusko Vasiljevic
Leader(s):
Estimated       18-May-2015                Estimated    29-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (30%), General industry and trade sector (70%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (15%), e-Services (5%), Export
development and competitiveness (30%), Technology diffusio n (20%),
Improving labor markets (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    499.00             Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  399.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Total                                                                     499.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to improve the effectiveness and coordination of selected public programs to alleviate
constraints to competitiveness and jobs, including investment and export promotion and innovation,
as well as active labor market programs, labor intermediation, and activation of social assistance
Page 1 of 6


﻿beneficiaries.
3. Project Description
The Project consists of the following components:
0
Component 1: Policy planning, monitoring, and coordination. This component supports: a) the
creation of an inter-ministerial policy planning, monitoring, and coordination (PPMC) framework (in
support of competitiveness and jobs reforms), led by the Public Policy Secretariat and with
a        participation of the Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Education, Science, and Technological
Development (science and innovation secretariat), and National Employment Service (in cooperation
with the Ministry of Labor, Employment, Veteran, and Social Affairs); b) the development individual
planning and monitoring frameworks at the ministry level (to feed into the inter-ministerial PPMC
system), and c) the piloting of the PPMC system.
Component 2. Investment and export promotion. This component supports a reform agenda led by
the Ministry of Economy to restructure and improve the functioning of its investment and export
promotion programs. This includes: a) the development and adoption of a strategic framework and
action plan for investment and export promotion, including identification of target sectors, MoE
development agency reform/ restructuring, and new or improved services, and b) the implementation,
monitoring, and updating of the action plan.
Component 3: Innovation. The component will: a) support enterprise innovation; b) facilitate
technology transfer and commercialization activities; and c) design public research sector reforms.
Component 4: Labor. The component will: a) enhance the capacity of the National Employment
Service; b) improve the effectiveness of active labor market policies; and c) increase social assistance
beneficiaries' incentives to work.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
The project will be implemented in the Republic of Serbia. Under Component 3, support will be
provided to the Serbia Innovation Fund (established in 2011) with headquarters in Belgrade, and to
innovative enterprises that may be based in various locations across Serbia.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Naima A Hasci (GSURR)
Nina Rinnerberger (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Project triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Assessment and is assigned environmental Category B.
The Project will not have significant and/or irreversible
adverse environmental impacts. Overall, the main
environmental concerns relate to Component 2, which
supports enterprise innovation in different sectors
throughout the country. An Environmental and Social
Assessment Framework was prepared, which specifies the
procedures that the Project will have in place during
Page 2 of 6


﻿implementation, with the objective that all investments
and reforms, supported under the Project will be
environmentally and socially sound and sustainable, and
consistent with WB Safeguard policies and Serbian
national legislation. The ESMF describes the kind of
exclusion activities that will not be financed under the
Project and its Eligible Expenditure Programs.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP  No        The project will not affect natural habitats because all
4.04                                financing will be done in the existing localities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will not affect forests because all financing
will be done in the existing localities.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not finance experiments or production of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No          The project does not affect physical cultural resources
Resources OP/BP 4.11                because all financing will be done in the existing
localities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no indigenous people in the affected project
BP 4.10                             area.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The components and sub-components of the project will
OP/BP 4.12                          not support reforms and/or grant and research financing
that might result in involuntary resettlement or require
land acquisition. The project does not anticipate any
direct, indirect or induced negative social impacts;
therefore the policy is not triggered. However, the
expected social and institutional impacts, particularly for
Component 4, were considered during the project
preparation process and guidelines reflected in the ESMF.
)         Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No       While the project will be implemented nationally in the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                Republic of Serbia on territories that include basins of
rivers which can be qualified as international waterways,
the project type does not "involve the use or potential
pollution of international waterways" as per OP 7.50. No
water use/absorption or pollution of waters will be
generated by the project activities, which would trigger
this policy.
Projects in Disputed    No          N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Direct, physical environmental impacts could arise under Component 3 of the proposed Project,
Page 3 of 6


﻿which provides support for startups and enterprises in different sectors across Serbian regions and
scale-up of operations of the Technology Transfer Facility focusing on technology transfer
outcomes. The main environmental concern deals with the Mini & Matching Grant Programs,
housed within and administered by the existing Innovation Fund (IF), which will support the
O
development of new or significantly improved technologies, products and processes. The Mini &
Matching Grants Program is open to applications in any field of science and technology in all
industrial sectors. However, in the past, the majority of awarded grants has been in the innovation
fields related to services, software and materials.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Possible indirect environmental and social impacts may result from Technical Assistance provided
under the Project, particularly as part of Components 1 and 2, which will support policy planning
and monitoring, better coordination of government programs, and potential reforms to select
Ministry of Economy programs. No environmental impacts are expected as a result of Component
4 on Labor, which will provide capacity support of the National Employment Services and
improve the cost effectiveness of labor market policies. Moreover, the project has been informed
by the findings of the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis conducted for the State-Owned
Enterprises Reform Development Policy Loan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared the Environmental and Social Management Framework, which outlines
the procedures to ensure: (1) compliance with the World Bank Group (IFC) exclusion list, (2) that
no sub-projects with significant impacts of a Category A type are supported, (3) that sub-projects/
grants will not necessitate involuntary land acquisition or any form of resettlement, (4) no World
Bank Safeguard policies other than OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment are triggered, and
(5) Technical Assistance processes and outputs are consistent with WB Safeguard policies. Any
activities corresponding to the World Bank category B Projects will be required to have an
Environmental Management Plan in place prior to approval that would identify potential
environmental impacts and provide adequate mitigation measures.
While the Public Policy Secretariat, which will coordinate the implementation of the Project, does
not have experience with Bank-financed projects, the Innovation Fund has received capacity
building in planning and implementing environmental and social safeguard measures under the
ongoing World Bank Innovation Serbia Project. To support implementation of the Safeguard
measures and ensure environmental and social compliance, an Independent Environmental and
Social expert will be engaged throughout the Project as described in the ESMF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders are the ministries, the Public Policy Secretariat, the Serbia Innovation
Fund, enterprises, Research and Development Institutes and other innovation actors.
The ESMF was disclosed in public (both in hard copy and on-line) on April 3, 2015 (http://www.
rsjp.gov.rs/). The public consultation meeting was announced in the local media along with
targeted invitations sent to relevant stakeholders. The public consultation meeting was held on
April 21, 2015. The final ESMF will be re-disclosed in public, including as a hard copy at the
Page 4 of 6


﻿reception area of the Bank Country Office in Belgrade and on-line through the World Bank
InfoShop prior to Appraisal. The availability of the ESMF was publicly announced at the Public
Policy Secretariat website.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Serbia                                                  03-Apr-2015
Comments: The draft EMSF was disclosed in public on April 3, 2015 and is available in English
and Serbian on the Public Policy Secretariat (PPS) website (http://www.rsjp.gov.rs/
okvirni-plan-za-upravljanje-zivotnom-sredinom-i-socijalnim-pitanjima/t). Hard
copies of the document have been placed at the PPS reception area and the World
Bank Country Office in Belgrade. The local consultation meeting was held on April
21, 2015. The meeting was announced in the local newspaper Politika (on April 6,
2015) and target invitations were sent to key stakeholders. The final ESMF will be
re-disclosed prior to Appraisal.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ]No [ X]  NA[]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Thomas Edward Haven,Dusko Vasiljevic
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)            Date: 30-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


