INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12552
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Georgia                    Project ID:   P149953
Project Name:    Secondary Road Asset Management Project (P149953)
Task Team        Natalya Stankevich
Leader(s):
Estimated        21-Sep-2015                Estimated      10-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Transportation (10%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (90%)
Theme(s):        Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (10%), Managing
for development results (10%), Regulation and competition p olicy (10%), Trade
facilitation and market access (35%), Rural services and infrastructure (35%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      57.50             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          7.50
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            50.00
Total                                                            57.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
(i) to improve access to markets and services through the rehabilitation and sustainable maintenance
of project secondary roads, and (ii) to progress towards maintenance sustainability of the secondary
road network by using a sound road asset management system in planning and budgeting processes.


﻿The project area is defined as Guria and two more (TBD) regions, which are the poorest in the
country.
C. Project Description
The proposed Secondary Road Asset Management Project (SRAMP) is being designed as a results-
based operation following the World Bank Guidelines. Under this approach, disbursement will be
tied to the achievement of a set of disbursement-linked indicators (DLI) pertaining to components 1
and 2. These indicators will be scalable whenever possible to allow for the flexibility in disbursement
a      to match implementation progress of the agreed annual plans whether faster or slower.
Three potential components have been identified for support under the proposed project:
Component 1: Road Asset Improvement and Preservation (Estimated Cost US$35.7 million; IBRD
share: US$28.56 million). The objective of this component is to support the rehabilitation,
improvement and maintenance of secondary road assets through innovative contracting methods:
output- and performance-based rehabilitation (OPRC) and design-build (DB) contracts. This will be
a DLI-based component, and financing will be linked to the accomplishment of the agreed DLIs. The
following sub-components will be supported:
Sub-component 1.1: Preservation of Secondary Roads Assets (Estimated Cost US$ 17.5 million;
IBRD share: US$14.0 million). This sub-component will support the scaling up of OPRC to Guria
region. It will finance a single OPRC which will be a five-year contract with sufficient length of
roads under rehabilitation in order to keep the private sector attracted. The contract is expected cover
the rehabilitation (about 50-70 km) of several road sections and routine maintenance (about 200-220
km) of the same rehabilitated road sections and other road sections rehabilitated in the recent years.
The OPRC will require the contractor to improve the rehabilitated road sections to the required levels
of service, and provide routine maintenance to the same rehabilitated sections and other previously
rehabilitated sections to meet the pre-defmed levels of service for the duration of the contract.
Payment will be based on achieving and maintaining specified levels of service and not on the
completion of physical works.
Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation of Secondary Roads Assets. (Estimated Cost US$ 16.5 million;
IBRD share: US$13.2 million). This sub-component will complement efforts of the Roads
Department (RD) in further building the capacity of the local industry in performance-based
contracting and preparing them for OPRC and other contracts with increased range of risks. This sub-
component will finance the rehabilitation of about 50 km of secondary roads through DB contracts in
other regions where DB or OPRC contracts have not been implemented. DB contracts will be of an
18-month duration. They will be packaged in a way to continue stimulating the growth of the local
construction industry, strengthening its capacity in the management of performance-based contracts
and further promote competition with international contractors. Improvement and rehabilitation
works will be executed within the roads' existing horizontal alignment, with bridge and culvert
repairs where appropriate. Candidate road sections for this type of contracts are yet to be identified in
the Five-year Plan.
Sub-component 1.3: Supervision and Monitoring Services of Civil Works (Estimated Cost US$1.7
million: IBRD share: US$ US$1.36 million). This sub-component will finance the monitoring and
supervision services of OPRC and DB contracts. The primary role of the Monitoring Consultant will
be to ensure that the pre-defined levels of service are complied with in both OPRC and DB contracts.
The Consultant will also provide initial road safety audits of the designs and ensure that road safety


﻿engineering countermeasures are incorporated in the design of capital works.
Component 2: Secondary Roads Asset Planning and Management (Estimated Cost US$1.4 million,
including US$1.12 million). The objective of this component is to support institutional reforms
aimed at enhancing RD's capacity in planning, budgeting, management, and monitoring for
secondary roads network on a country level, not project level.
Sub-component 2.1: Planning and Budgeting for Secondary Roads Network (Estimated Cost US$0.6
million; IBRD share: US$0.48 million). The implementation of this sub-component will build on the
ongoing activity targeting the development of Road Asset Management System (RAMS) under the
Bank-supported Second Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP-II). This sub-component will
enhance RD's capacity to collect and analyze road data, carry out road condition and traffic surveys
and incorporate road accidents statistics (from the Ministry of Internal Affairs' Road accidents
database) to collect input data for RAMS and inform RD's planning and budgeting processes. It will
also support training of RD staff in the maintenance and management of the new RAMS and its use
to prepare 5-year rolling and annual plans for investment and maintenance of secondary roads
network. It will be a DLI-based sub-component, and financing will be linked to the accomplishment
of the agreed DLIs.
Sub-component 2.2: Integrated Implementation of RD's new Road Safety Action Plan (Estimated
Cost US$0.5 million; IBRD share: US$0.4 million). This sub-component will focus on supporting
RD's its Road Safety Unit in implementing some activities from RD's new Road Safety Action Plan
for 2016-2021, which is being developed under the ongoing Fourth East-West Highway (EWHIP-4).
Priority will be given to (i) linking the road accidents database to RAMS to inform the planning
process, (ii) development and introduction of trainings in certified road safety audits and inspections
for the local consulting and construction industry to ensure the continuous application of road safety
audits at the design stage, (iii) road safety awareness and education campaign in Guria region, and
(iv) other road safety activities from the Action Plan that may require inter-agency coordination.
Sub-component 2.3: Monitoring of the Five-Year Plan (Estimated Cost US$0.3 million; IBRD share:
US$0.24 million). This sub-component will aim to improve the capacity of RD in performance
management and reporting to its stakeholders and road users on its progress in achieving target
results of its Five-year Plan for the Investment and Maintenance of the Secondary Roads Network.
o      The technical assistance to be implemented under this sub-component will help RD develop the
methodology and indicators to monitor and assess its progress towards the accomplishment of its
Five-Year Plan, and advise RD on how to improve its quality of service, efficiency, productivity and
cost effectiveness in the delivery of this 5-year Plan. In addition, it will also support consultant
services to provide independent integrated performance audit and verification of results (including
DLIs) under this Plan. Integrated performance audit will verify the delivery of results (DLIs) and
mainstreamed application of RAMS in planning, budgeting, road safety planning, and monitoring of
the Five-Year Plan. It will also finance carrying out of road user satisfaction survey (baseline and
follow-up studies) on all project roads under DB and OPRC contracts.
Component 3: Project Implementation and Monitoring Support (Estimated Cost US$0.4 million;
IBRD share: US$0.32 million). This component will provide for the institutional support to the RD,
Foreign Project Unit (FPU) and Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Centre (TRRC) for hiring
consultants and a project manager for project implementation. FPU's Monitoring and Evaluation
sub-unit will monitor the indicators pertaining to grievance registered under the project and actually


﻿addressed, share of male drivers benefiting from the project road safety activities, and other project
indicators.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will contribute to the implementation of the Government's Five-year rolling Plan for
Investment and Maintenance of the Secondary Roads Network (2016-2021) and enhancement of the
country's systems in secondary roads assets planning, budgeting, contracting and monitoring on a
program level. The Five-year Plan is estimated to cover about 970 km of secondary roads, and is to
be financed primarily from the State budget of Georgia with a minor (10 percent) contribution from
the Bank's loan in the amount of US$30 million over a five-year period. The project will finance the
rehabilitation and maintenance of the selected roads within the existing horizontal alignment.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Environment and Resettlement Division was created in RD through merging of the Environment
Unit and the Resettlement Unit - each reporting to different Divisions - in April 2013. This
institutional reform demonstrated the Government's recognition of the importance of safeguards
issues in the roads infrastructure projects management and implementation.
The current Deputy Head of the Division has been involved in the management and implementation
of social safeguards issues since 2007 and has very good knowledge and understanding of the Bank
policies. He was responsible for the resettlement and land acquisition policies management,
implementation of the relevant processes on the ground. However this Deputy Head has recently
become unable to work at full scale due to personal reasons. The responsibilities and work program
of the Deputy Head of the Resettlement Unit got equally distributed between the staff of RD's
Resettlement Unit. Preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) under the Bank-funded projects
is usually contracted out by RD to private firms. Local consultants are being hired to implement
RAPs while RD's staff remains in charge of monitoring their implementation.
The environmental safeguards are managed by an Environmental Protection Unit of RD's
Resettlement and Environment Division. This Unit comprises of a chief and three staff members.
Some staff received professional on-the-job training as part of the World Bank's technical assistance
to RD and some have participated in the Bank-provided safeguards training for Borrowers.
Safeguards performance under one completed and two ongoing SLRPs supported by the Bank has
been mostly satisfactory, periodically slipping to moderately satisfactory. The first project of SLPR
series did not trigger OP/BP 4.12 but resettlement did occur at one of its sites that went without
documenting. This glitch was spotted by the Bank team of the Borrower addressed the issue fully
complying with the provided recommendations. Consequent SLRPs did trigger OP/BP 4.12, had
PRFs in place and were/are implemented in compliance with the policy. Implementation of SLRPs
has not caused tangible damage to the natural environment, however deficiencies in environmental
performance did not go unnoticed and were pretty common: insufficient demarcation of work sites
and placement of traffic warning signs, and faults in on-site and final disposal of construction waste.
To the much extent these shortfalls may be attributed to the mediocre performance of the consultant
serving RD for environmental supervision of SLRPs over years. Lesson learned from the
implementation of numerous by RD is that maintaining critical in-house capacity for safeguards
management within the Department is indispensable. While external consultants will continue
providing project supervision services, including environmental and social monitoring, the
Environmental and Resettlement Division of RD must retain qualified and capable staff for ensuring


﻿quality control over consultants' work and for providing adequate follow-up on the information
incoming from consultants. As long as technical assistance for capacity enhancement of RD is an
important element of SRAMP, it was agreed to channel part of the available TA resources for
providing on-the-job training and coaching for RD's environmental and social staff. Such training
O
U       should be focused on the development of practical skills and extensively use the modality of leaning
by doing.
O
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
a      Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Jorge E. Villegas (GSURR)
Nino Metreveli (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is not expected to have significant impact
OP/BP 4.01                              on the environment. All planned physical works are
limited to rehabilitation and maintenance of the
existing alignments. Overall long term social and
environmental impacts will be positive, while
negative impacts will be of minor scope and
duration, and typical for any secondary road
rehabilitation and maintenance activities. The project
is therefore classified as environmental Category B.
An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), currently used for the ongoing
Third Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP
III), will be updated for the purposes of the proposed
Secondary Road Asset Management Project. ESMF
will provide the overview of the expected
environmental and social issues related to the project
implementation and will offer comprehensive
guidance on the site-specific environmental
management planning to be carried out by the client
using consultant services for all sections of roads to
be proposed for the project intervention on the
rolling basis. The use of an EMP Checklist for Small
Scale Road Construction or Rehabilitation is
proposed to facilitate site-specific environmental
management planning under the project, unless a
higher risk Category B subproject is identified
through environmental screening. No Category A
activities will be eligible for the project support.
ESMF will be disclosed in-country and opened for
public feedback prior to the project appraisal, while
site-specific EMPs will be subjected to the similar


﻿procedures and get finalized based on the received
public feedback prior to commencement of works in
each individual road section.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          OP/BP 4.04 is triggered as a precautionary measure,
because the specific road sections to be covered by
the project are not known upfront. Guidance on
environmental mitigation in case of works being
undertaken in proximity to protected areas or within
sensitive/critical habitats will be provided in the
ESMF and in site-specific EMPs once they are
developed.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Potential minor to medium scale impacts that some
individual investments may have on forests is
covered by triggering OP/BP 4.01 and 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           Pesticides are not being used for controlling road-
side vegetation anywhere in Georgia and this
practice will not be applied for the roads covered by
the project.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          The project will support rehabilitation and
OP/BP 4.11                               maintenance of existing roads and therefore will not
affect any known physical cultural resources. OP/BP
4.11 is therefore not triggered, while blueprint of
action in case of chance finds during earth works will
be provided in the ESMF and site-specific EMPs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project will not finance new road construction
BP 4.12                                  and all civil works will be performed within the
existing right-of-way. However, minor land
acquisition may take place to provide adequate
sidewalks and drainage, if required. There might as
well be the case of seasonal street traders that will
need to be addressed.
Since the roads to be rehabilitated and maintained are
not yet defined it is not possible at this stage to
define the needs for land acquisition and
resettlement.
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
developed prior to appraisal based on the existing
RPF currently in use for the purposes of SLRP III. If
relevant, the RPF will take into account any lessons
learned during the implementation of the three
previous SLRPs. Under each sub-project a feasibility
study will be undertaken, that will include social


﻿assessment and screening as part of EMP. If
screening identifies the need for a RAP it will be
prepared according to the elaborated and approved
a                                                  RPF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
RD will update the ESMF and RPF currently used for the implementation of SLRP III, re-disclose
them through RD's web page, open these documents for public feedback, and finalize in the
manner satisfactory to the Bank before appraisal of the proposed Project. Site-specific EMPs and
RAPs, as required, will be developed on a rolling basis, disclosed, discussed with the project
affected stakeholders, and finalized on a rolling basis over the course of the project
implementation. Works may not commence at any project site unless an EMP satisfactory to the
Bank is developed, and RAP, if required, is prepared and implemented by the client.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Natalya Stankevich
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                        Date: 06-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                       Date: 06-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


