                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17413
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P153541
                            Project Name:      Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Development Project (P153541)
                            Task Team          Guangming Yan,Wendao Cao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          25-Oct-2016              Estimated     09-Feb-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       150.04           Total Bank Financing:    100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   50.04
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                                     150.04
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase income opportunities of targeted beneficiaries in
                           selected poor rural communities of Shaanxi province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project comprises four components, which are summarized below.

                           Component A: Farmer Cooperative and Value Chain Development (US$91.65 million, of which
                           IBRD US$45.24 million). This component aims to support the improvement of value chains for


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         selected agricultural products with local competitive advantage, establish new farmer cooperatives or
                         strengthen existing cooperatives to become effective business entities and strengthen forward and
                         backward linkages. The specific activities supported under this component are arranged in three sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components:

                         a)        Cooperative Establishment and Development. This sub-component will support the
                         establishment and business operation of farmer cooperatives, including construction of management
                         facilities and procurement of basic office equipment. It will also support training in cooperative
                         management and business operations, financial, technical and other training related to the
                         establishment or improvement of farmers cooperatives; training and capacity building for other
                         community groups.

                         b)    Cooperative Development Fund (CDF). This sub-component would provide conditional grant
                         financing support to eligible new or existing cooperatives. Funds would be used to implement
                         cooperative investment plans in: new production systems; improved seedlings and improved
                         breeding stock; facilities for processing agricultural products; storage and marketing facilities;
                         technical and advisory services for market analysis and development; and civil works, goods and
                         services related to upgrading quality standards, labeling, certification, branding, logistics, food safety
                         and other investments at the cooperative level.

                         c)       Competitive Grant for Enterprises (CG). This sub-component, amounting to some 10% of
                         project investment would provide matching grants to finance enterprise investments individually or
                         in partnership with farmer cooperatives which demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor
                         farmers/households. Grants would focus on the investments which increase the value of agricultural
                         output, extending activities either upstream or downstream in the value chain and create income-
                         generating activities for poor farmers.

                         Component B: Economic Infrastructure and Services Support (US$37.52 million, of which IBRD US
                         $33.89 million). This component aims to improve the economic infrastructure connecting project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities to large value chains. It would provide investments for (i) improving connectivity
                         within selected villages, inter-villages, between villages and central small towns; (ii) upgrading
                         production infrastructure, including construction and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
                         infrastructure; establishment of communications and information infrastructure; provision of cold
                         storage and other post-harvest facilities, market facilities, etc.; (iii) strengthening other infrastructure
                         serving farmers➢❨ income increasing activities.

                         Component C: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building Support (US$4.17 million, of which
                         IBRD US$4.17 million). This component aims to support both technical and institutional capacity
                         building for participating farmers, village committee members, community economic groups, farmer
                         cooperatives/associations and advisors, agricultural technicians, agro-enterprises and companies, etc.
                         This will be achieved through training, extension services, study tours, skill development programs,
                         consultations and project awareness raising campaigns and dissemination of project lessons. This
                         component will include recruitment of cooperative facilitators and support for the Technical
                         Advisory Groups (TAGs) to review and improve the Cooperative investment plans. Applied research
                         and analysis will also be carried out under this component.

                         Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$4.39 million, of which
                         IBRD US$4.39 million). This component aims to strengthen and develop the administrative and
                         technical capacity of PMO staff through (i) capacity building for the provincial, county PMO and

                                                                        Page 2 of 12
                         cooperatives to strengthen project management; and (ii) development of Management Information
                         System (MIS) and an, M&E system for project activities which includes monitoring physical project
                         progress, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and project impact monitoring. (iii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supporting the establishment of institutional arrangements for the operation and maintenance of
                         infrastructure.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Feng Ji (GEN2A)
                         Songling Yao (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental             Yes            It is confirmed that OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment)
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    is triggered. The project will bring about positive impacts
                                                                   and benefits on the environment and the targeted
                                                                   communities in the project areas, and have limited
                                                                   adverse impacts. The project will cause short-term
                                                                   construction nuisance associated with the construction/
                                                                   rehabilitation/upgrading of basic infrastructure. During
                                                                   operation, livelihood improvement interventions and
                                                                   infrastructure facilities would generate waste, wastewater,
                                                                   air emission, noise etc. However, these impacts are not
                                                                   expected to be significant given that these investments are
                                                                   of small scale and scattered in eleven counties in the
                                                                   Province.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   The project is classified as a Category B project due to the
                                                                   type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the project and the
                                                                   nature and magnitude of its potential environmental
                                                                   impacts.
                                                                   (See Section II.A(1) for detail.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP    No             The project aims to increase income opportunities of
                          4.04                                     targeted beneficiaries in the selected existing poor rural
                                                                   communities. The project activities include small scale
                                                                   civil works on existing agricultural land or construction
                                                                   farmland. None of these activities would have significant
                                                                   adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse
                                                                   or unprecedented. None of the project influence areas is
                                                                   the land or water areas located in natural habitats as
                                                                   defined by the World Bank policy OP 4.04 on Natural
                                                                   Habitats. As such OP 4.04 is not triggered. Although not
                                                                   anticipated any sub-project screened that triggers OP 4.04
                                                                   on Natural Habitats is not eligible for financing under the
                                                                   project.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36        No             The project will not finance activities that would involve



                                                                    Page 3 of 12
                                                        any conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or
                                                        related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project may finance non-grain agricultural operations
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        which likely lead to the limited use of pesticide or
                                                        herbicides. This policy is triggered(See Section II.1.A for
                                                        detail).
                         Physical Cultural        No    The project will not involve significant excavations,
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           demolition, and movement of earth, flooding, or other
                                                        environmental changes; not be located in, or in the
                                                        vicinity of, a physical cultural resources sites As such,
                                                        OP4.11is not triggered. Although not anticipated any sub-
                                                        project screened that triggers OP 4.11 on Physical
                                                        Cultural Resources is not eligible for financing under the
                                                        project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The TT implemented screening on minority people via
                         BP 4.10                        desk review, site visits and check with provincial minority
                                                        authority, and did not found there is no minority village/
                                                        community present in or collectively attached to the
                                                        project areas. The prepared social assessment of the
                                                        project also concurred with the TT➢❨ s conclusion.
                                                        Therefore the policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project activities, in relatively small scale and with
                         OP/BP 4.12                     flexible locations, do not result in any demolition or
                                                        relocation of structure or facilities. However, the project
                                                        implementation do entail land use, relying mostly on land
                                                        transfer and rural land renting market, and and possibly
                                                        on limited land acquisition. Most of the land will be used
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        for agriculture related activities by villagers themselves
                                                        within their villages, which does not trigger land
                                                        acquisition. Only a limited amount of land is permanently
                                                        to be occupied by enterprises, market facilities, etc., and
                                                        needs to be acquired, about 36 mu in the first tranche of
                                                        the project. There is no land donation or land adjustment.
                                                        The resettlement impact seems minor.

                                                        On land use in rural cooperatives. Villagers are
                                                        voluntarily participating in cooperatives, existing or to be
                                                        established by the project, in various ways: inputting cash
                                                        or term operational right of land (commercially renting),
                                                        or just relying on cooperative services of skill training,
                                                        product processing or trade. The participants will get
                                                        income from rental of operational right of land, or cash
                                                        input, and could get wages if they work for cooperatives.
                                                        As specific sites of the construction activities mentioned
                                                        above and the remaining tranche activities can only be
                                                        clearly determined during projectimplementation, a



                                                         Page 4 of 12
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed.

                                                                       A land use arrangement has been developed and included
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       in the Resettlement Policy Framework to provide for the
                                                                       process and criteria for such land transactions.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The irrigation facilities supported by the project include
                            4.37                                       small water storage tanks to store groundwater and
                                                                       rainwater cisterns. The project will not finance
                                                                       construction or rehabilitation of any dams or dependent
                                                                       on any dams as defined under this policy. Thus, this
                                                                       policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No             The project is not associated with an international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment:

                             Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): The project will bring about positive impacts and benefits
                             on the environment and the targeted communities in the project areas, and have limited adverse
                             impacts. At the same time, the project will cause short-termconstruction nuisance associated with
                             the construction/rehabilitation/upgrading of basic infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of village roads
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and construction of small bridges in rural area) and livelihood intervention activities (e.g.
                             improvement of fruit gardens by installation of irrigation facilities such as irrigation pipeline,
                             boreholes, and rainwater storage tanks, provision of small scale crop storage and processing
                             facilities, livestock farms including household livestock farms and bio-gas tanks, vegetable
                             greenhouses, agricultural produce trade markets and cooperative offices etc.). The adverse impacts
                             may include disturbance to local communities and traffic, noise, dust, wastewater, soil erosion and
                             disposal of spoil etc. But these construction impacts are mostly temporary, site specific, limited
                             and local in nature, and can be readily mitigated with well-known good construction management
                             practice. During operation, livelihood improvement interventions would generate waste,
                             wastewater, air emission, noise etc.. However, these impacts are not expected to be significant
                             given that these investments are of small scale and scattered in eleven counties in the Province.

                             Pest Management (OP4.09): The project will support the diversification of crop systems and
                             increase greenhouse area by 12 hectares, and improve existing fruit gardens (approximately 389
                             hectares) which may induce pesticide use by approximately 0.25 tons/year. To mitigate the impact,
                             a Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been developed for the project. The PMP incorporates the
                             existing good pest management practices and proposes a number of activities such as: (i)
                             promoting IPM to reduce the use of toxic pesticides, e.g. improvement of pest forecasting, bait
                             lamps, crop rotation, pest resistant varieties; (ii) training and capacity building for local farmers
                             and governmental agencies; (iii) introducing and promoting biological and botanical pesticides;


                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                         (iv) strengthening monitoring; and (v) reinforcing regulatory aspects. Implementation of the PMP
                         will be undertaken by the County PMOs, and farmer cooperatives, with assistance of consultants,
                         County Plant Protection Stations and County Agricultural Technology Extension Services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Stations.

                         Social

                         The project will be implemented in 11 counties i.e. Longxian, Linyou, Changwu, Heyang, Baishui,
                         Fuping, Yichuan, Yanchang, Yanchuan, Dingbian and Mizhi under five prefecture-level
                         municipalities. The project will cover about 29 towns/townships involving an estimated total of
                         253 administrative villages, with a total population of 177,578 of which 48,665 are registered as
                         poor (2015). The main project beneficiaries are participating farmers, farmer cooperatives, agro-
                         business enterprises and village committees.

                         The project is to increase agriculture-related income opportunities of targeted rural beneficiaries,
                         in parallel to bring much social benefits for the farmers including the poor. The positive social
                         impacts relates to improving physical capital, human capital, and social capital, empowering rural
                         communities, and promoting institutional capacity and services.Nevertheless, the project,
                         especially its Component II, will probably require land acquisition, in its activities of improving
                         connectivity between villages, central small towns and regional transport networks; and of
                         upgrading production infrastructure, including construction of irrigation and drainage
                         infrastructure; establishment of communications and information infrastructure; provision of green
                         house, cold storage and other post-harvest facilities, market facilities, etc.

                         The project activities, in relatively small scale and with flexible locations, do not result in any
                         demolition or relocation of structure or facilities. However, the project implementation does entail
                         land use, relying mostly on land transfer and rural land renting market, and possibly limited land
                         acquisition. Most of the land will be used for agriculture related actions by villagers themselves
                         within their villages, which does not trigger land acquisition. Only few land is permanently to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         occupied by enterprises, market facilities, etc., and needs to be acquired, about 36 mu in the first
                         tranche of the project. The resettlement impact seems minor.

                         On land use in rural cooperatives. Villagers are voluntarily participating in cooperatives, existing
                         or to be established by the project, in various ways: inputting cash or term operational right of
                         land, or just relying on cooperative services of skill training, product processing or trade. The
                         participants will get income from rental of operational right of land, or cash input, and could get
                         wages if they work for cooperatives.

                         A land use arrangement has been developed and included in the Resettlement Policy Framework
                         to provide for the process and criteria for such land transactions

                         Linkage issue. The selection criteria of the project villages covers, among others, i) be existing
                         cluster of rural villages; ii) exclude remote villages of small population size suffering high risks of
                         natural hazards and population drain (which are targeted by the local government's resettlement
                         programs). Therefore the project has norelationship with the ongoing resettlement activities by the
                         Province.Villages or areas that are the target of ecological resettlement are not considered eligible
                         for financing under the project.

                         The TT implemented screening on minority people via desk review and site visits, and did not

                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                           found there is no minority village/community present in or collectively attached to the project
                           areas. The prepared social assessment of the project also concurred with the TT on this. Therefore
                           the policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N.A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N.A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment

                          An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared for the first batch of investments
                          in thirteen communities in accordance with Environmental Assessment Policy OP4.01. The EMP
                          identified potential environmental impacts mentioned above and proposed mitigation measures
                          including (i) Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for construction activities; and (ii)
                          mitigation measures for livelihood improvement facilities and infrastructure; and (iii) social
                          impact management plan. ECOPs will be entered into bidding documents and civil works
                          contracts. Waste/wastewater to be generated by livelihood improvement facilities (e.g. crop
                          processing workshops, livestock farms) will be collected and reused/treated/sent to designated
                          sites for proper disposal. To reduce the use of chemical fertilizer, balance fertilization will be
                          promoted, and livestock waste collected and reused as organic fertilizer. The EMP also proposes
                          the monitoring plan, institutional arrangement and capacity building activities, and EMP
                          implementation budget etc.

                          Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF): Since the project will take a phased
Public Disclosure Copy




                          approach for the implementation of community activities, the detail of specific investment
                          activities for the second phase investments cannot be identified prior to project appraisal. As such
                          an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared following the
                          relevant Chinese policies, laws and regulations and the Bank's safeguards policies. The ESMF
                          identifies the potential types of investments which are similar to the first batch of investments, sets
                          out guidelines and procedures to assess the environmental and social impacts, and contains
                          measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and avoid adverse impacts and enhance positive impacts.
                          Each subproject proposal will be screened for potential negative environmental impacts. The
                          ESMF includes due diligence for existing processing facilities, mitigation measures, monitoring,
                          institutional arrangements, grievance-handling mechanisms and capacity building activities.

                          Social

                          The project, especially its Component II, will probably utilize land, and most of the land will be
                          used by villagers themselves within their villages, which does not trigger land acquisition. Only
                          few land is permanently to be occupied by enterprises, market facilities, etc., and thus needs to be
                          acquired, about 36 mu in the first tranche of the project. As specific sites of the construction
                          activities can only be clearly determined during project implementation, a Resettlement Policy
                          Framework (RPF) was developed to elaborate resettlement policies, determine compensation rates,
                          establish mechanism of resettlement preparation, implementation, monitoring and grievance


                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         redress, etc. The Resettlement Policy Framework includes a land use arrangement to provide for
                         the process and criteria for such land transactions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The SA was conducted in the project areas with assistance from Shaanxi Social Science Institute
                         (SSSI). Based on sampling and field work, the SA identified diverse stakeholders, including poor
                         households and women; figured out roles, demands and opinions of the relevant stakeholders on
                         planning, design, construction and operation related to cooperative and economic facilities;
                         discovered social risks related to project activities and further explored measures for minimizing
                         adverse social risks and enlarging social benefits. The findings and recommendations of the SA
                         were discussed with the FS team and reflected in the project design. Furthermore, it covered
                         gender and poverty issue, via investigating social and economic baseline covering women and the
                         poor, and integrating attitudes and opinions from the female and poor participants into the project
                         design.

                         The SA largely focused on how to ensure project activities target the right beneficiaries, on how to
                         design standards and mechanism to ensure proper involvement of and benefit for common
                         households, poverty households and women, to enable long term sustainable operation of designed
                         mechanisms after project completion.

                         Poverty issue. There are 13621 poverty households with 48665 persons in the project area, with a
                         poverty ratio of 27%. According to the poverty investigation, 213 poor households, in the project
                         areas, poverty types include mainly disability and disease, taking 25%; and shortage of skill or
                         fund, accounting for 40%. On poverty demand, the social assessment indicated that 70% of the
                         poverty households are aware of cooperatives and 90% intend to participate in if possible. The
                         project will engage about 70% of the total poverty households to participate in cooperative, and
                         directly benefit from the project. The following indicators are integrated into the project
                         monitoring plan: i) Poor Beneficiaries; ii) Number of cooperative members lifted out of poverty
                         (Number); iii) Percentage of poor households participating in the farmer cooperatives
                         (Percentage).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gender: The SA, based on 112 female farmers investigation, provided for a gender-disaggregated
                         social and economic baselines, consulted with female farmers on their social and economic
                         concerns and needs, as well as on potential positive and negative project impacts, and integrated
                         their attitudes and opinions in mechanism design of cooperative, training program planning, etc.
                         The following indicators are integrated into the project monitoring plan: i) Number of cooperative
                         members trained, by gender; ii) Direct project beneficiaries satisfied with access to economic
                         infrastructure disaggregated by gender; iii) Female beneficiaries.

                         Monitoring: Social monitoring indicators, including cooperative participation rates and training
                         rates of poor and female farmers, were clearly defined and integrated into the project monitoring
                         plan, and a detailed monitoring mechanism was established including the potential land acquisition
                         actions.
                         Organizational Capacity: The proposed project will be coordinated by Provincial Poverty
                         Alleviation and Development Office (PPADO),which has rich experience with Bank supported
                         projects. A Provincial Steering Committee (PSC), led by a Vice Governor of the Government of
                         Shaanxi with representatives from the PDRC, PDOF, Provincial Department of Construction
                         (PDOC), PPADO and Provincial Statistics Bureau, will be organized to oversee the preparation
                         and implementation of the project. At the provincial level, the PPADO will take the lead in project
                         management. This arrangement helps assure the proper preparation and implementation of

                                                                   Page 8 of 12
                           safeguard policies. The Shaanxi PPAO has previously executed similar Bank poverty reduction
                           projects, and is therefore experienced in safeguard requirements. At municipal level, a PMO has
                           been established to coordinate project preparation and implementation among participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                           counties within its jurisdiction and between these counties and relevant municipal government
                           agencies. At county level, each county of the eleven counties has set up a Project Implementation
                           Unit. Four county PIUs have experiences with the Bank financed project. But seven of the eleven
                           county level authorities are new to Bank-supported project procedures and need guidance from the
                           provincial PMOs. PPADO and County PMOs have designated staff for safeguards management.
                           Experienced safeguards consultant have been engaged by the clients and safeguards trainings were
                           provide during project preparation. More safeguards consultants will be hired to assist with the
                           implementation of safeguards instruments.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EA safeguard documents were prepared through consultation with key stakeholders during the
                           project preparation process from April-May 2016. The EA safeguard documents were locally
                           disclosed through announcements published on the PMO➢❨ s website and local newspaper on
                           May 9, 2016. They were subsequently disclosed at the Bank Infoshop on May 31,2016.

                          Stakeholder Identification: The conducted SA identified key stakeholders under the project,
                          including project beneficiaries, those who affected by potential land acquisition, and related
                          agencies. The project beneficiaries consist of participating farmers, farmer cooperatives, agro-
                          business enterprises and village committees.

                          Participation: The project characters entail high relying on participation from farmers,
                          cooperatives, and service providers. The project planning and design has to be, and is hence in a
                          participatory way, and a participatory implementation manual was prepared to guide farmer
                          participation. The key areas of participation includes the followings: i) Full information disclosure
                          at each stage; ii) Real demands from farmers/the poor/women, agricultural producers and service
Public Disclosure Copy




                          providers; iii) How to establish and operate standard cooperatives in line with the Cooperative
                          Laws; iv) How to engage farmers especially poverty groups in cooperatives and other project
                          activities to enable their sharing project benefits; v) Linkage mechanism between the standard
                          cooperatives and beneficiaries especially poor households vi) Activity selection and design.

                          It is required that 90% of the rural households and 100% of the registered poor households be
                          aware of the purpose and conditions of the cooperative development funds; and that each
                          cooperative shall set a target to achieve at least 70% participation of the villager's poor households
                          in the cooperative over the life of the project, as a condition for accepting its investment proposal.

                          Consultation on the RPF. PPMO organized a policy publicity meetings for all related staff of
                          municipal and county PMOs where detailed explanation of current policies about resettlement at
                          national, provincial and municipal levels and policies of the World Bank was given and
                          requirements for the work are also proposed. County (district) level PMOs also organized policy
                          briefings for all types of impacted people at all levels where policies about land acquisition and
                          resettlement of the World Bank and China were widely disseminated. Responses received were
                          fully reflected in the RPF.

                          Information Disclosure: The final RPF and the SA were disclosed locally on May 9, 2016, and
                          within World Bank on May 31, 2016.


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           Grievance Redress: A grievance redress mechanism was designed in the RPF, villages and
                           individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by the project may submit complaints, via
Public Disclosure Copy




                           three channels: project management system, external monitoring and even court system. Further,
                           the complaints could be go to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WBÃ¢
                           ➂❨➂ s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly
                           reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and
                           individuals may submit their complaint to the WB➢❨ ➂ s independent Inspection Panel which
                           determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its
                           policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
                           brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an
                           opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank'➂❨➂ s
                           corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
                           information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.
                           inspectionpanel.org.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-May-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            09-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-May-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            09-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            09-May-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Guangming Yan,Wendao Cao
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 23-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                     Date: 24-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
