                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18575
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Sep-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P114069
                            Project Name:       Shandong Energy Efficiency Project (P114069)
                            Task Team           Jonathan Edwards Sinton,Yun Wu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           20-Oct-2010             Estimated     09-Jun-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE09                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       317.10           Total Bank Financing:     150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             167.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                150.00
                              Total                                                                                                317.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project objective is to improve energy efficiency in selected enterprises in Shandong
                           province particularly through energy efficiency leasing and i                                ncrease
                           use of biomass for power and heat generation.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           The proposed project objective is to improve energy efficiency in selected enterprises in Shandong



                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         province particularly through energy efficiency leasing and i                                    ncrease
                         use of biomass for power and heat generation.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Shandong Energy Efficiency Project is comprised of three components: Part A, Energy
                         Efficiency Sub-projects, Part B, Anqiu Biomass CHP Plant, and Part C, Project Management,
                         Monitoring and Evaluation. The total original estimated project cost is RMB 2.1 billion (equivalent
                         to US$ 313.7 million) with IBRD loan support of US$ 150 million (47.8% of total estimated project
                         costs).

                         The proposed Level I restructuring will (i) drop Part B; (ii) adjust the PDO as above; (iii) extend the
                         project closing date by 18 months to March 31, 2018; (iv) adjust disbursement arrangements for Part
                         A, Energy Efficiency Sub-projects to increase the financing ratio of IBRD/counterpart funding for
                         subprojects; (v) revise the results framework; and (vi) revise the disbursement estimates. The
                         extension and revision of financing ratio are necessary to enable achievement of the end targets of
                         Part A. This will be the second restructuring of the project, and the first extension of the closing date.

                         The Project components after the proposed restructuring are described below:

                         Part A: Energy Efficiency Sub-projects (estimated cost: US$267.4 million, IBRD loan financing US
                         $134 million). This component will support financial leasing and Energy Performance Contracting
                         (EPC) of energy efficiency investments in selected enterprises, particularly in the industrial sector.
                         The IBRD loan will be on-lent to two leasing companies and one Energy Services Company
                         (ESCO): (1) a US$64 million sub-loan to the Shandong Rongshihua Leasing Company, Ltd.,
                         (Rongshihua); (2) a US$50 million sub-loan to the Guotai Leasing Company, Ltd. (Guotai); (3) a US
                         $20 million sub-loan to Shandong Luxin Energy Investment and Management Company (Luxin
                         Energy).

                         The Bank loan will be used for the civil works, supply and installation of goods and equipment for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         eligible subprojects as defined in Operations Manuals, satisfactory to the Bank and adopted by each
                         company. Part A aims to support the Shandong Provincial Government's energy efficiency service
                         industry development program through the demonstration of successful use of financial leasing and
                         energy performance contracting to finance energy efficiency investments.

                         Part C. Project Management, Technical Assistance, Monitoring and Evaluation. (estimated cost:
                         RMB 2.4 million (US$0.37 million equivalent, IBRD loan financing $0.37 million) This component
                         will finance: (a) technical assistance for project implementation and special studies, including an
                         evaluation of mid-term achievements and impediments to achieving desired outcomes; (b) training
                         and study tours; (c) project management support.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The potential sub-projects under Part A will be located across Shandong Province, east of China.
                         Shandong has a temperate continental climate with average annual precipitation at the range of
                         600-800 mm.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Xin Ren (GEN2A)
                         Youxuan Zhu (GSU02)


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               For Part A, environmental concerns associated with construction (of boilers rehabilitation and
                              retrofitting, heat exchange stations and pipelines, etc) are dust, noise, disposal of solid waste,
                              interruption of traffic and chance find of cultural relics. These impacts during construction are
                              moderate, of temporary nature, mostly confined within the boundary of existing plants and readily
                              manageable with standard mitigation measures. Energy efficiency improvement under Part A
                              usually involves material recycling and heat recovery thus is anticipated to reduce energy
                              consumption and associated environmental impacts.

                             For the restructuring, the only change that might have environmental impact is the dropping of
                             Part B, the Anqiu Biomass CHP Plant, thus reducing related potential impacts of the overall
                             Project.

                             The subprojects to be financed under two leasing companies (Rongshihua, Guotai) and one ESCO
                             (Luxin Energy) are located mainly within existing industrial enterprises in Shandong Province.
                             Sub-projects will be mainly involved replacing old equipment within the boundaries of the
                             existing plants with no land acquisition required. The only source (or case) of potential adverse
                             effect foreseen are for subprojects using waste heat from existing plant production for heat supply,
                             which may have limited land acquisition during construction of heat pipelines outside boundaries
                             of the plants.




                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Long-term impacts are mainly positive in terms of reducing energy use and associated air
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pollutant emissions and other pollution.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The type of energy efficiency sub-projects foreseen have either minor environmental impacts that
                           are readily manageable or no adverse environmental impacts and provide significant
                           environmental benefits such as reductions in local pollution, such as dust and sulfur dioxide
                           emissions. The most relevant alternative to the project under Part A is the ➢❨ without project
                           case➢❨ , in which the existing facilities would continue to operate at low efficiency instead of
                           being renovated. This would lead to more environmental pollution.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Under Part A, in accordance with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and the World Bank
                           Operational Policy OP4.01, the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) provides the
                           policy objectives, legal framework and mitigation measures for different categories of impacts;
                           specifies the screening procedures for those subprojects that may involve temporary or, in the
                           unlikely event, long term impacts on the environment; and identifies process, activities and steps
                           to be followed for the preparation of individual Environment Assessments (EA) or Environment
                           Management Plan (EMP), as relevant. In addition, the requirements on consultation and disclosure
                           as well as monitoring procedures have also been highlighted in the EMF.

                          To facilitate the environmental safeguards screening by EE Leasing Companies and ESCO, a
                          screening table has been developed and included in EMF, based on which a environmental
                          screening will be carried out for all potential subprojects. Once it is determined what, if any,
                          impacts are generated to construct or operate any project activities, preparations of EAs or EMPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                          should begin. The overall responsibility for preparation and implementation of any necessary EA
                          rests with sponsors of individual subprojects. The EA will be prepared in accordance with the
                          policy principles and planning and implementation arrangements set forth in this EMF, and
                          established appropriate mitigation measures as appropriate for all categories of adverse impacts.

                          The Social and Environmental Units of the three companies have followed the EMF fairly well
                          and are actively involved with host enterprises in ensuring satisfactory EA/EMPs are prepared for
                          subprojects that require EAs. As planned, the Bank has monitored compliance with the EMF
                          during project supervision and directly reviewed most subprojects➢❨ proposals, including their
                          safeguard instruments and domestic compliance.

                          Most of subprojects to be financed are replacing old equipment within the existing plants with no
                          land acquisition required. The only type (case) of potential adverse effects foreseen are related to
                          are the subprojects using waste heat from existing plant production for heat supply, which may
                          have limited land acquisition impacts during construction of relevant heat pipelines outside the
                          plants. Because of such potential land acquisition impacts, a resettlement policy framework has
                          been developed for both EE Leasing Companies and one ESCO, which will apply to those
                          subprojects that might involve with any limited land acquisition.

                          In accordance with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and the World Bank Operational Policy


                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                           OP4.12, the resettlement policy framework provides the policy objectives, legal framework and
                           compensation entitlements for different categories of impacts; specifies the screening procedures
                           for those subprojects that may involve with land acquisition and resettlement; and identifies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process, activities and steps to be followed for the preparation of individual resettlement plans. In
                           addition, the requirements on consultation and disclosure as well as monitoring and grievance
                           procedures have also been highlighted in the policy framework. A copy of the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) was disclosed to the province in March 2010.

                           To facilitate the resettlement screening by EE Leasing Companies and ESCO, a resettlement
                           screening table has been developed and included in the RPF, based on which a resettlement
                           screening will be carried out for all potential subprojects. Once it is determined that land
                           acquisition is essential to complete any project activities, resettlement planning should begin. The
                           overall responsibility for preparation and implementation of any necessary RAP rests with
                           sponsors of individual subprojects. Based on accurate baseline census survey and social economic
                           survey, the RAP will be prepared in accordance with the policy principles and planning and
                           implementation arrangements set forth in this RPF, and established appropriate mitigation
                           measures as appropriate for all categories of adverse impacts.

                           The Social and Environmental Unit of two EE Leasing Companies and one ESCO will actively
                           involve in RAP preparation in order to ensure satisfactory RAPs are prepared for subprojects
                           involved with any potential land acquisition and resettlement, and submit them to the World Bank
                           for review. All RAPs prepared must be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to awarding of
                           contracts for the civil works causing the displacement. In spite of such provisions, among
                           implemented subprojects by two leasing companies and one ESCO, so far none of them had been
                           found involved with any land acquisition and resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             For Part A, key stakeholders of the subprojects would include the sponsors of individual
Public Disclosure Copy




                           subprojects to be identified by the leasing and ESCO companies, the communities in the
                           surrounding areas of the individual subprojects, as well as related suppliers, contractors and local
                           governments. These stakeholders can only be identified during the project implementation. The
                           EMF and RPF have been disclosed on the official website of Provincial Energy Conservation
                           Office, one of the key agencies supporting the Project Management Office, for comments from the
                           public. These documents were also disclosed in the Bank➢❨ s InfoShop. Public consultation and
                           disclosure requirements for individual subprojects to be supported are described in the EMF which
                           has been followed during implementation, i.e., subprojects needing EA have proper local
                           disclosure and public consultation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Apr-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-May-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Apr-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-May-2010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jonathan Edwards Sinton,Yun Wu
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jie Tang (PMGR)                             Date: 07-Sep-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
