                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC17517

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Vietnam                       Project ID:      P159760
                            Project Name:        MARD M&E Capacity Building
                            Team Leader(s):      Sergiy Zorya,Hanane Ahmed
                            Estimated Date       31-Aug-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GFA02                         Lending          IPF
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Public administration-
                                                 Financial Sector (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Rural markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (60%), Rural services and
                                                 infrastructure (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.8                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                          1.8
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           As indicated in the Japan PHRD operating guidelines note, the overall development objective of the
                           Japan PHRD grant program is to enhance the use of government system to promote evidence-based
                           decision making through strengthening the M&E systems of recipient Ministries and Implementing
                           Agencies in the PHRD priority sectors.

                           The MARD of Vietnam is regarded as a strong candidate for support due to its ongoing commitment
                           to policy reform, analysis and formulation, and its recent efforts to strengthen its capacity for
                           monitoring and evaluation, especially in the context of the sector-wide restructuring objectives
                           through the ARP.

                           Within this context, the PDO of the proposed project is to enhance M&E capacity of MARD and
                           selected DARDs to monitor progress of the ARP.
                           C. Project Description
                         The recently completed ARP prepared by the MARD shifts the orientation of sectoral goals from
                         physical targets to indicators related to the triple bottom line of sustainable development. It advocates
                         for the sector to become market-led and consumer-driven, with the role of the government shifting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from being the primary investor and service provider to being the facilitator of investments and
                         services provided by others. The current M&E system in MARD, however, is not suitable to inform
                         and support this restructuring process.

                         Decisions regarding farm enterprises, and farm policies and programs are mainly based on output
                         oriented macro-targets (such as acreage planted or quantities produced) or technical indicators that
                         determine adoption by farmers of technical advice and new technologies. Considerations and
                         monitoring of indicators such as labor productivity, profitability, input use intensity and
                         environmental sustainability are largely absent. With the restructuring envisaged sector M&E shifts
                         its focus to sector performance indicators such as contribution to farm incomes, improvement of
                         livelihoods, competitiveness of different crops within but also outside of Vietnam, effectiveness of
                         public policy and investments and the sustainable and effective use of natural resources. This
                         requires a profound understanding of farm enterprises and their economics. New data sources, actors
                         and methodologies of joint analysis will need to be incorporated into the sector M&E to ensure that
                         future policy reforms and decisions on investments are based on sound information and are supported
                         by all actors affected by the policies.

                         In addition to developing a new set of sector performance and ARP indicators, it is equally important
                         to carry out the following complementary activities: (i) analysis and clarification of roles and
                         services of MARD and DARD government agencies in the ARP; (ii) capacity development to
                         change/adjust work processes (including support to strengthening inter-departmental cooperation
                         mechanisms) to better fulfill MARD functions especially in the context of M&E; (iii) capacity
                         building to MARD departments entailing market oriented planning requirements and processes,
                         project analysis, economic analysis and M&E skills, communication of ARP objectives, roles and
                         functions throughout the entire country; and (iv) sector M&E including sector-wide planning and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         performance monitoring; technical assistance and capacity building for policy analysis, policy
                         formulation and coordination of policy implementation.

                         CAPACITY BUILDING for M&E: Lessons from Best Practice

                         The World Bank has the substantial experience in helping countries to build their M&E capacity.
                         This experience shows that while there are no precise models for creating successful M&E systems,
                         every country and situation is different, there are some important lessons on what contributes to
                         success. These lessons are derived from the IEG/World Bank report prepared in 2007: How to Build
                         M&E Systems to Support Better Government. Of these lessons, the first and foremost is that
                         substantive demand from government is a prerequisite to successful institutionalization. An M&E
                         system must produce information considered useful by key stakeholders. For Vietnam, strong
                         demand for an evidence-based M&E system should come from both its contribution to improved
                         policy making and its contribution to full ownership of the process of policy formulation and
                         implementation.

                         Other key lessons relevant to the circumstances of building a capacity for evidence-based M&E in
                         the MARD and DARD in Vietnam include:

                         1. The need to begin support with a clear understanding of the existing roles and capacity for M&E.
                         In the context of Vietnam, an organizational change management is needed to clarify the different
                         role of departments and functions within MARD and DARDs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. The need for a powerful champion of M&E systems, within a capable Ministry. In the context of
                         Vietnam, this requirement has been met via the strong support of the MARD Vice Minister.

                         3. Care not to over-engineer the M&E system. Creation of an over-ambitious range of monitoring
                         indicators can easily weaken an M&E system, especially during the early stages of development.
                         Monitoring indicators that are not actively used can burden an M&E system, reducing the resources
                         allocated to their use for analysis and evaluation.

                         4. The need to build a reliable data base. The value of an M&E system and demand for information
                         will fall if data quality is poor. In many countries there is often too much (low quality) data and not
                         enough information. Capacity building will thus entail a careful review of the existing information
                         and statistical base provided by public institutions in the sector. As all statistics have their
                         limitations, it is essential to understand what these limitations are, both when choosing the
                         information to use and in using it for evidence-based decision making.

                         5. The need for training in M&E and the use of M&E. A strong emphasis on training is critical to
                         successful capacity building for M&E. For all M&E systems this includes training in the
                         establishment and maintenance of a large data base and the identification, design and use of
                         appropriate monitoring indicators. Where the M&E system is the basis for evidence-based decision
                         making, training in the use of this information for policy analysis and policy evaluation is especially
                         important. Policy analysis and evaluation is the key output of evidence-based M&E systems, with
                         monitoring as an intermediate output.

                         6. The need for a long-term view when building a successful M&E capacity. Countries that have
                         built successful M&E systems have found that it is a long-haul effort requiring patience and
                         persistence. It takes time to create or strengthen data systems, to recruit and train staff; to plan and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implement evaluations and to build an effective institutional framework for using and sharing
                         information. The ability to provide PHRD project support over a 2-3 year period will significantly
                         improve project impact in this regard.

                         Project preparation and design includes the following activities:

                         Component 1: Support to the development of ARP M&E indicators

                         The objective of this component is to improve the existing M&E system to better monitor the
                         progress of the ARP and sector wide-developments.

                         Main activities and outputs will include:

                         (i)      development of new set of ARP indicators, to cover both quantitative and qualitative aspects
                         of the agricultural sector performance and the ARP implementation
                         (ii)     preparation of manuals and protocols for data collection, frequency of reporting, and roles
                         and responsibilities of MARD and DARDs
                         (iii)    pilot testing of selected indicators, especially those required impact evaluation
                         (iv)     preparation of the roadmap for finalization of the ARP M&E indicators beyond the
                         project➢❨ s implementation.
                         The work under this component will be closely coordinated with the IPSARD, and will require the
                         services of international and local consultants, the purchase of M&E software and the limited amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of goods (computers, etc.), if necessary, the limited number of workshops and seminars in Hanoi and
                         in selected Provinces on indicators and methodologies, and operational expenses, including for pilot
                         tests for selected indicators.

                         The expected outcomes of this component are: (i) a set of new sector performance and ARP
                         indicators developed; (ii) M&E plan for data collection and methodologies developed; (iii) pilot tests
                         for selected indicators conducted; and (iv) the roadmap for the further M&E plans developed.

                         Component 2: Support to the organizational change

                         The objectives of this component are to improve the M&E procedures and strengthen human
                         capacity at MARD and selected DARDs to use the upgraded M&E system.

                         The main activities and outputs will include:

                         (i)     Support the change team to clarify the roles and tasks of the MARD staff in the new M&E
                         and carry out necessary institutional changes
                         (ii)    Increase awareness through information campaigns and workshops about the M&E initiative
                         to improve the flow of knowledge between central and local governments.
                         (iii)   Train the MARD and DARD staff working on M&E on the approaches, roles and functions,
                         indicators, and methodologies, and expose them to the international best practices.
                         (iv)    Foster collaboration with the private sector, agricultural commodity boards, research, and
                         academia through joint workshops and activities.

                         The work under this component will require trainings, with the support of local and international
                         consultants, focused workshops, and operational expenses. The expected outcomes include: (i) better
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acknowledgement and understanding of the need for better ARP indicators and the M&E system for
                         effective policy making; (ii) clarified roles of central and local governments in data collection; (iii)
                         higher capacity of the M&E staff in MARD and selected DARDs to collect and analyze new
                         information; and (iv) more active engagement of MARD with other partners in M&E strengthening.

                         Component 3: Project management

                         The objective of this component is to carry out the day-to-day management of the project.

                         The main activities will include:

                         (v)      Preparation of the project progress reports, including M&E
                         (vi)     Knowledge management
                         (vii)    Financial management and audit
                         (viii)   Procurement
                         (ix)     Other project management activities.

                         The expected outcomes include: (i) timely progress report preparation; (ii) provision of high quality
                         and timely fiduciary services (FM and procurement); (iii) knowledge management and
                         dissemination; and (iv) other support to the smooth implementation of the project activities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide coverage involving MARD and selected provincial DARDs since the project focuses on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sector-wide M&E capacity building.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSU02)
                           Thu Thi Le Nguyen (GEN2A)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No            The project focuses on capacity building.
                           BP 4.01                                          Therefore, no physical investments on
                                                                            environmental resources will take place.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):         Name: Sergiy Zorya,Hanane Ahmed
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 21-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/       Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                      Date: 22-Apr-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
