                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                    Report No.:ISDSC20843
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                            Iraq               Project ID:                P162845
    Project Name:                       Iraq Gas Flaring Reduction TA (P162845)
    Team Leader(s):                     Carlos Alberto Lopez Quiroga,Noora Arfaa
    Estimated Date                      27-Feb-2017
    of Approval:
    Managing Unit:                      MNC02                    Lending                     IPF
    PHGlbPracLbl                                                 Instrument:
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        0.95                        Total Bank Financing: 0
    Financing Gap:             0.45
      Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
      Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                                   0.5
    Environmental Category:             B - Partial Assessment

    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    Support Government of Iraq in the preparation 5-yr Gas-to-Power Action Plan to plan
    C. Project Description
    The proposed activity consists of the preparation of a 5-Year Gas-to-Power Action Plan (2018-2022) to
    plan, prioritize, coordinate and fund gas-to-power infrastructure investment requirements between
    Ministry of Oil, Ministry of Electricity and Ministry of Finance. Essential coordination between the
    Ministry of Oil and the Ministry of Electricity is limited at present. The proposed Action Plan is
    expected to address the planning, coordination and funding of a phased transition from the current power
    generation mix of predominantly crude, heavy crude, and LFO to the increased use of natural gas as the
    lowest cost technology in both open-cycle (OCGTs) and combined-cycle gas turbines (CCGTs).

    The proposed Action Plan is expected to address the following:

    i. an identification and volume estimation of existing and expected gas flares and their location
    ii. a prioritization, initial economic assessment and location of required natural gas capture, gathering
    and processing infrastructure requirements including their indicative expected investment costs
    iii. a prioritization and initial economic assessment of projected gas-based power generation options,
    their location and indicative expected investment costs, including the re-conversion to natural gas of
    existing plants currently using alternative fuels and the incorporation of new gas-based facilities
    iv. an assessment of the condition of existing natural gas transport pipelines

                                                Page 1 of 4
v. a prioritization and initial economic assessment of existing natural gas transport infrastructure
refurbishment and projected new capacity needs in support of (ii) and (iii) above
vi. an assessment of options to attract private interest and capital for natural gas capture, processing,
transport and gas-to-power investments within the framework of the ongoing RAS and DPF II PSP-led
conceptual approach, including the convenience/feasibility of conducting licensing international tenders
in support of program investment goals
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
This technical assistance activity will be implemented within the Ministry of Oil and is not expected to
have any direct physical impacts. However, to safeguard against any potential environmental and social
impacts that may arise as a result of project activities, Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 OP/BP4.12 have been triggered. The team will ensure that ToRs
for consulting services under this activity incorporate relevant Bank safeguard guidelines and disclosed
pubically; it is expected that the ToRs for these studies and assessments will be consulted on with
relevant stakeholders.The action plan eventually proposed should take into consideration the potential
environmental and social impacts, and ensure that the advice provided is consistent with OP 4.01 and
4.12. Environmental impacts such as air pollution and GHG emissions, accidental release/spills,
emergency response, consideration of alternative sites for development or for gas pricing should be
considered in line with OP 4.01. Finally, any technical assistance output and contract model should also
be consistent with sector-specific Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
N/A
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                         Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                    This technical assistance activity will be
                                                           implemented within the Ministry of Oil and is
                                                           not expected to have any direct physical
                                                           impacts. However, to safeguard against any
                                                           potential environmental and social impacts
                                                           that may arise as a result of project activities,
                                                           Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and
                                                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
                                                           OP/BP4.12 have been triggered. The team will
                                                           ensure that ToRs for consulting services under
                                                           this activity incorporate relevant Bank
                                                           safeguard guidelines; it is expected that the
                                                           ToRs for these studies and assessments will be
                                                           consulted on with relevant stakeholders, and
                                                           disclosed publically.The action plan
                                                           eventually proposed should take into
                                                           consideration the potential environmental and
                                                           social impacts, and ensure that the advice
                                                           provided is consistent with OP 4.01 and 4.12.
                                                           Environmental impacts such as air pollution

                                           Page 2 of 4
                                                          and GHG emissions, accidental release/spills,
                                                          emergency response, consideration of
                                                          alternative sites for development or for gas
                                                          pricing should be considered in line with OP
                                                          4.01. Finally, any technical assistance output
                                                          and contract model should also be consistent
                                                          with sector-specific Environmental Health and
                                                          Safety Guidelines.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No
    Pest Management OP 4.09                 No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     Yes           This technical assistance activity will be
                                                          implemented within the Ministry of Oil and its
                                                          not expected to have any direct physical
                                                          impacts. However, to safeguards against any
                                                          potential environmental and social impacts
                                                          that may arise as a result of project activities,
                                                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 has
                                                          been triggered and the team will ensure that
                                                          ToRs for consulting services under this
                                                          activity will incorporate relevant Bank
                                                          safeguard issues and it is expected that the
                                                          ToRs for these studies and assessments are
                                                          consulted on with the relevant stakeholders,
                                                          and disclosed publically. The action plan
                                                          proposed should take into consideration the
                                                          potential environmental and social impacts,
                                                          and ensure that the advice provided is
                                                          consistent with OP 4.12.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No
    Projects on International Waterways     No
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No

V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):            Name: Carlos Alberto Lopez Quiroga,Noora Arfaa
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:             Name:                                       Date:

                                            Page 3 of 4
Practice Manager/                        Name:                                                   Date:
Manager:


 1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.




                                                    Page 4 of 4
