INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12516
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                      Project ID:  P144966
Parent       P113542
Project ID:
Project Name: Kenya Informal Settlements Improvement Projects - Additional financing
(P144966)
Parent Project Kenya Informal Settlements Improvement Project (KISIP) (P113542)
Name:
Task Team       Abebaw Alemayehu
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-Apr-2015                Estimated    29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Sub-national
government administration (30%), General transportation se ctor (30%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (60%), Municipal governance and
institution building (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Ser vice Delivery (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       8.30            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                   8.30
Total                                                                       8.30
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 7


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The overall project development objective of the KISIP is to improve living conditions in
informal settlements in selected municipalities in Kenya. This will be achieved by enhancing
security of tenure and improving infrastructure based on plans developed in consultation with the
community.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
To improve living conditions in informal settlements in selected urban centers in selected counties
in Kenya. This will be achieved by enhancing security of tenure and improving infrastructure
base on plans developed in consultation with the community
3. Project Description
This project has the following components.
Component 1: Strengthening institutions and program management. This component will support
institutional strengthening and capacity building of the Ministry of Housing, the Ministry of Lands,
and the participating municipalities. It also finances the management activities associated with
program implementation and establishment of a monitoringand evaluation system.
Component 2: Enhancing tenure security. This component supports systematization and scale-up of
ongoing efforts to strengthen tenure security in urban informal settlements.
Component 3: Investing in infrastructure and service delivery. This component supports investment
in settlement infrastructure, and, where necessary, extension of trunk infrastructure to settlements.
Component 4: Planning for urban growth. This component supports planning and development of
options that facilitate delivery of infrastructure services, land and housing for future population
growth.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Some 18 urban centers in 14 counties are eligible to participate in the project. These are: Nyeri
(Nyeri county), Thika (Kiambu), Nairobi (Nairobi), Machakos and Mavoko (Machakos), Embu
(Embu), Kitui (Kitui), Naivasha and Nakuru (Nakuru), Eldoret (Uasin Gishu), Kisumu (Kisumu),
Kericho (Kericho), Mombasa (Mombasa), Kilifi and Malindi (Kilifi), Kakamega and Mumias
(Kakamega), and Garissa (Garissa). However, participation is voluntary and requires municipalities
to meet certain rules of access. The total population covered by these towns is about 6.4 million.
Nairobi is the largest, with 3.2 million inhabitants, and Embu is the smallest, with about 37,000
residents. Most of these towns are administrative capitals of their counties. The number of people
living in informal settlements is rising, due to rural to urban migration. Informal settlements are
characterized by inadequate drainage with flooding during the rainy season, lack of clean water and
sanitation facilities, poor solid waste management, and absence of other infrastructure.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
Yasmin Tayyab (GSURR)
Page 2 of 7


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Component 3 of the Project includes small to moderate
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                scale infrastructure investments, including expansion of
public facilities (for example, schools and clinics), water
and sewerage systems, water kiosks and ablution blocks,
and tertiary roads connecting settlements to the main
roads, and the like. As activities at each settlement are
demand driven, individual settlement designs are not
known during project preparation. The initially chosen
framework approach is still relevant at the Additional
Financing stage. As the subproject designs have become
available during project implementation, the Project has
routinely screened and developed Environment and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIAs) (using independent
consultancies). The ESIAs for subprojects have been
disclosed locally and in the Bank InfoShop. In addition,
the updated Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be redisclosed as part of the
preparation of this Additional Financing.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The Project is operating in urban areas with no identified
4.04                                 natural habitats. Where the project sites are close to water
bodies, including rivers, the Project implementing team
enforces maintenance and enhancement of riparian zones.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural       Yes          There are no known cultural heritage sites within informal
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 settlements selected for project interventions. However,
the ESMF includes chance find procedures to guide
contractors in case of accidental discoveries of graves,
shrines, or any other objects of cultural significance.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project is operating in urban areas, and given the
BP 4.10                              context, the policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The original project has developed an Resettlement Policy
OP/BP 4.12                           Framework (RPF) to guide preparation of settlement
specific RAPs, where displacement of people or loss
assets is identified. RAPs for Nairobi, Machakos,
Nakuru, Mombasa, Eldoret, and Naivasha have been
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in Kenya and in
the Bank Infoshop. The RAPs have been implemented
prior to beginning of civil works on project sites. In
addition, the project RPF has been updated to reflect the
new government structure and updated implementation
arrangements and will be redisclosed.
Page 3 of 7


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The additional financing will support systematization and scale-up of ongoing efforts to strengthen
settlement planning and tenure security in urban informal settlements. The investments eligible
for financing under KISIP include roads, bicycle paths, pedestrianwalkways, street and security
lighting, vending platforms, solid waste management, storm-water drainage, water and sanitation
systems, electrification, public parks and green spaces, and expansion of primary schools, clinics,
and facilities for early childhood education within the informal settlements. Environmental and
social impacts will be localized, mostly construction related, and have easily identified mitigation
measures. The impacts will be mitigated by the implementation of Environmental and Social
Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans linked to the bidding process. The screening
criteria in the ESMF are used by the project to determine the nature and magnitude of impacts
before these are taken up and management measures will be developed accordingly. Enhancement
of positive impacts for the overall improvement of living quality in these settlements will be
integrated with the community mobilization initiative, and community enhancement plans will be
prepared for each settlement.
There may be permanent and/or temporary displacement of people to a small extent due to the
requirements for rehabilitation of infrastructure. To the extent possible, resettlement will be
avoided or people displaced by the project will be resettled within the same settlements. The
existing RPF provides guidance on the resettlement and compensation process and preparation of
project specific RAPs. RAPs for new investments will be prepared as necessary and implemented
before the beginning of civil works at the project sites.
The project's ESMF and RPF have been updated by the client to reflect Kenya's devolution agenda
and incorporate the new county governments into the project implementation process. The
updated ESMF and RPF have been consulted upon, reviewed by the Bank team and will be
disclosed in Kenya and at the Bank InfoShop. During project implementation, the subproject
specific ESIAs and RAPs have been routinely prepared and disclosed following public
consultations.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Experience with implementation of the project thus far indicates that there are no potential indirect
or long-term impacts due to the proposed activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The settlement-specific ESIAs include consideration of project design alternatives. Based on the
Page 4 of 7


﻿implementation experience, the environmental and social impacts are minimized as a direct
consequence of the settlement selection criteria adopted by the project. These criteria include:
*      Land tenure status: a settlement must be located on land that is owned by the government
or on land with clear ownership status.
*      Location: a settlement cannot be located on a hazardous site or in an environmentally
fragile area.
*      Settlement size and density: larger and denser settlements will receive priority to ensure
that as many people as possible benefit from the investments.
*      Scale of potential displacement of residents: physical upgrading of the settlement should
not entail large-scale displacement (and, thereby, relocation) of residents.
*      Proximity to trunk infrastructure: to maximize settlement coverage within a limited budget
and to ensure that participating settlements receive connections to citywide infrastructure networks
and maintenance systems, in the initial years of project implementation settlements that are in
close proximity to core trunk infrastructure (such as roads and trunk lines for water, sewage or
electricity) will receive priority.
*      Sustainability of the proposed rehabilitation is ensured through community's willingness
to participate and remain engaged in the program.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Land, Housing, and Urban Development (MLHUD) has assigned environment
and social/community development staff who are responsible for overseeing the preparation and
implementation of environmental and social management plans at the settlement level. These
officers have gained experience with overseeing preparation and implementation of the ESIAs,
EMPs and RAPs prepared for KISIP. They are familiar and are experienced in managing the
potential environmental and social issues that are likely to be encountered in this program. The
team consists of three staff: one officer is seconded from the National Environmental Management
Agency and two additional officers support the team on environmental and social issues.
Additional support to safeguards is provided by the monitoring and evaluation team. The
participating county administrations have environment and social development specialists on their
project teams to ensure the appropriate monitoring and implementation of various management
plans prepared as guided by the ESMF.
The MLHUD has prepared an ESMF (disclosed in February 2011) to screen and mitigate the
impacts associated with the proposed infrastructure facilities. This framework, which has been
routinely used by the project, is providing guidance on the process to be followed for screening
and mitigating the potential impacts.
The MLHUD has also prepared the RPF (disclosed in January 2011) to assist the project in
managing compensation and involuntary resettlement, and to guide preparation of RAPs, where
necessary.
As part of the preparation of project Additional Financing, the project ESMF and RPF have been
updated to (a) update the implementation arrangements reflecting the change from municipalities
to counties; (b) reflect the changes in legislative framework; (c) adjust decision flow for carrying
out the environmental assessment for subprojects leveraging project team capacity; and (d)
facilitate inclusion of recommendations identified in the environmental and social safeguards
instruments into technical designs. The ESMF and RPF will be redisclosed to the public in Kenya
Page 5 of 7


﻿and in the Bank InfoShop.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include the residents of the settlements, staff of county administrations, civil
society, elected representatives and NGOs working in the respective municipalities and the
MLHUD. The preparation of the ESMF, the RPF and subsequent ESIAs and RAPs involved
multiple focus group discussions with all participating city councils. The draft safeguards
instruments have been discussed with these stakeholders and their feedback and suggestions has
been incorporated appropriately. The project team will continue the stakeholder consultations,
during the preparation and design of specific investments in the selected informal settlements.
As part of the Additional Financing, the project team has carried out a supplementary capacity
building program on safeguards to prepare the project team, including safeguards staff, and
consultants for an increased pace of project activities implementation. Such training initiatives
were carried out with support from the World Bank team.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               17-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            17-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               17-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            17-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[    ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ]  No[  ]  NA[
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abebaw Alemayehu
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo       Date: 23-Apr-2015
Manager:                       (PMGR)
Page 7 of 7


