                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA14883
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                           Project ID:   P152441
                            Project Name:      Georgia National Innovation Ecosystem (GENIE) Project (P152441)
                            Task Team          Thomas Edward Haven
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Nov-2015                       Estimated   04-Feb-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTC03                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General information and communications sector (30%), Other industry (50%),
                                              General industry and trade sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Micro, Small and
                                              Medium Enterprise support (20%), Export development a nd competitiveness
                                              (20%), Technology diffusion (20%), Education for the knowledge economy
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      42.00           Total Bank Financing:                40.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    40.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                       2.00
                              Total                                                                                    42.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The PDO is to increase innovative activities of firms and individuals and their participation in the
                         digital economy.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Georgia National Innovation Ecosystem (GENIE) Project responds to the Government's vision
                         to transform Georgia into an innovation-driven economy. It comprises four components:

                         Component 1: Innovation Infrastructure

                         This component will support the development of Georgia's Innovation and Technology Agency's
                         (GITA) envisioned hub-and-spoke network of innovation centers, as well as increase the use of
                         broadband Internet services among rural households and SMEs. The component will finance: (a) the
                         development of approximately eight Regional Innovation Hubs (RIHs), including minor
                         rehabilitation works, equipment, personnel, and operating costs; (b) smaller Community Innovation
                         Centers (CICs) in about fifty second-tier towns and villages, including minor rehabilitation works,
                         equipment, personnel, and operating costs; and (c) a voucher and cash-back program to help connect
                         eligible households and SMEs outside of Tbilisi to the digital economy.

                         Component 2: Innovation Services

                         This component will deliver services, many in coordination with the CICs and RIHs, tailored to
                         Project beneficiaries at various stages/levels of the innovation ecosystem. It will finance: (a) building
                         the innovation community through events (innovation competitions, exhibitions, conferences),
                         publicity and media, and the Informatics Olympiads; (b) digital economy skills development through
                         structured training programs; and (c) business innovation support through specialized training,
                         coaching, mentoring, and technical consulting.

                         Component 3: Innovation Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance: (a) matching grants to private enterprises to develop innovative
                         products, process, and services and adopt new technologies; (b) administration of the matching
                         grants program and coaching for grant recipients; and (c) technical assistance to stimulate other types
                         of innovation financing. Two types of matching grants are foreseen: (i) “Start-up” grants to
                         innovative MSMEs incorporated in Georgia within the last two years; and (ii) “Innovation” grants to
                         MSMEs that anticipate a product, technological or business process innovation or technology
                         adoption that is new to the firm and has market potential.

                         Component 4: Project implementation support

                         This component will aim to ensure efficient and effective implementation of all Project components.
                         This will include financing consultants to support project management, component technical
                         implementation, procurement, safeguards, financial management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
                         and an expert advisory body. The component will also finance the design and implementation of: (i)
                         tools to monitor the results framework; (ii) M&E studies/surveys to establish baselines for Project
                         results indicators and measure their evolution during Project implementation; (iii) impact evaluation
                         for selected Project activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         The Project will finance activities throughout the country with no geographic limitations.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                         Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The general focus of this Project is the delivery of
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      technical assistance for boosting technology adoption and
                                                                    innovation. However Project proceeds will be used for
                                                                    small to medium size physical works (i.e. building
                                                                    renovations) and for grant-financing of micro, small and
                                                                    medium enterprises (MSMEs). Therefore OP/BP 4.01 is
                                                                    triggered.

                                                                    The Project will not support new construction and none of
                                                                    the expected activities will have significant, complex or
                                                                    irreversible impacts on the natural and social
                                                                    environment. Hence the GENIE Project is classified as
                                                                    environmental Category B.

                                                                    Individual activities to be supported by the Project are not
                                                                    known upfront, however their expected environmental
                                                                    and social impacts are known upfront, and measures
                                                                    required for their mitigation are simple and generic.
                                                                    Therefore an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                    Framework (ESMF) is prepared to guide site-specific
                                                                    safeguards work throughout the Project life. All proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    activities will be screened and classified. Category B and
                                                                    C activities will be eligible for the Project funding, while
                                                                    Category A activities will not be eligible.

                                                                    The ESMF will be included into the Operations Manual of
                                                                    the GENIE Project. Instructions for applying
                                                                    environmental and social safeguards to the preparation of
                                                                    applications and to the implementation of grant-funded
                                                                    activities will be incorporated into the MSME guidelines
                                                                    for accessing grants from the GENIE Project - also part of
                                                                    the Operations Manual.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 Grant Applications submitted to GITA under Component
                                                                    3 of the Project will be screened to identify activities
                                                                    requiring purchase and/or use of pesticides and



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                              Applications involving such activities will be rejected.
                                                              MSME guidelines for accessing grants from the GENIE
                                                              Project will include a clear statement on the non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              eligibility of purchasing and/or using pesticides in relation
                                                              to the grant financing.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes   The Project funds will be available for refurbishing
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11              existing public buildings to house several Regional
                                                              Innovation Hubs (RIHs) and multiple Community
                                                              Innovation Centers (CICs). These may be buildings of
                                                              libraries, schools, municipal buildings, and other similar
                                                              institutions. The nature of the refurbishing and if it will
                                                              involve any substantial renovations, is to be determined
                                                              during preparation and implementation. However, it is not
                                                              excluded that some of these buildings may have cultural/
                                                              historic value, in which case designs for any type of
                                                              works to be undertaken on these buildings should be
                                                              agreed with the National Agency for Cultural Heritage
                                                              Preservation (NACHP) under the Ministry of Culture and
                                                              Monument Protection. Special permission for entering the
                                                              site and/or supervision on behalf of the NACHP may also
                                                              be required.

                                                              OP/BP 4.11 is triggered. The ESMF includes a blueprint
                                                              of action in case a historic building is to be refurbished or
                                                              chance finds are encountered in the course of the Project
                                                              implementation.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement No       No physical activities under Components 1 and 3 will be
                            OP/BP 4.12                        financed that involve land acquisition and/or physical
                                                              relocation of people. Environmental and social screening
                                                              of all individual activities proposed for the Project support
                                                              will carefully assess the risks of encroachment into
                                                              private property and/or limiting/blocking access to it as
                                                              well as the risks of disruption of the current use of land/
                                                              property by formal or informal users. If such risks are
                                                              identified, the performance of works providers will be
                                                              monitored to prevent any such possible negative impacts.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                Page 4 of 7
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The GENIE Project will finance retrofitting/rehabilitation of the existing public buildings to
                           provide premises for the Regional Innovation Hubs (RIHs) and Community Innovation Centers
                           (CICs) to be established with Project support. No new construction will be included in the Project.
                           A grant program to be operated under Component 3 of the Project will provide funding to micro,
                           small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) for technology acquisition and developing product and
                           process innovations. No construction works will be supported under the grant program. Activities
                           listed on the IFC exclusions list will be excluded and so will be activities requiring purchase and/
                           or use of pesticides. Activities implying any type of involuntary resettlement will also be ruled out.

                           Hence, none of physical works eligible for GENIE Project funding will carry significant, complex
                           or irreversible environmental and social risks.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long term environmental impacts of GENIE Project are likely to be neutral, while social impacts
                           are expected to be positive and considerable such as job creation, inclusion of women and youth,
                           and local development and economic growth.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           At an early stage of Project preparation, laying fiber optic cable had been considered for
                           expanding broadband connectivity. This activity was later dropped due to several considerations, a
                           potential need for involuntary resettlement being one.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           GITA developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) formulating
                           guiding principles for safeguards management under the GENIE Project. The ESMF provides a
                           blueprint of action for environmental and social screening, classification, and approval of each
                           relevant activity proposed for Project financing. It also provides a methodology for environmental
                           and social management planning, applying mitigation measures, and monitoring their
                           implementation.

                           GITA will be the Project implementing entity. GITA is a young institution, established in
                           February 2014 in the capacity of a legal body of public law operating under the control of the
                           Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development. GITA has no experience in applying
                           safeguard policies of the World Bank and will require capacity-building through coaching and
                           rigorous implementation support to be provided by the Bank. It was agreed between GITA and the
                           World Bank that GITA will hire appropriate expertise to handle technical supervision of works
                           under Component 1 of the Project. Also, an Environmental/Social specialist will be recruited by
                           GITA for creating basic in-house capacity for safeguards management and for overseeing
                           environmental aspects of the grants in Component 3. Building in this type of expertize into GITA
                           may be considered as part of technical assistance for the Agency's institutional strengthening to be
                           delivered under Component 4.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           The Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development, and GITA under it, are key proponents
                           and main stakeholders of the GENIE Project. A number of MSMEs striving to obtain new
                           technologies and undertake innovative activities will benefit from the grants program built into the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project, and firms and workers will benefit from the training, coaching, and skills development
                           programs. The populations of the settlements where the Project will help to establish RIHs and
                           CICs will also benefit, as will firms and households that gain access to broadband connectivity.

                           GITA has disclosed Georgian and English versions of the draft ESMF through its web page and
                           held a public consultation meeting to discuss it with stakeholders. The document will be finalized
                           through incorporation of the received feedback. Site-specific Environmental and Social
                           Management Plans (ESMPs) will also be disclosed and discussed with intended beneficiaries and
                           potentially affected people as needed. In addition to publishing through the Internet, several hard
                           copies of site-specific ESMPs will be delivered to the selected public institutions of beneficiary
                           communities, so that public access to these documents is guaranteed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          29-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       18-Nov-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                              12-Nov-2015
                           Comments: Public consultation on draft final ESMF kicked-off with a stakholder meeting held
                                         on November 13, 2015 aimed at introducing the Porject and its ESMF, stimulating
                                         discussion around it, receiving first round of public feedback, and entertaining
                                         questions for clarificaiton. November 19 c.o.b. was announced as a deadline for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         submission of more in-depth technical comments/questions in written.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          property?


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Thomas Edward Haven
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/    Name: Javier Suarez (PMGR)                          Date: 19-Nov-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
