                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC18380

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Zambia                         Project ID:      P160383
                            Project Name:        Zambia Scaling Renewable Energy Program Investment Plan
                            Team Leader(s):      Raihan Elahi
                            Estimated Date       31-Mar-2018
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEE01                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Other Renewable Energy (80%), General energy sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Rural services
                                                 and infrastructure (30%), Climate change (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.3                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                0.3
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to support the Government of the Republic of Zambia to
                           prepare a renewable energy investment plan for consideration by the SREP for funding.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will provide support to the Government Republic of Zambia (GRZ) in the preparation of
                           the SREP Investment Plan for consideration by the SREP subcommittee for funding. The Investment
                           Plan will identify projects that the GRZ would want the SREP fund to support. This will be a high
                           level document which will identify whether the selected projects meet the eligibility criteria to
                           receive funding support from SREP. These include, renewable energy based projects, selected
                           through a consultative process, involvement of private sector participation, ensuring poverty
                           reduction, promotion of gender equality, etc. The investment plan will also identify the Multilateral
                           Financing Agency (MFA) that will co-fund each project. Once the investment plan is approved, then
                           each project will have to follow the identified MFA➢❨ s project approval process to become eligible
                           for funding. To prepare the Investment Plan, the GRZ will appoint consultants to review existing
                           studies that may be reused in the framework of SREP and identify the most appropriate components
                         and investments following specific criteria. The consultants will also review the enabling
                         environment for the development of renewable energy projects in the country and propose changes
                         necessary. Finally the consultants will review and provide recommendations regarding the current
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business models and selection criteria and mechanisms with the aim of promoting additional
                         transparency and objectivity.

                         GRZ designated the Director of the Department of Energy (DoE) of the Ministry of Energy and
                         Water Development as the Focal Point for the preparation of the SREP Investment Plan for Zambia.
                         The Alternate Focal Point is the Director of the Interim Climate Change Secretariat. GRZ has
                         nominated a task force, and is awaiting formal appointment by the Secretary to Cabinet. The Task
                         Force would include: Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Energy and Water Development; Permanent
                         Secretary, Ministry of Finance; Director, Department of Energy; and representatives from Cabinet
                         Office; Ministry of National Development Planning; Interim Inter-Ministerial Climate Change
                         Secretariat; Zambia Environmental Management Agency; Energy Regulation Board; ZESCO
                         Limited; Rural Electrification Authority; and the Office for Promoting Private Power Investment.

                         Zambian stakeholders indicated the following as the obstacles to the renewable energy investment.
                         -        Lower than cost-reflective tariff is a major constraint to private sector participation in the
                         Zambia power sector;
                         -        Absence of a transparent and competitive procurement framework, standardized power
                         purchase agreements, indicative term sheets to raise debt, etc. negatively affect the level of private
                         investment in Zambia power sector;
                         -        Lack of clarity on the future of mini-grids when national grid reaches the mini-grid areas,
                         puts the mini-grid developers at risk and reduces attractiveness for new investments;
                         -        Absence of a least-cost expansion plan does not allow ZESCO to efficiently expand the
                         power sector;

                         The investment plan will be aligned with the priorities identified in the National Energy Policy of
                         2008 (NEP2008), the Sixth National Development Plan (SNDP 2011-2016), and the Vision 2030,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which aims to transform Zambia into a prosperous middle income country with universal access to
                         clean, reliable, and affordable energy by 2030. Likewise, the prioritization of investments proposed
                         in the investment plan will consider its alignment with both SREP objectives and GRZ priorities as
                         outlined in the NEP2008 and the Rural Electrification Master Plan (REMP).

                         The investment plan shall demonstrate how the proposed activities will lead to barrier reduction for
                         renewable energy development and market transformation, including increased private sector
                         participation in the sector. The potential areas of engagement under the SREP may include renewable
                         energy technologies such as small-hydro, solar, geothermal, and wind. During the preparation of the
                         investment plan, the GRZ will identify and review all types of renewable energy applications
                         (including cook stoves) and business models that have potential for replication in Zambia through
                         consultation with relevant stakeholders. The investment plan will be developed to include a broader
                         set of renewable energy priorities to help GRZ access not only SREP resources but also other climate
                         finance resources such as the GCF.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This activity concerns studies and technical assistance. No physical activities are being financed.
                         Nevertheless, some screening will be needed to make sure that the proposals which end up in that
                           plan identify relevant meet Bank safeguard policy requirements. As currently designed this triggers
                           OP 4.01 and is rated as B.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mwansa Lukwesa (GEN01)
                           Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             No physical activities are being financed.
                           BP 4.01                                             Nevertheless, some screening will be needed to
                                                                               make sure that the proposals which end up in
                                                                               that plan identify relevant Bank safeguard
                                                                               policy requirements. As currently designed this
                                                                               triggers OP 4.01 and is rated as B. The draft
                                                                               TORs for the consultant preparing the
                                                                               Investment Plan will be disclosed prior to
                                                                               appraisal and will take into account relevant
                                                                               environmental and social considerations.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):           Name: Raihan Elahi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                      Date: 09-Jun-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                                          Date: 09-Jun-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
