                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2017 | Report No: ISDSC22329




                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                             Page 1 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                  Environmental Category        Country
                                                          Promoting Community-
                                                          based Climate Resilience in
                           P164257                                                      B - Partial Assessment        Jamaica
                                                          the Fisheries Sector (
                                                          P164257 )
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                      Investment Project
                           Keiko Ashida Tao                                             GEN04
                                                                                                                      Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA


                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding         [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                 [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                            4,875,000
                           Total Financing                                                                               4,875,000
                            Trust Funds                                                                                  4,875,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                         0

                           DETAILS


                           Trust Funds
                           Source                                Currency                           Amount                        USD Equivalent
                           Strategic Climate Fund Grant(CSCF)    USD-US Dollars                   4,875,000                            4,875,000


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to strengthen climate resilient practices among targeted fishing and fish farming communities of Jamaica

                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )




                           C. Project Description
                                1. Component 1: Strengthening the Fisheries Policy and Regulatory Framework (PPCR financing of US$0.573
                                   million). Declining performance of the fisheries sector is directly related to its vulnerability to climate change
                                   impacts coupled with anthropogenic threats such as overfishing and pollution. One effective way to build
                                   resilience to climate change in this sector is to strengthen and improve the overall health of marine and coastal
                                   ecosystems. This component would support strengthening the enabling environment and measures to
                                   promote sustainable fisheries and aquaculture management. Specifically, this component would support (1.1)
                                   developing the policy and regulatory framework for climate resilient fisheries and aquaculture management,
                                   including developing a strategy and action for the draft national Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy, developing
                                   protocol and guidelines for the fisheries and aquaculture productions to incorporate climate considerations,
                                   and drafting regulations for community-led fisheries management including monitoring, control, and
                                   surveillance (MCS); and (1.2) strengthening the community-led fisheries management framework, including
                                   establishing partnerships with community-based organizations for sustainable fisheries management and MCS,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   developing the management plans to this effect including water quality monitoring, and providing training and
                                   equipment for MCS.
                                2. Component 2: Diversification and Fisheries-based Alternative Livelihoods (PPCR financing of US$2.68 million).
                                   Given declining wild fish stocks due to anthropogenic and climate impacts and the rising demand for fish and
                                   fish products on the domestic and global markets, aquaculture, coastal mariculture/polyculture, and offshore
                                   pelagic fisheries have potential business opportunities that can be harnessed to meet those demands.
                                   Aquaculture and coastal mariculture/polyculture, in particular, are a means of reducing dependency on wild
                                   fish stocks and, hence, reducing their vulnerabilities to climate impacts. This component would support (2.1)
                                   promoting freshwater aquaculture and coastal mari-culture/poly-culture among fishing communities, including
                                   developing a demonstration aquaculture farm; developing climate-smart aquaculture sub-projects for new and
                                   existing fish farmers; developing a demonstration coastal mariculture/polyculture operation; developing
                                   climate-smart mari-culture/poly-culture and alternative livelihoods sub-projects; and refurbishing and
                                   upgrading the existing seed stock production and expanding local feed production; (2.2) exploring artisanal
                                   longline fishing[1] for offshore pelagics as fisheries-based alternative livelihood opportunity. This would include
                                   conducting a baseline stock assessment; developing the sustainable management strategy; and providing skill-
                                   based training and equipment.
                                3. Component 3: Capacity Building and Awareness Raising (PPCR financing of US$0.97 million). This component
                                   would support capacity building and awareness raising of the community-based organizations, fishery
                                   industries, and the relevant government personnel to promote climate considerations in fisheries and
                                   alternative livelihoods. The proposed activities include (3.1) expanding the knowledge base on climate change
                                   impacts on the fisheries sector to give stakeholders the information and skills needed to advance climate-smart
                                   livelihood activities, such as a targeted socio-economic assessment including gender and youth dynamics in the
                                   fisheries sector; climate projection for inland aquaculture, coastal mari-culture/poly-culture, and pelagics
                                   fisheries; and agro-meteorological information services for inland aquaculture and coastal mari-culture/poly-
                                   culture operations; (3.2) awareness building and behavior change, including a Knowledge Attitudes and
                                   Perceptions assessment, and development and implementation of a behavior change strategy; and (3.3)
                                   Capacity building and knowledge sharing for fisheries organizations and the Fisheries Division, including
                                   support for the formalization of selected informal community-based organizations and strengthening of
                                   existing community-based organizations; building capacity in technical skills and business management;
                                   implementing targeted community-to-community learning and knowledge exchange; developing the Fisheries
                                   Information Management System at the Fisheries Division; and strengthening capacity of the Fisheries Division


                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                                    personnel including extension officers to promote climate resilience in the capture and culture fisheries sector.
                                 4. Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (PPCR financing of US$0.655
                                    million). The Project would fulfill the monitoring and reporting requirements of the World Bank, as well as the
                                    PPCR in coordination with the PIOJ which acts as the PPCR Country Focal Point. The M&E would also
                                    incorporate targeted knowledge management activities aimed at capturing and sharing overall lessons within
                                    Jamaica and across countries under the PPCR Caribbean regional track. This component would support (4.1)
                                    project management including establishment of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the Project Steering
                                    Committee (PSC); developing and implementing the annual work plans; providing fiduciary management
                                    including procurement, financial management, audits, and safeguards; managing implementation risks; and
                                    communication to key stakeholders on project implementation progress; and (4.2) monitoring and evaluation
                                    (M&E), including developing and implementing the M&E plan; and contributing to the preparation of the
                                    annual PPCR Core Indicators Monitoring and Reporting Scorecard.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           [1] A drifting longline consists of a mainline kept near the surface or at a certain depth by means of regularly spaced
                           floats with relatively long snoods with baited hooks evenly spaced on it. (FAO, 2017)




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The Project activities will be country-wide, including inland areas for aquaculture (e.g. Spanish Town west of Kingston
                          where existing facilities are located) as well as coastal areas for a variety of subprojects in and near fishing
                          communities. Upgrades to existing inland aquaculture facilities near Spanish Town will include improvements to
                          prevent river flooding. Changes in facility design will be evaluated to ensure sound environmental management of
                          wastewater discharges, to optimize water sourcing, to minimize potential release of cultured species, and to build in
                          the best international environmental management practices for aquaculture projects. Coastal projects may affect a
                          variety of environments and communities, including some with major tourist developments, sensitive environments,
                          and protected areas near the shoreline. There are several Marine Parks in Jamaican waters and along the north coast
                          (near Ocho Rios, Montego Bay, and Port Antonio) and the west coast (at Negril), and projects on the south coast may
                          affect the Protected Areas of Portland Bight or the Palisadoes. Specific areas for intervention will be prioritized during
                          project preparation, and may include Portland Cottage and Alligator Pond on the south coast for aquaculture,
                          mariculture, or polyculture activities. Community-based monitoring, compliance, and surveillance (MCS) of reef-related
                          fisheries may yield associated benefits of ecosystem restoration and preservation of high biodiversity critical natural
                          habitats, as well as enhanced function of ecosystem services such as coastal erosion protection and tourism value.
                          Small patch reefs and seagrass meadows occur along many of the island’s coastlines and support local fishing activity,
                          and efforts will be explored to integrate the conservation of reefs and seagrass in concert with the project, to generate
                          additional project environmental benefits. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                          prepared to guide the evaluation and screening of ecologic and economic aspects of projects in reefs and coastal areas,
                          the challenges of species selection and control of invasives, the feasibility of artisanal long-line fishing improvements,



                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                          impacts of MCS to fishers' access to natural resources.




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Recipient has developed an ESMF and will include it in the Operations Manual to address the safeguards issues.
                          The Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF) has not implemented Bank-supported projects.
                          However, the Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) will be closely working with the MICAF to develop, disclose and
                          implement the instruments. The PIOJ has direct recent experience with development of ESMFs for another PPCR
                          project (Climate Data and Information Management Project) as well as other World Bank projects, and understands
                          the requirements and processes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Kimberly Vilar (GSU04)
                          Shafick Hoossein (GEN05)


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 Yes                   The policy is triggered because the project
                                                                                                    activities may include those could
                                                                                                    potentially have adverse impacts, such as
                                                                                                    improvements to prevent river flooding. An
                                                                                                    Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                    Framework (ESMF) is considered to be the
                                                                                                    most appropriate instrument for this
                                                                                                    national project which provides
                                                                                                    overarching guidance on environmental
                                                                                                    management in the context of safeguards.
                                                                                                    The project will be rolled out sequentially
                                                                                                    and that Environmental and Social
                                                                                                    Management Plans will be developed for
                                                                                                    each subproject activity once they have
                                                                                                    been identified. The ESMF will be
                                                                                                    developed and incorporated into the
                                                                                                    Operations Manual to lay out the
                                                                                                    framework for screening, planning and
                                                                                                    management to minimize potential
                                                                                                    negative environmental and social impacts
                                                                                                    and to maximize any environmental and
                                                                                                    social benefits. The ESMF and resulting
                                                                                                    management plans should take into


                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                  Page 5 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                                                                                                    account the WBG EHS Guidelines, in
                                                                                                    particular, the General EHS Guidelines and
                                                                                                    the Guidelines for Aquaculture. The ESMF
                                                                                                    provides a preliminary assessment of
                                                                                                    environmental and social impacts, and
                                                                                                    guides any additional assessment needs
                                                                                                    once specific projects are defined during
                                                                                                    implementation. The Technical Assistance
                                                                                                    component of the project detailed in
                                                                                                    Component 1 will consider any
                                                                                                    environmental and social risk and integrate
                                                                                                    their objectives, whilst also ensuring that
                                                                                                    the activities will include transparency
                                                                                                    through rigorous stakeholder engagement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    and public disclosure.　The project will
                                                                                                    carry out a targeted socio-economic
                                                                                                    assessment or possibly a distributional
                                                                                                    impact analysis under Component 3 at an
                                                                                                    early stage of implementation to look at
                                                                                                    gender and youth dynamics in the selected
                                                                                                    fisheries communities, any impacts to
                                                                                                    vulnerable and disadvantaged groups,
                                                                                                    including any gender differentiated
                                                                                                    impacts, analysis of labor standards
                                                                                                    including working conditions, and existing
                                                                                                    forced and child labor practices (if any) in
                                                                                                    the sector. In addition, the project will also
                                                                                                    include health and safety considerations
                                                                                                    into its capacity building activities.
                                                                                                    The policy is triggered because aquaculture
                                                                                                    or mariculture projects could affect or alter
                                                                                                    sensitive coastal zones and marine
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       Yes
                                                                                                    environments, via construction or clearing,
                                                                                                    emissions of nutrients and particulates,
                                                                                                    introduction of species, or other impacts.
                                                                                                    The project does not consider any changes
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No                      to forests including mangroves or any
                                                                                                    works in forests as defined by the policy.
                                                                                                    Pest management agents to control disease
                                                                                                    and parasites pose a risk of contamination
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                           Yes                     and will be managed with best
                                                                                                    international practice for aquaculture
                                                                                                    activities.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11            Yes                     Screening for presence of coastal or
                                                                                                    submarine physical cultural resources and a


                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                                                                                                    chance find procedure will be included in
                                                                                                    the ESMF.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                     No                      This policy is not triggered. Jamaica is an
                                                                                                    ethnically diverse country with people of
                                                                                                    Maroon, Indian and Lebanese descent
                                                                                                    constituting important minorities.
                                                                                                    However, there are no groups present in
                                                                                                    Jamaica who display the four
                                                                                                    characteristics of indigenous people as
                                                                                                    defined by OP 4.10. Therefore this policy is
                                                                                                    not triggered. The ESMF has been
                                                                                                    developed to include a preliminary
                                                                                                    assessment of social impacts. If any of
                                                                                                    these minorities are more likely to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    disproportionately impacted by the project,
                                                                                                    this should be considered as part of the
                                                                                                    social assessment under Component 3 at
                                                                                                    the early stage of implementation.
                                                                                                    The project will not finance the
                                                                                                    construction or installation of facilities in
                                                                                                    locations that would require involuntary
                                                                                                    resettlement or land acquisition, as defined
                                                                                                    under OP 4.12. The project will not require
                                                                                                    the involuntary taking of land for the
                                                                                                    improvements to prevent river flooding in
                                                                                                    any location. No squatters have been
                                                                                                    identified in the project area. The ESMF
                                                                                                    includes sub-project screening measures to
                                                                                                    ensure such impacts do not occur.
                                                                                                    The strengthening of the legislative
                                                                                                    framework anticipated under component 1
                                                                                                    involves the regulation of fisheries
                                                                                                    resources on a national level to promote
                                                                                                    their sustainability. The project will also
                                                                                                    strengthen community-based monitoring,
                                                                                                    control and surveillance actions to limit
                                                                                                    illegal activities. These represent
                                                                                                    community-based natural resource
                                                                                                    management activities, where the
                                                                                                    beneficiary communities work collectively
                                                                                                    to sustainably manage access to fisheries.
                                                                                                    These community-based measures will be
                                                                                                    subject to an assessment of the adequacy
                                                                                                    of the community-based decision making
                                                                                                    process, and measures necessary to


                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                                                                                                    mitigate adverse impacts on vulnerable
                                                                                                    community members (if any). As such, the
                                                                                                    policy does not involve the restriction of
                                                                                                    access to natural resources in parks or
                                                                                                    protected areas as defined under OP 4.12,
                                                                                                    but rather national legislative efforts and
                                                                                                    community-based measures for climate
                                                                                                    smart fisheries management.
                                                                                                    Given that the project will not involve
                                                                                                    resettlement, land acquisition or restriction
                                                                                                    of access to parks or protected areas – the
                                                                                                    policy is not triggered.
                                                                                                    Grievance redress mechanisms including
                                                                                                    how to access these mechanisms at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    local level will be developed under the
                                                                                                    project. The project will assess whether
                                                                                                    there is a need for capacity building on
                                                                                                    grievance redress or other strengthening
                                                                                                    measures.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               No                      The project will not finance the
                                                                                                    construction or installation of facilities in
                                                                                                    locations that would require involuntary
                                                                                                    resettlement or land acquisition, as defined
                                                                                                    under OP 4.12. The project will not require
                                                                                                    the involuntary taking of land for the
                                                                                                    improvements to prevent river flooding in
                                                                                                    any location. No squatters have been
                                                                                                    identified in the project area. The ESMF
                                                                                                    includes sub-project screening measures to
                                                                                                    ensure such impacts do not occur.
                                                                                                    Furthermore, as per OP 4.12, this Policy
                                                                                                    does not apply to regulations of natural
                                                                                                    resources on a national or regional level to
                                                                                                    promote their sustainability such as
                                                                                                    fisheries management (footnote 8) and it
                                                                                                    also does not apply to restriction of access
                                                                                                    to natural resources under community-
                                                                                                    based projects (footnote 6) such as those
                                                                                                    described under Sub-Component 2.1.
                                                                                                    The strengthening of the legislative
                                                                                                    framework anticipated under component 1
                                                                                                    involves the regulation of fisheries
                                                                                                    resources on a national level to promote
                                                                                                    their sustainability. The project will also
                                                                                                    strengthen community-based monitoring,


                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )



                                                                                                    control and surveillance actions to limit
                                                                                                    illegal activities. These represent
                                                                                                    community-based natural resource
                                                                                                    management activities, where the
                                                                                                    beneficiary communities work collectively
                                                                                                    to sustainably manage access to fisheries.
                                                                                                    These community-based measures will be
                                                                                                    subject to an assessment of the adequacy
                                                                                                    of the community-based decision making
                                                                                                    process, and measures necessary to
                                                                                                    mitigate adverse impacts on vulnerable
                                                                                                    community members (if any). The ESMF
                                                                                                    will also include sub-project screening
                                                                                                    measures to rule out any construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    installation of facilities in locations that
                                                                                                    would require involuntary resettlement or
                                                                                                    land acquisition. Given that the project will
                                                                                                    not involve resettlement, land acquisition
                                                                                                    or restriction of access to parks or
                                                                                                    protected areas – the policy is not
                                                                                                    triggered.
                                                                                                    Grievance redress mechanisms including
                                                                                                    how to access these mechanisms at the
                                                                                                    local level will be developed under the
                                                                                                    project. The project will assess whether
                                                                                                    there is a need for capacity building on
                                                                                                    grievance redress or other strengthening
                                                                                                    measures.
                                                                                                    The project will not finance the
                                                                                                    construction of new, or rehabilitation of
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                         No
                                                                                                    existing, dams. No project investments will
                                                                                                    rely on the performance of existing dams.
                                                                                                    The project will not support activities which
                                                                                                    affect international waterways as defined
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50    No
                                                                                                    under the policy. Therefore the policy is not
                                                                                                    triggered.
                                                                                                    The project will not be implemented in
                                                                                                    areas known to involve disputed areas as
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60             No
                                                                                                    defined in the policy. Therefore the policy
                                                                                                    is not triggered.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage

                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Community-based Climate Resilience in the Fisheries Sector ( P164257 )




                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           16-Jun-2017
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           The Recipient has developed an ESMF and will include it in the Operations Manual to address the safeguards issues.
                           The ESMF will be disclosed in country and in the Bank website by mid July 2017.



                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                                    Keiko Ashida Tao

                           Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor:                                Noreen Beg                                        28-Jun-2017

                            Practice Manager/Manager:                          Paul Jonathan Martin                              29-Jun-2017


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Jun 30, 2017                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 10
