                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR20313
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kenya                                        Project ID:           P131512
                            Project Name:       Nairobi Sanitation Project (P131512)
                            Task Team           Rajesh K. Advani,Patrick Nduati Mwangi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                   Estimated
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA01                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         4.08           Total Bank Financing:        0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                                   0.00
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                                     4.08
                              Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00
                              Total                                                                                                      4.08
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The objective of this project is to increase access to sewerage and water supply connections in
                           Nairobi➢❨ s low-income communities. The project builds upon a 2004 IDA Grant which
                           successfully helped establish the Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company (NCWSC) as an

                                                                                  Page 1 of 5
                         autonomous and ring-fenced service provision utility with clear roles, responsibilities and contractual
                         arrangements. NCWSC will be the project implementer and service provider for this OBA project.
                         The project also builds on the 2007 IDA Credit (Water and Sanitation Service Improvement Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         or WaSSIP) which has funded, inter alia, significant improvements to the water and sewerage
                         networks in Nairobi➢❨ s low-income areas. This expansion of local networks, particularly sewer
                         networks, within Nairobi➢❨ s low-income settlements has provided an opportunity for improved
                         access to water and sewerage services. However, the cost of connecting to these networks is too high
                         for low income families and so this project will provide targeted output-based subsidies for eligible
                         households to facilitate service access.

                         The project will partially subsidize the cost of upgrading compound latrines and connect compounds
                         and households to the water and sewerage network. All the wastewater produced at the beneficiary
                         households will be conveyed to the Kariobangi Sewerage Treatment Plant which was rehabilitated
                         under the IDA-financed Water and Sanitation Services Improvement Project (WaSSIP). The main
                         sewers feeding the treatment plant were also rehabilitated under the WaSSIP.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities will be carried out in twelve of Nairobi's informal settlements: Kayole Soweto,
                         River Bank, Matopeni, Mukuru, Mathare, Huruma, Maili Saba, Mowlem, Canaan, Mwengenye,
                         Kawangware, and Kibera.

                         Nairobi➢❨ s slums demonstrate the magnitude of the challenges and opportunities for poverty
                         reduction in these settlements. The National Bureau of Statistics conservatively estimates that, within
                         Nairobi➢❨ s administrative boundary, at least 30 percent of the population lives in slums. With the
                         2009 census reporting Nairobi➢❨ s total population as 3.2 million, the city➢❨ s slum population now
                         stands at almost one million people. Recent in depth research supported by the World Bank reveals
                         both encouraging and discouraging development indicators in Nairobi➢❨ s slums. The incidence of
                         economic poverty is very high➢❨ an astounding 73 percent of slum residents fall below the poverty
Public Disclosure Copy




                         line. Unemployment is also high (26 percent), and living conditions are appalling➢❨ only 3 percent
                         live in a house with permanent walls, water and electricity.

                         Rapid growth of informal slum settlements in the city of Nairobi can be attributed to a number of
                         factors among them increasing income inequalities and urban poverty, increasing rates of rural urban
                         migration, inefficient land delivery systems, high costs of urban living and poor investment in low
                         income housing, among other factors. In these low income areas of Nairobi, basic amenities such as
                         water, sanitation facilities including toilets and designed drainage and sewage systems as well as
                         garbage dumping sites are lacking. Some of the low income areas have recently seen developments
                         to improve basic services.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (GEN01)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01



                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project activities trigger OP 4.01 and OP 4.12, although in both cases, the risks are
                              anticipated to be minimal and site-specific.
                              The site-specific, local environmental risks identified are related to construction impacts. As a
                              mitigation plan, the project adopted and re-disclosed the ESMF developed for WaSSIP project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Restriction of access to resources, temporary disturbance: Neither involuntary resettlement nor
                              land acquisition is expected to be associated with this project. Connections will only be made once
                              consumers have applied for services, and so the project is entirely demand driven. However, there
                              could potentially be temporary disruption to household activities, and in some cases project
                              activities may lead to property damage. Therefore, the project has adopted the Resettlement Policy
                              Framework (RPF) developed for the WaSSIP project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The project is likely to have a strong positive impact on the target areas, and no negative impacts
                              are envisaged.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                NCWSC has developed an Environmental and Social Action Plan which will be used during
                              project implementation. It has been cleared by the Bank and publicly disclosed.




                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard
                             The                    with
                                          policies, are
                                 key stakeholders       thean emphasis
                                                            project       on potentially
                                                                    beneficiaries. There affected people.
                                                                                         is an extensive process of face to face
                           consultation with PAPs in the target areas before any construction takes place, during which the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safeguards policies are discussed. Community meetings, known locally as barazas, are held to
                           sensitize the communities of the potential impacts and benefits of the project. NCWSC has
                           established a site offices in the target area, and consumers may come there to apply for services,
                           pay bills and register complaints.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [        ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rajesh K. Advani,Patrick Nduati Mwangi
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)             Date: 18-Jan-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)        Date: 19-Jan-2017
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
