INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 191
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Haiti                      Project ID:  P148259
Project Name: HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)
Task Team       Gaetano Vivo
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Mar-2015                Estimated    28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Flood protection (60%), Irrigation and drainage (40%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (60%), Other rural development (20%), Urban
planning and housing policy (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                5.00
Total                                                                       5.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed PDO is to strengthen the Government of Haiti's institutional capacity to provide
weather, water and climate services customized to the needs of the civil protection and agriculture
sectors, which contributes to increasing resilience.
The PDO will be achieved through: (i) integrating existing hydro-met data collecting networks into a
Page 1 of 7


﻿national data platform and strengthening capacity for data archiving, validation, and analysis; and (ii)
identifying weather, water, and climate services' requirements for select end users (including
agriculture and civil protection).
3. Project Description
The project will support the Government of Haiti's capacity to increase its resilience today and build
its future adaptive capacity by providing access to water, weather, and climate information to end
users. By strengthening the collaboration between relevant institutions and end-users, the focus will
a         be on enhancing accessibility and customization of hydro-met information that is critical for decision
making in emergency management and agriculture. In these two sectors, the project will leverage
synergies with existing World Bank-IDA operations (e.g. the Re-launching Agriculture 2 and the
Disaster Risk Management and Reconstruction projects) which aim to increase resilience to
exogenous shocks, including hydro-meteorological hazards.
The project will comprise three components:
Component 1. Support the hydro-meteorological services' institutional reform process and develop
data management tools (US$3,000,000). The focus of this component will be on the integration of
the existing hydro-met data collection networks into one national data platform accessible across all
end users in the GoH. In addition to providing the technical platform, the component will provide the
technical assistance to GoH to gradually move from the current structure of six hydro-meteorological
networks managed by five different government entities to a structure with one national agency
coordinating the development, operation and maintenance of all hydro-meteorological data
management. Specifically, the Component will support a country-wide, geo-referenced baseline
assessment of stations, define requirements for an optimal national network, repair and replace,
where needed, existing data-collecting sensors. It will provide the GoH with a data platform that can
gather data from all existing sensors. In order to support the institutional reform process, this
component will include technical assistance to achieve the merging of CNM and SNRE and
facilitate the evolution towards the Agency model. Finally, the component will support technical
capacity building in the hydro-met institutions through training and study tours. This component will
also support climate-resilience research benefitting Haiti, by financing scholarships, research projects
and international collaborations.
Component 2. Identify weather, water and climate services' requirements for select end users and
developing information services to support decision making (US$1,400,000). The focus of this
component will be the definition of hydro-met information requirements for end-users. In line with
recommendations from the Global Framework for Climate Services this is expected to be a long-term
process, with a continuous user feedback mechanism, including in the aftermath of major events. End
users targeted by the project include: civil protection (e.g. parametric thresholds for select high-risk
zones, in order to enable use of the hydro-meteorological data platform as a decision support
mechanism for the activation of warnings by DPC) and agriculture (e.g. leveraging the new data
platform to improve existing information services for farmers and national food security agency).
These sectors were chosen with a view to tapping on synergies with existing Bank projects, such as
the Re-launching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services II (P126744); the Disaster
Risk Management and Reconstruction (P126346). Several other sectors supported by the World
Bank in Haiti will benefit from an improved access to reliable hydromet information, including:
infrastructure design (e.g. update return periods for select hazards in order to better integrate climate
resilience measures into infrastructure design), and public health (e.g. information service for
warnings of water-borne diseases and contingency planning).
Page 2 of 7


﻿Component 3. Support to project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and PPCR knowledge
management (US$600,000). Component 3 will include two subcomponents. (i) Strengthening
MARNDR capacity to comply with Bank fiduciary, safeguard, and M&E procedure and ensure
O
U         effective and timely implementation of project activities. This will include the recruitment of a
Project Coordinator in charge of day-to-day project management, additional human resources, and
financing of operating cost. (ii) Supporting MARNDR M&E capacity and PPCR knowledge
management. An M&E specialist financed through the project will strengthen MARNDR's capacity
to monitor and report progress on the project-level results of the SPCR (in coordination with CIAT).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will maintain and replace hydro-meteorological equipment and provide services and
capacity building around the country. In the areas where new equipment will be installed awareness
raising and communication activities will be carried out to ensure engagement and support of local
communities. Project beneficiaries include all data users that may benefit from reliable hydro-
meteorological and climate data to inform their decision-making. Direct beneficiaries include public
and private actors who work in sectors specifically targeted by the project, i.e. farmers and
emergency responders. Indirectly, the Haitian population in general and particularly the poor and
most vulnerable to hydro-meteorological shocks (slum dwellers, rural population, and people living
in high risk areas) will benefit from information services provided by the project or by applications
stemming from them.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (GENDR)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Hydromet projects usually provide environmental
0         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               benefits, given that they support lower risks associated
with floods, drought and fire, winds, extreme weather
events, and even industrial accidents. Project activities are
usually implemented within available hydromet sites and
involve a minor installation of observation equipment
with no or minimal environmental disturbance. This
project, likewise, has a very low environmental and social
risk and is rated a low risk Category B project. The main
environment impacts are focused on three aspects of the
equipment repair (Component 1):
(a) the safe disposal/storage of old equipment, in
particular, of mercury containing parts such as
thermometers, temperature gauges, etc;
(b) the safety of workers involved in repair: it is important
to ensure that their exposure to mercury is minimized
through the use of appropriate protective gear and
handling protocols; and
(c) possible exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs) if
Page 3 of 7


﻿the system for collection of the data from the equipment is
sent by cell tower or other emitting frequency. While
there is no clear proved risk to low levels of EMF, higher
levels may cause a disturbance, particularly to those who
are sensitive to EMFs.
The environmental risks mentioned above are only
associated with Component 1. This component focuses on
strengthening the capacity of the GoH to collect, store
and provide hydro-meteorological and climate data to end
users. Under this component, the project may also fund
the repair of equipment necessary to collect critical hydro-
meteorological and climate data and will finance
community awareness raising activities in places where
repaired stations are located.
A short Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the GoH to
address (i) safe disposal/storage of old equipment, in
particular, of mercury containing parts such as
thermometers, temperature gauges, etc, (ii) the safety of
workers involved in the repair or removal of equipment,
and (iii) possible exposure to minor electromagnetic
fields. The ESMF addresses potential negative impacts
and appropriate procedures to avoid, minimize, and
mitigate these impacts. It contains an Environmental
Management Plan section as part of the ESMF which
focuses specifically on procedures for safe removal and
disposal of mercury. Consultations with Government
personnel on the ESMF and site visits to hydromet
stations have been completed. As sites where
rehabilitation/installation of stations will happen are not
chosen yet, no consultations with project affected people
were done. However, once the sites are chosen,
consultations will be done with project affected people.
The ESMF was disclosed in country on March 24, 2015
and on the Bank's website on March 25, 2015. The ESMF
can be accessed at the following link on the Ministry of
Agriculture's website
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/IMG/pdf/
cadre de_gestionenvironnementale_etsociale cges_.
pdf
In Haiti, it is unlikely that mercury, like in the US and
Europe, is recycled. It is also unlikely that there is any law
Page 4 of 7


﻿related to the release of mercury into the air or water or
ground. The EMP therefore focuses on assessing what is
available in Haiti in terms of mercury storage and assesses
other options for safe disposal. The EMP also focuses on
safety issues for workers, including directives on
protective gear, and standard operating procedures that
need to be used when removing and storing (temporarily)
parts containing mercury. Standard protocols are available
in the literature which elaborate the steps necessary for
the removal and storage of these parts prior to transport to
a designated center or facility.
Component 2 focuses on understanding hydro-met data
requirements for end users and includes collection of
information from end-users, workshops, etc. This
component has no safeguard requirement.
Component 3, support to project implementation,
monitoring and evaluation focuses on recruitment of the
project coordinator and team and project management.
This component has no safeguard requirement.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           This policy is not triggered given that the project is not
4.04                                  expected to have impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
finance activities that affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural        No           This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  impact the quality or management of physical cultural
resources as defined under the policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           This policy is not triggered given that given that there are
BP 4.10                               no indigenous peoples present in the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No           This policy is not triggered given that there will be no
OP/BP 4.12                            involuntary resettlement as defined under the policy.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
4.37                                  support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
support other investments which rely on the services of
existing dams.
Projects on International  No         This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  affect international waterways as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed     No           This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      affect disputed areas as defined under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 5 of 7


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will replace meteorological, agro-meteorological, hydrological, hydro-geological,
climatic and marine equipment as well as support larger scale capacity building. There are no
potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts. The main impact will come from the safe
disposal of mercury thermometers and the replacement, where possible, of this equipment with
non-mercury elements.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The main negative environmental impact is related to the safe disposal of mercury, often contained
in the thermometers of old hydro-meteorological and other such equipment. Possible adverse
effects may include exposure to mercury during installation and removal of the equipment, unsafe
disposal of mercury containing components, and short terms exposure to minor electromagnetic
fields as meteorological information is relayed over a network from the equipment to a central
location. These environmental impacts are expected to be localized and minimized through
responsive mitigation measures
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project alternative considered is to replace these older equipment containing mercury with
components that are not hazardous. Where possible, the project will seek to purchase these models
of equipment.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has developed the ESMF and has assumed responsibility for safeguard monitoring
and reporting. The borrower's capacity is limited but sufficient to ensure that the procedures
outlined in the ESMF/EMP for mercury disposal are followed by the contractor. The ESMF
contains screening procedures for the identification of sites for new meteo-hydrological equipment
to prevent involuntary resettlement as defined by the policy.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The potentially affected people are not yet known because the project sites have not been
identified. Nevertheless, the borrower has engaged and consulted with stakeholders (government
agencies, local CBOs, etc) on the design of the project and the ESMF which are reflected in the
ESMF. Mechanisms for local consultation and potentially affected people during site
identification for infrastructure works are included in the ESMF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             24-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 6 of 7


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Haiti                                                      24-Mar-2015
Comments: Disclosed on the Ministry of Agriculture's website:
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/IMG/pdf/
cadre de_gestion environnementale et sociale cges_.pdf
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
o         Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gaetano Vivo
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Josef Lloyd Leitmann (PMGR)          Date: 30-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


