INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15703
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Belarus                    Project ID:  P114515
Project Name: Integrated Solid Waste Management Project (P114515)
Task Team       Kremena M. lonkova
Leader(s):
Estimated       16-Nov-2009                Estimated    17-Jun-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU09                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Solid waste management (99%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and
flood protection (1%)
Theme:          Pollution management and environmental health (50%), City-wide Infrastructure
and Service Delivery (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     102.12            Total Bank Financing:   42.51
Financing Gap:            5.50
o           Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        48.61
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           42.51
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                5.50
Financing Gap                                                    5.50
Total                                                           96.62
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 5


﻿The proposed project development objective (PDO) is twofold: (i) increase environmental benefits of
integrated solid waste management in Grodno through recovery                      and
reuse of recyclable materials; and (ii) strengthen national capacities to m
anage hazardous wastes associated with POPs. The GEF global objective is to red
0
uce environmental and health risks, associated with the presence and release of
POP in the global and local environment.
O
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is twofold: (i) increase environmental benefits of
integrated solid waste management in Grodno through recovery                      and
reuse of recyclable materials; and (ii) strengthen national capacities to m
anage hazardous wastes associated with POPs. The GEF global objective is to red
uce environmental and health risks, associated with the presence and release of
POP in the global and local environment.
3. Project Description
The project consists of 4 components, as follows: Component I: Mechanical Materials Recovery
Facility in the city of Grodno; Component 2: Waste Separation Management Improvements;
Component 3: Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs); and Component 4: Project Management.
As of the time of this ISDS, the contract for the construction of the Materials Recycling Facility
(MRF) in Grodno under Component I has been signed and is under implementation. Civil works
have advanced substantially and substantial completion of the facility is expected by the summer of
2016 to be followed by a period of testing and commissioning. The project is currently being
restructured to allow that project savings are used to finance the cost of collection equipment under
Component II. The project is on track to achieve its Development Objective - to increase the
environmental benefits of integrated solid waste management in Grodno through recovery and reuse
of recyclable material.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
U        analysis (if known)
Project activities under Component I are located in the vicinity of Grodno. Project activities under
O
Component II are located in the city of Grodno. Project activities under Component III were located
outside populated areas in the Republic of Belarus.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSU03)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Page 2 of 5


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Safeguards issues and impacts are not impacted by project restructuring, which relates to project
financing.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no potential indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities resulting
from project restructuring.
Safeguard polices triggered for the overall project investments are relevant for the activities
financed under Component I and III. As of the time of this ISDS, the project remains in
compliance with the safeguards policies.
Project implementation will positively impact the environment at site areas, and environmental
gains will be achieved due to: (i) solid waste management improvement in Grodno oblast through
increasing the effectiveness of the existing collection, recycling, and solid waste treatment system;
(ii) prolongation of landfill service life through storing only recycling residuals; (iii) raw materials
*           (plastic, paper, non-ferrous and ferrous materials) demand decrease through recycling waste.
The social impacts of the project are positive as it seeks to engage the population into separate
waste collection in Grodno oblast and creates new jobs for local residents. The project does not
finance any land acquisition and project activities do not lead to any form of resettlement. All civil
works are carried out on a site located outside of the city, without causing interference to any
social or economic activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A public consultation process has been implemented for the project in accordance with the Bank
OP 4.01. Two rounds of public consultations were held for each draft EIA with EMP prepared
respectively for Component I and Component III. For the SW facility, a first EIA consultation was
Page 3 of 5


﻿held on June 19, 2009, and the second took place on August 19, 2009. For the POPs investments,
a first EIA public discussion was held in May 2009 at the main project sites in Slonim and Lida,
followed by another set of meetings in July 2009. Comments received during all meetings are
incorporated in the final EIA safeguard documents. The final documents were reviewed and
O
approved by the Bank and disclosed in English in Infoshop on November 12, 2009. The respective
Executive Summaries were also sent to the Board on November 12, 2009 in time to meet project
appraisal conditions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include the Ministry of Housing and Utilities (MHU), which is the ministry
responsible for overseeing national investment plans in the communal services sector, including
water, sanitation and solid waste; the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection (MNREP) that acts as the National Executing Agency based on its
official assignment of the national coordination role for implementation of the Stockholm
Convention; the City of Grodno including municipality representatives and population; several
donors involved in POPs related activities in Belarus included UNDP, NATO and SEPA; and
NGOs and local research institutes interested in the overall project activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Oct-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Nov-2009
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  12-Nov-2009
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA[   ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 4 of 5


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X]  No  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
o          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kremena M. lonkova
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                 Date: 27-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: David N. Sislen (PMGR)             Date: 27-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


