INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16527
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mozambique                 Project ID:  P149377
Project Name: Water Services & Institutional Support II (P149377)
Task Team       Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares,David Malcolm Lord
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Feb-2016                Estimated    29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWA01                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (100%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     146.00            Total Bank Financing:   90.00
Financing Gap:           56.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
0
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                90.00
Total                                                                      90.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
(i) Increase water service coverage in key cities;
(ii) strengthen the institutional and regulatory capacity for water supply services in the Northern,
Central and Southern regions of Mozambique; and
Page 1 of 11


﻿(iii) Support the recipient to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
3. Project Description
The proposed project is a follow-on from the successful Water Services and Institutional Support
Project (WASIS I), which closed on October 31, 2015. The project and is designed to expand piped
water provision in the target cities and to support the next phase of institutional reforms in the urban
water sector. The reform process has been guided by the Government's water sector policy,
including the delegated management framework and an institutional landscape that promotes: (a) a
o        clear separation of function (policy, operation and regulation), (b) autonomy, local /regional
accountability and efficiency in service delivery, and (c) full cost-recovery and financial
sustainability. The long-term, strategic objectives of the sector reforms are to achieve universal
coverage, to support independence through enabling self-financing or private-sector financing, and to
create robust institutional structures and supporting mechanisms that respond to local demands for
sustainable water service delivery.
It is within this strategic sector context that WASIS II has been defined. The proposed institutional
activities and infrastructure investments will support the long-term objectives of the reform process,
particularly through increasing water service coverage in key cities, strengthening institutional
capacity and regulatory frameworks for water supply services, and establishing regional utilities in
the northern, central and southern Regions of Mozambique. On August 6, 2015, the Council of
Ministers approved the creation of the regional utilities that will be supported by the Project.
Furthermore, the proposed investments aim to leverage wider economic benefits by focusing on
growth poles, or strategic cities that are active centers of trade and commerce along important
development corridors. In addition, the project will take full advantage of opportunities to reduce
extreme poverty by working within some of the poorest provinces in Mozambique and extending
piped water services to predominantly low-income households in peri-urban areas. This will be
supported by specific activities, including targeted payments to remove connection barriers for
eligible households, technical assistance for refining pro-poor water tariff structures, and developing
and mainstreaming citizen engagement and gender-inclusive policies and procedures.
0
Specifically, the proposed project will finance priority water supply investments in three major
systems that serve five urban areas in the Northern and Central regions: (a) Pemba, (b) Beira and
Dondo, and (c) Tete and Moatize, the last of which will be financed under additional financing under
an IDA1 8 allocation). In addition, the project will support the creation of regional water utilities in
the northern, central and southern regions of Mozambique. The proposed infrastructure investments
will enable an increase in coverage and will address key infrastructure constraints to improving
efficiency and quality of services. Furthermore, the proposed water supply infrastructure will
support and leverage institutional objectives, including the creation of the regional utility companies.
WASIS II has been structured in five components. A summary of activities to be financed under
each Component is provided below.
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production and Distribution (US$116.1
million) :
Subcomponent 1.a: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production (US$66.1 million) -
Subcomponent L.a aims to increase production capacity in the three systems serving the cities of
Pemba, Beira and Dondo, and Tete and Moatize, including through the expansion and refurbishment
of wellfields, refurbishment of an existing intake, expansion and refurbishment of water treatment
Page 2 of 11


﻿facilities, rehabilitation and expansion of transmission infrastructure, pump stations, and associated
fittings.
Subcomponent 1.b: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Distribution (US$50.0 million):
O
Subcomponent 1.b investments will increase service coverage in the three water distribution systems
serving the cities of Pemba, Beira and Dondo, and Tete and Moatize, including through the: (a)
construction of new distribution centers and rehabilitation of existing ones to increase storage with
ground reservoirs and pressure through elevated water towers within the existing footprint; (b)
expansion and rehabilitation of water supply networks; (c) provision of equipment comprising
installation of district meters and pressure control valves within existing pipelines and telemetry
systems; and (d) provision of approximately 60,000 new household meters and associated materials
for domestic connections.
Component 2: Institutional Support (US$18.9 million):
Component 2 will support the decentralization of FIPAG operations by establishing and reinforcing
three regional utilities, i.e. Aguas do Sul, Aguas do Centro, and Aguas do Norte, including the
purchase and installation of a commercial system with system components focusing on billing and
commercial management, customer service policies and procedures (including citizen engagement,
gender and disability considerations, and complaints handling/recourse mechanisms), establishment
of corporate governance structures, policies and procedures, including human resource issues
associated with skills/professional development and equal opportunity and gender policies, and asset
management systems and indirect NRW-reduction programs.
This component will also support project management, supervision for contracts under Component 1,
audits, training, and various technical studies as needed, as well as technical assistance to FIPAG for
the implementation of environmental and social safeguards.
Component 3: Output-Based Payments for Low-Income-Household Connections (US$6 million):
0
The objective of the component is to increase access to piped-water connections for low-income
households in the cities of the central and northern regions of the recipient and in the Maputo region
by providing output-based payments to the regional utilities to support the provision of water
a        services to the poor by facilitating the uptake of connections for low-income households through
grant payments to reimburse the costs of eligible connections. This component will also support
FIPAG to structure tariffs and establish other mechanisms to improve poverty targeting for low-
income customers to ensure sustainability of the proposed interventions, including related studies and
hiring of the independent verification agent.
This component will build upon the successful experience of the recently closed Global Partnership
on Output-Based Aid Project (P104945) in Maputo, which supported about 30,000 subsidized
connections in peri-urban areas. The component will continue support for connections in Maputo (in
parallel to the activities of the Greater Maputo Water Supply Project [GMWSP]) and will replicate
and extend the program to the project cities in the central and northern regions.
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (zero-budget):
This component will support potential disaster-recovery needs in FIPAG water systems by providing
immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed. This will include supply of critical
Page 3 of 11


﻿parts and equipment, minor civil works rehabilitation, supply of fuel, rent of generators and rapid
transportation of chemicals and critical parts by express mechanisms.
Component 5: Capacity Building and Operational Support to CRA (US$5 million):
0
The objective of this component is to expand and refine quality-of-service and financial regulatory
mechanisms for urban water supply in Mozambique, including a detailed impact evaluation to
measure and assess outcomes related to the project's institutional and infrastructure investments.
This component will expand quality-of-service and financial regulatory mechanisms for urban water
supply in Mozambique, including through the: (a) carrying out of impact evaluation activities to
measure the outcomes of the project; (b) scaling up of the information and communication
technology (ICT) based platform for customer complaints and support for recourse mechanisms
(RECO) and rollout thereof within Mozambique; (c) creation of local regulatory mechanisms to
monitor and enforce parameters of local regulation, including the establishment of the local
regulatory commissions (Comissoes Regulatorias Locais [CORALs]) and carrying out of training of
community representatives and focal points; and (d) review of subsidies for low-income customers.
The project will also support the regional utilities, through CRA, to improve key performance
indicator and data management systems by establishing procedures for the utilities to report
information within a country system that is aligned with the International Benchmarking Network
Methodology (IBNET) database.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project investments will take place in five cities: Tete, Moatize, Beira, Dondo, and Pemba,
served by three water supply systems. Given the nature, scale and scope of the infrastructure
investments planned, the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project are
expected to be localized, moderate, reversible and temporary. The civil works will be carried out
either on land already owed by FIPAG or along existing roads rights-of-way.
0
The proposed WASIS II project is a repeater of the ongoing WASIS project, which is a Category B.
WASIS II will finance the same nature of investments as those financed by WASIS in the same
0
locations in Mozambique. Hence, WASIS II is also a Category B project. In addition, the locations of
infrastructure investments under both projects are similar - urban areas and rights-of-way of existing
roads. It is envisaged that the bulk of the impacts associated with the proposed activities will occur
during the construction/rehabilitation phases.
There are no protected areas for nature conservation, species or habitats of particular interest that will
be directly or indirectly affected. It is expected that most of the potential adverse environmental and
social impacts associated with the project investments will be avoided and/or mitigated through
provisions adopted during the project preparation phase and/or the development of the technical
designs. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed
for WASIS I. As WASIS II is also rated as category B and activities will take place in similar
locations, the ESMF has been updated and disclosed in Mozambique. The ESMF was disclosed on
August 12, 2015 in Beira, Dondo, Tete, Moatize, and Pemba; a second disclosure was carried out on
September 21, 2015 in the same cities. A third disclosure in Mozambique was done on February 16,
2016. The ESMF was submitted for disclosure in the Bank's InfoShop on February 10, 2016. Where
necessary, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and Environmental and Social
Management Plans (as well as Resettlement Action Plans) will be inserted in the works contracts
Page 4 of 11


﻿obligations. Other relevant and applicable national regulations will guide the project implementation
phase, as well as serve as due-diligence guidelines with which the Borrower has to comply.
The proposed project investments and associated potential impacts are summarized below:
0
Typical project-supported infrastructure investments include:
(a)    Civil, electrical and mechanical works to improve water supply production, which include
expansion and refurbishment of wellfields, a water intake, and water treatment plants;
(b)    Priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and operational efficiency of the water
distribution system, which include goods and rehabilitation or construction of water distribution
centers, increasing water storage capacity and pressure; and
(c)    Rehabilitation or expansion of water transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines and
pump stations, as well as rehabilitation and expansion of water supply networks.
Typical negative environmental and social impacts expected from the project-supported investments:
Infrastructure investments under (a) and (b) above will be constructed on FIPAG-owned land, in
which similar infrastructure already exists but is in need of expansion or rehabilitation. During the
reconnaissance field visits, the project team observed that FIPAG properties are mostly fenced, free
of encroachment and, in general, well kept. The anticipated impacts associated with the construction
and rehabilitation activities will likely include minor soil erosion (resulting from vegetation clearance
and excavations of soils for activities such as the rehabilitation and construction of boreholes), and
the installation of pipelines and/or construction of distribution centers and water treatment plants.
Additional impacts will include noise and dust emissions from vehicles and the movement of
machinery during the construction phase. Pollution of soils and waterways may also result from
potential spills and leaks of fuels as well as oils and any lubricants used on the machinery and
vehicles involved in construction activities. Notwithstanding, soil erosion can be minimized by
strictly restricting vegetation removal and excavations to areas where construction of infrastructure
will take place. These impacts will be mitigated through compliance with the ESMF, National
Regulations, and any applicable Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP), which will
contain Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) to be implemented by the Contractors. These
clauses should form part of the Contractors' contract specifications and bill of quantities.
It is expected that there will be little or no land acquisition in the project, but in case any construction
requires land acquisition and/or affects community or individual livelihoods, FIPAG will follow the
provisions of the RPF addressing compensation requirements, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
will be prepared as necessary.
Infrastructure investments under (c) will be constructed on the existing rights-of-way of roads.
During the exploratory field visits, the project team observed that the road rights-of-way envisaged
for the investments are free of encroachment, but detailed information about any required land
acquisition and/or impact on livelihoods (such as of street vendors who may eventually use the area)
will be available only during the preparation of the detailed engineering designs. Given the technical
flexibility allowed for the installation of water pipelines, it will be possible to avoid land acquisition
and also impacts on livelihoods. In case these impacts cannot be avoided, FIPAG will follow the
provisions in the RPF addressing compensation requirements.
Specific project infrastructure investments and associated impacts to be noted:
Page 5 of 11


﻿The project will add wells to two different well fields, Pemba and Tete/Moatize.
(a) In Pemba the project will expand production of the Metuge well field from around 17,500 m3 per
O
U         day to around 30,000-32,000 m3 per day (12,000-14,000 m3 per day increase) by installing
additional 10-15 new boreholes. A ground water assessment undertaken in 2012 defines a sustainable
yield of 45,000 m3 per day for the Metuge well filed. So, the proposed project will reach about 70
percent of the sustainable yield of 45,000 m3 per day.
(b) In Tete/Moatize, the project will expand the total production in the system from around 44,000
m3 per day to around 55,000 m3 per day (around 11,000 m3 per day increase). This will include
installation of additional 20-22 new boreholes in the Tete and Nhartanda well fields - both of which
are high yielding due to their potential interconnectivity with the Zambezi river, according to an
assessment done in 2013.
*      The well fields in Tete/Moatize are potentially interconnected with the Zambezi river, which
is close to the well fields. If interconnection occurs, abstraction would be a small fraction of the dry-
weather flow of the river. The additional amount of water to be abstracted is about 0.016 percent of
the Zambezi river flow in the dry season, close to the sites. The Operational Policy on International
Waterways OP/BP 7.50 has been triggered.
*      In order to increase protection of the water intake structure located in the embankments of
the Pungue River, which supplies water to the cities of Beira and Dondo, the project will finance
rehabilitation works of the structures protecting the intake. This activity also triggers the Policy on
International Waterways, OP/BP 7.50.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kristine Schwebach (GSU07)
Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela (GENDR)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENO 1)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          This project is a repeater of WASIS I, which was
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                classified as a Category B type. The nature, scale and
scope of the infrastructure investments proposed for the
project are similar to those financed under the original
project. This policy is triggered due to potential negative
environmental impacts mostly expected to occur during
the construction phase. The main anticipated impacts
associated with the construction and rehabilitation
activities will likely include minor soil erosion (resulting
from vegetation clearance and excavations of soils), and
the installation of pipelines and/or construction of
distribution centers and water treatment plants. Noise and
dust emissions may result from vehicles and the
movement of machinery during the construction phase
including pollution of soils and waterways as a result
Page 6 of 11


﻿from potential spills and leaks of fuels, oils and any
lubricants used by machinery and vehicles on the
construction sites. During project implementation the
borrower will capacitate its environmental team to ensure
effective management of environmental and social issues
associated with water supply projects at central, regional
and local levels.
During project preparation, existing Environmental and
Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) prepared for the
original project and disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop
(03/23/2010) were duly updated by the borrower and
widely consulted. The ESMF has been disclosed in
country on February 16, 2016. The ESMF was submitted
for disclosure in the Bank's InfoShop on February 10,
2016, prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat areas
4.04                                affected by proposed investments.
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No           The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The proposed project activities do not require the use of
pesticides or other inputs that trigger this policy.
Physical Cultural      No           The presence of physical cultural resources has not been
Resources OP/BP 4.11                identified in the project area. In addition, the project will
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement YesThprpsdpoetatvtemitrsutntmoay
OP/BP4.1The preseneos of scali. cutrlreoucs hs nothe          eno
idntified ienterojcanadtion, Tefo,aprrite opoecstwill
avoid disturbing or affecting physical cultural resources.
Nonetheless, civil works contracts will include chance
finds procedures as described in the project ESMF.
Therere e no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Ivlna  The proposed proje ct ivities might result in temporary
OP/BP 4.12                          or permanent loss of assets, i.e., crops or other means of
Sincome generation. Therefore, appropriate compensation
for these negative social impacts may be needed.
Where possible, expansion will occur within existing
FIPAG infrastructure compounds. Water pipelines will
also utilize road rights-of-way in order to reduce the
impact on assets. In cases where new neighborhoods are
being formed, FIPAG will work with the municipality to
ensure water networks are established prior to the
municipality allowing new homes to be built.
Under the original project, the Borrower developed a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). This was
reviewed, approved and disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop
(03/23/20 10). The RPF was updated and disclosed in
Page 7 of 11


﻿country on September 21, 2015. The RPF was submitted
for disclosure in the Bank's InfoShop on February 10,
2016, prior to appraisal.
0
In case land acquisition or restriction of access to
resources are identified as a requirement for a project
activity, a RAP will be prepared, consulted upon,
reviewed by the World Bank for No Objection, and
publicly disclosed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve or affect any source of water
4.37                                 that uses Dams.
Projects on International  Yes       This policy is preemptively triggered because the project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 will finance activities potentially affecting two
International rivers, the Pungue River and Zambezi River.
Pungue -The project will rehabilitate structures protecting
the water intake located on the river embankments, but
there will be no increase of water abstraction compared to
the original design.
The Pungue River is shared by Zimbabwe and
Mozambique. Mozambique is the downstream riparian.
Zambezi - The project will rehabilitate and install new
boreholes that may affect about 0.016 percent of the river
flow in the dry season, assuming that the aquifers are
interconnected. The Zambezi River is shared by Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia and
Zimbabwe. Mozambique is the downstream riparian.
U         Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not taking place in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed WASIS II is a repeater of WASIS I, which was a Category B project. WASIS II will
finance the same nature of investments as those financed by WASIS I in the same locations in
Mozambique. In addition, the locations of infrastructure investments under both projects are
similar - urban areas and rights-of-way of existing roads. Proposed activities likely to generate
negative environmental and/or social impacts during construction will include civil, electrical and
mechanical works to improve water supply production, expansion and refurbishment of well
fields, a water intake, and water treatment plants, rehabilitation or expansion of water transmission
infrastructure, including new pipelines and pump stations, as well as rehabilitation and expansion
of water supply networks.
WASIS II has triggered the following Safeguard Polices: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
Page 8 of 11


﻿4.01), due to potential negative environmental impacts expected during the construction phase,
mostly related to public nuisance, disturbances, and pollution of soils, including waste
management; Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), because the project may result in temporary
or permanent loss of assets, i.e., crops or other means of income generation; and Projects on
O
)           International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), because the project will finance activities potentially
affecting two international rivers, the Pungue River and Zambezi River.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the project are
relatively small in scale, and the potential adverse environmental and social impacts are expected
to be minor, localized, and easily mitigated. Indirect and long-term impacts are not expected at this
time, barring any major cumulative impacts caused by the larger water sector investments in select
target cities that are being implemented in tandem with some of the activities of this project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
FIPAG prepared an ESMF and an RPF to ensure that the project remains in full compliance with
Bank Safeguard Policies as well as national legislation throughout project implementation. Both
the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and measures to mitigate any adverse environmental
and social impacts of the project, almost all of which are related to construction. The ESMF
provides a screening process for establishing the level of environmental management required for
each type of project activity. With respect to implementation of the ESMF and RPF, the
Environmental and Social Unit in FIPAG was created within the Technical Support area, which
has the primary responsibility for all project environmental and social issues, including
implementation of the ESMF and RPF.
O
The project will finance training and capacity building activities associated with ensuring that
FIPAG has sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF and RPF, as well as any
subsequent Environmental and Social Management Plans for construction and Abbreviated RAPs
(if required) throughout project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project stakeholders include FIPAG, municipal authorities, community leaders and residents
where the WASIS II investments will be made.
Both the ESMF and RPF were publicly disclosed in country and target cities through the FIPAG
Offices on August 12, 2015 and September 21, 2015 following open and transparent public
consultations with key project stakeholders prior to appraisal of the original project. The ESMF
and RPF were submitted for disclosure in the Bank's InfoShop on February 10, 2016. Project
beneficiaries were included in the consultation process and were consulted directly with respect to
the ESMF and RPF. The target audience for the public consultations included provincial and
municipal governments, civil society, and local communities in the cities where the bulk of the
project activities will be implemented. The recommendations and discussions were included in the
final version of the ESMF and RPF. All project beneficiaries have access to the Portuguese
version of the summaries of the ESMF and RPF in their city.
Page 9 of 11


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mozambique                                               16-Feb-2016
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Mozambique                                               21-Sep-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?          Yes [  ] No [   ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
Page 10 of I1


﻿If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [X] No [ ]       NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares,David Malcolm Lord
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 18-Feb-2016
Practice Manager!     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)       Date: 18-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


