INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12349
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                Project ID:  P148291
Project Name: Higher Education Project (P148291)
Task Team       Jason Allen Weaver,Sachiko Kataoka
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-May-2015               Estimated     16-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     15.00            Total Bank Financing:    15.00
U         Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                8.25
IDA Grant                                                                  6.75
Total                                                                     15.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to develop mechanisms that improve and
monitor the quality and labor-market relevance of higher education.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿The project consists of three components: (i) institutional-level improvements; (ii) system-level
interventions; and (iii) project management, monitoring and evaluation.
COMPONENT 1: Institutional-Level Improvements (USD 12.2 million equivalent)
This component supports institutional-level improvements through the following two sub-
O
components:
*         Sub-component 1.1: Just-in-Time Grants to Re-/Up-Skill Workforce (USD 1.0 million equivalent)
Based on a rapid assessment of employer demand and survey of the target audience, grants will be
awarded to eligible education institutions to develop and deliver short-term programs/courses that
align with the sectors, skills, and competencies in immediate demand. The target audience will be
males and females in the job market, including returning migrants and secondary education graduates
entering the labor market with limited work experience in need of up-skilling or retooling (e.g.,
entrepreneurship, business management, IT skills, etc.). The MoES will establish a steering
committee (with representatives from MoF, MoEDT, MoLME, employers, etc.) to oversee the
activity. Based on the outcomes of the employer assessment and survey of the unemployed, the
MoES will publish a call for proposals. Eligible education institutions will submit, and proposals will
be reviewed by selected local employers, instructional design experts, and seasoned experienced
trainers. The steering committee will award grants on a competitive basis using a pre-defined set of
scoring criteria guided by principles such as impact, sustainability, equity and labor-market
relevance. All education institutions are eligible, including those located in the regions, and
collaboration among institutions will be encouraged. A communications campaign will ensure all
eligible institutions and potential enrollees are aware of the activity.
Sub-component 1.2: Competitive Grant Program for Universities (USD 11.2 million equivalent)
The objective of this sub-component is to support the design and implementation of a Competitive
Grant Program (CGP) that will fund demand-driven improvements at HEls. By design, HEls will
self-identify and propose initiatives as a way to foster institutional diversity across the system. On a
O
Q)        competitive basis, the CGP will support the best proposals aimed at the following two objectives: 1)
labor-market relevance and 2) female student support services.
Each of the two objectives has several activities associated with it. Under labor-market relevance, the
proposed sub-projects should address improving labor-market relevance through updated curriculum,
academic offerings, teacher development, career services, refurbishing laboratories, providing
equipment, and learning materials with the support of pedagogical experts and employers. To
improve the provision of support services to female students, the proposed subprojects should create
and strengthen mechanisms to encourage female students' enrollment and completion of higher
education and their transition into the labor market, including but not limited to residential programs,
mentoring programs with women in the workforce, speaker series, job search workshops, etc. Several
NGOs are already providing support to female students, so universities will be encouraged to partner
with these NGOs in their proposal.
COMPONENT 2: System-Level Interventions (USD 2.1 million equivalent)
This component supports interventions at the system level through the following three sub-
components:
Sub-component 2.1: Quality Assurance Enhancements (USD 0.8 million equivalent)
Page 2 of 6


﻿This sub-component supports capacity development for improving and quality. Activities to be
supported include: a) implementing minimum standards for conducting and reporting graduate tracer
studies; b) building capacity of the relevant government authority and HEls to operate in a manner
more consistent with European Standards and Guidelines (ESG) for quality assurance; and c)
U         developing, piloting (at three universities), and approving new standards and guidelines for
institutional accreditation and internal quality assurance.
Sub-component 2.2: System-wide Higher Education Curriculum Reform (USD 0.9 million
equivalent)
This sub-component supports the reform of state-defined curriculum. University-level academic
standards in Tajikistan have two components: 1) state-mandated requirements for general disciplines
and 2) requirements of the academic specialty. The MoES/RMTC is currently responsible for the
state-mandated standards for general disciplines as well as the standards for each specialty. Activities
to be financed under this sub-component include: a) Conducting a detailed employer survey similar
to the Skills Towards Employability and Productivity (STEP) measurement survey. This in-depth
employer survey will provide a more comprehensive indication of what specialties, skills, and
competencies are most important to Tajikistan's economy in both the near and medium terms; and b)
Revising the state-defined curriculum for 5-7 clusters of academic specialties (e.g., teacher
preparation, finance/banking/accounting, etc.) with input from local and international experts as well
as private sector employers to reflect the cognitive and transversal skills in demand by Tajikistan's
new and evolving economy. The activity will start with a revision to science, math, and language
teacher training and then clusters of other academic specialties will be identified and sequenced
according to the employer survey results and other relevant data.
Sub-component 2.3: Assessment of Higher Education Financing (USD 0.3 million equivalent)
This sub-component supports an assessment of Tajikistan's approach to financing higher education.
It will produce recommendations for a more effective and performance-orientated allocation method
that supports key policy objectives.
COMPONENT 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (USD 0.7 million equivalent)
The activities to be financed support project management, communication, training, monitoring and
evaluation, operating costs, and the project's audits.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*        analysis (if known)
The proposed Project will support higher education institutions (HEls) across the country. There is a
component that will finance proposal-based quality and relevance enhancement activities, which may
include small scale rehabilitation of existing campus facilities. However, there will be no land
acquisition or major civil works. Specific locations of HEls that may invest in small scale
rehabilitation are to be identified during the implementation.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The proposed Project will provide a small scale grants to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               higher education institutions for improvements. This may
Page 3 of 6


﻿include small-scale rehabilitation of campus facilities
such as laboratories and classrooms. The impacts will be
a) site specific, b) temporary and not irreversible, and c)
those that are typically associated with building
rehabilitations and small constructions.
The scope of potential small scale rehabilitation, if any,
cannot be identified until the project implementation.
Hence, the MoES has prepared, disclosed and consulted
on an Environmental Management Framework (EMF).
The EMF provides guidance for preparation of site
specific EMP checklists or EMPs to be prepared during
the project implementation. Possible civil works that
require a regular EMP include rehabilitation of
laboratories and classrooms.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          Although the project may support the rehabilitation of
OP/BP 4.12                           existing infrastructure, its will not support any physical
U)                                             works that would require land acquisition or cause
involuntary resettlement impacts as per OP 4.12. Sites
visits and screening will ensure the exclusion of any sites
with involuntary resettlement risks.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
wo. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental issues which might occur due to the implementation of the project are those
associated with Components 1.2 which may require physical improvement of some university
facilities. The environmental risks in such case will include those typically caused by minor
Page 4 of 6


﻿renovation activities, i.e. disturbance due to increased noise, dust and odor, generation of
construction wastes, and labor safety issues. All those will be addressed through sub-project
specific EMP Checklists to be prepared by the MoES once the sub-projects are identified. The
procedures as well as the institutional responsibilities for the development of such EMP Checklists
O
have been determined by the Project Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared by
MoE in April 2015.
The project will not finance any activities which may result in involuntary resettlement impacts as
per OP 4.12.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long term indirect impacts of the Project include the better studying environment for the
teachers and students of the beneficiary universities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MoES has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to identify the most
typical environmental impacts which might be caused by the minor renovation activities supported
by the Project. The EMF also includes the procedures to be followed if a renovation is proposed in
any of the sub-projects. The EMF envisages that the MoES will develop EMP Checklists to
address specific risks of each sub-project related to the minor renovation activities. The MoES will
be responsible for the environmental management of the Project. The MoES has been involved in
the implementation of previous education reform projects and is experienced with the Bank's
operational policies and safeguard requirements.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As the implementing agency, the MoES has disclosed the EMF prior to Appraisal on its official
website on May 5, 2015, with an invitation for comments by May 18th. Minutes of public
consultations conducted on May 7th were attached to the final version of the EMF.
In addition, further (in person) consultations on the EMP Checklists will be held at an introductory
workshop for those HEls interested in participating in Component 1.2.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                23-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             07-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tajikistan                                                 05-May-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 5 of 6


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[    ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
0          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jason Allen Weaver,Sachiko Kataoka
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza      Date: 20-May-2015
Manager:                     (PMGR)
Page 6 of 6


