INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12846
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Africa                   Project ID:   P155374
Project Name:     Pan-African Civil Society FCPF Capacity Building Program on REDD+
Project
Team Leader(s): Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan
Estimated Date    30-Sep-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSURR                    Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):         Participation and civic engagement (20%), Other social development (20%),
Social Inclusion (60%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  0.35644              Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                         Amount
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                 0.35644
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
To build the capacity of targeted civil society organizations in Africa and enhance their knowledge,
and understanding of REDD+, and increase their participation in REDD+ processes at national and
regional levels. (Participating countries will be defined further during preparation.)
C. Project Description
The project will finance the following three main components:
Component 1: Capacity Building Activities for targeted Pan-African civil society organizations
(Approx. US $230,296.00)
Under this component capacity building activities will be supported in eligible REDD+ countries in
Africa, i.e.: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, C6te d'Ivoire, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo and Uganda).
Countries under the FIP Program in Africa i.e. Ghana, Burkina Faso and Democratic Republic of


﻿Congo will not receive support to implement local level activities under this component.
Keeping in mind that formulation of the REDD+ strategy is a process that is participatory in nature,
capacity-building activities provide CSOs with a valuable tool for engaging more meaningfully in the
O
implementation of REDD+ activities. Activities under this component will be proposed and
implemented by civil society organizations based on their current needs and a self-assessment of
areas in which additional information and knowledge are needed. These activities will be defined
during project preparation.
This component will support the implementation of capacity building activities for selected civil
society organizations in eligible REDD+ participating countries in Africa, to: (i) enhance their
understanding of climate change and REDD+; (ii) improve their participation in the preparation of
REDD+ strategies and implementation of REDD+ Programs; and (iii) enhance their participation in
the discussions on the role of REDD+ in climate change mitigation. Capacity building activities
under this component will include activities such as: the carrying out of training and workshops, the
preparation of studies and analytical reports, and the preparation of training and other materials. The
scope of the capacity building activities at the country level will be further developed during project
appraisal. Further, strengthening the CSOs capacities of accountability to their constituencies and
enhancing of gender issues all REDD+ activities will also be considered under this component.
Component 2: Regional level activities and Dissemination of project results (Approx. US $
90,500.00)
This component will finance the design and implementation of a communication strategy to
disseminate at the country and regional level the results of the activities carried out, including the
preparation of good practices and lessons learned. The dissemination of results will target fellow
southern civil society organizations in each of the targeted project countries, as well as national and
regional REDD+ process and climate change forums. Communication strategies will draw upon
existing resources, relationships, and networks to the maximum extent possible. The materials will be
culturally appropriate. In addition, it provides valuable information to identify replicable materials
that can be customized and adapted to context-specific situations. Data on women and youth
participation will be highlighted.
o      Activities under this component will finance dissemination, civil society regional networks and
platforms forums, and the publication of written and audio-visual materials. Materials may be
produced to the extent possible both in appropriate languages, taking into considerations Africa main
languages i.e. French, English and Portuguese given that Mozambique is part of the eligible countries
participating in the FCPF. PACJA will consult with existing regional networks relevant to REDD+ in
the Africa region to seek broader support of the work plan. Events like the African Carbon Forum,
AMCEN meetings, Conference of Parties regional preparatory forums and other events in the region
will be used a good platforms to share knowledge with other regional networks. CSO forums in the
region will provide inputs to the planned activities and these will be communicated to the World
Bank through PACJA.
Under this component FCPF countries in the region will be eligible to receive materials and other
knowledge exchange products.
Component 3: Management and Administration (Approx. US $ 35,644)


﻿Under this component, support will also be provided for PACJA day-to-day project implementation
and management including, procurement, financial management, preparation of annual work plans
and organization of audit reports. It will also support overhead costs including for the PACJA
secretariat in dispensing its mandate in regards to this project.
O
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Civil Society Organizations in REDD+ countries participating in the FCPF in Africa, except for
those also participating in the Forest Investment Program and its associated Dedicated Grant
Mechanism, are eligible to receive support for capacity building activities in their respective
countries. This would include Cameroon, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, C6te
d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sudan, Tanzania,
Togo, and Uganda.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The recipient will receive capacity building and training to ensure to ensure its understanding of the
World Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies and its responsibilities regarding
compliance. Also, the capacity building would focus on assessing the capacity of the recipient to
screen, scope and oversee compliance with safeguard policies, and to incorporate relevant elements
of the polices to ensure the participation of stakeholders in the design and implementation of the
capacity building activities.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No            Given the scope and scale of the Project, it is
BP 4.01                                      not expected that significant and irreversible
Q)                                                   environmental impacts and risks will be
generated. The operational manual for the
Project will include screening and follow-up
procedures for the management of potential
environmental and social impacts for activities
to be implemented under the Project, to include
the ex-ante exclusion of certain activities (such
as those requiring involuntary resettlement).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The fundamental purpose of the activities
financed by the Project is to strengthen forest-
dependent indigenous peoples' organizations to
contribute to their national REDD+ Readiness
processes. Any issues related to natural habitats
will be addressed as part of the screening and
follow up procedures prepared in accordance to
the requirements of OP/BP 4.01.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            Activities financed under the Project are
expected to have eventual positive impacts on
forest management by strengthening the


﻿capacity of forest-dependent indigenous
peoples' organizations to contribute to their
national REDD+ Readiness processes. Any
issues related to forest will be addressed as part
of the screening and follow up procedures
prepared in accordance to the requirements of
OP/BP 4.01.
o       Pest Management OP 4.09       No            None of the activities that would be supported
by the Project are expected to involve the
procurement or a substantial increase in the use
of pesticides. This would be specified in an
exclusion list.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          This policy is not triggered because the Project
BP 4.11                                     is not expected to support any activities having
an adverse impact on physical cultural
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No            This policy is not triggered as the support
provided under this Project will be targeted at
in-country CSOs working on REDD+ and at
organizations representing non-indigenous
forest dwellers. Support is in fact being
provided to indigenous peoples' organizations
through a complementary but separate Project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No           None of the activities that would be supported
4.12                                         by the Project are expected to involve physical
displacement and resettlement. Nor are they
expected to involve the involuntary restriction
of community access to natural resources in
legally designated parks or protected areas. This
would be specified in an exclusion list.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No           None of the activities that would be supported
by the Project are expected to involve the
construction or operation of new or existing
dams.
Projects on International      No            This policy is not triggered because the Project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         is not expected to support any activities having
adverse impacts on the efficient utilization and
protection of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No          This policy is not triggered because the Project
7.60                                         will not support activities in disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan


﻿Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 29-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/         Name: Markus Kostner (PMGR)                           Date: 29-Jun-2015
U        Manager:
S        1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


