                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16702
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kazakhstan                                   Project ID:           P128050
                            Project Name:       East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western
                                                China International Transit Corridor (CAREC - 1b) (P128050 )
                            Task Team           Jacques Bure
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       24-Feb-2012                                      Estimated   01-May-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTI03                                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (99%), Public administration-
                                                Transportation (1%)
                            Theme:              Trade facilitation and market access (80%), Regional integration (10%),
                                                Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1256.00           Total Bank Financing:                                     1068.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            188.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              1068.00
                              Total                                                                                              1256.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objectives (PDOs) are to increase transport efficiency along the Western


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         Europe-Western China Road Corridor within Almaty Oblast and to modernize highway management
                         on sections of the Western Europe-Western China Road Corridor.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project development objectives (PDOs) are to increase transport efficiency along the Western
                         Europe-Western China Road Corridor within Almaty Oblast and to modernize highway management
                         on sections of the Western Europe-Western China Road Corridor.
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed project restructuring requires expansion of a project component (Component 1:
                         Upgrade and construction of the road section of the Western Europe-Western China Road Corridor
                         within Almaty Oblast) to include the financing of 96km of the Otar-Uzynagash road section, which
                         extends into Zhambyl Oblast (80 km out of 96 km is in Almaty Oblast and 16 km in Zhambyl
                         Oblast). Due to cost savings occurred under the two components, financing needs not to be revised
                         for both components. The modified scope of the Project activities will be reflected in the revised
                         project description in the Legal Agreement and the project performance monitoring indicators.

                         Component 1: Upgrade and construction of the road section of the Western Europe-Western China
                         Road Corridor within Almaty and Zhambyl Oblasts. This component is proposed to finance civil
                         works and consultancy services to support the upgrade and reconstruction of road section Otar-
                         Uzynagash that extends from Almaty Oblast into Zhambyl Oblast. The estimated cost of additional
                         road section is US$210million. Due to cost savings, the financing under component 1 does not need
                         revisions.

                         Component 2: Modernize highway management of sections along the Western Europe-Western
                         China Road Corridor. Due to cost savings, the financing under component 2 does not need revisions.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The road section Otar-Uzyngash runs in 10-30 km away from and in parallel to Tien-Shan mountain
                         ridge and the landscape is generally mild. Total length of the road sections, where road widening will
                         be carried out (from 2 to 4 lanes, Category I) is 69 km and total length of bypasses (2 lanes,
                         Category II) is 27 km. Total length of the alignment under the project is 96 km.
                         The area has abundant ground water resources. The climate has distinct continental features with
                         cold winter and hot, dry summer and precipitation during short periods in spring and fall. There are
                         no risks from natural hazards in the project area. The major risk factor is from the rivers crossed by
                         the alignment. These rivers start in mountains and have high seasonal variability with significant
                         flood potential during rainstorms.
                         The alignment is located in the area of existing and historic human economic activity. The section is
                         located to the North-West from Almaty and runs through Zhambyl rayon of Almaty oblast and
                         Korday rayon of Zhambul oblast. The existing road network is most dense in the western part with
                         intensive economic activity, including industries, construction, mining and intensive irrigated
                         farming. Irrigated farming, animal husbandry, infrastructure and transport corridors are present along
                         the alignment in general. There will be no significant impacts on landscapes and natural habitats in
                         the area of the alignment.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GEN03)
                         Lola Ibragimova (GSU03)


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The design of the road has taken measures for the minimization of environmental impacts into
                              account. The routing follows existing infrastructure corridors and thus limiting the conversion of
                              land to non-critical land types and land use types. The design includesmeasures to protect the
                              adjacent population from noise (routing, barriers), increase traffic safety by speed controls,
                              pedestrian crossings and underpasses. The design also has taken into account requirements
                              articulated from farmers along the alignment for safe crossings for animals and farm traffic
                              through sufficiently dimensioned underpasses. Similar underpasses will facilitate wildlife
                              crossings (mainly deer and wild boar). The design has included results from hydrographic and
                              hydrological studies, installing sufficient culverts to avoid damming of permanent of seasonal
                              watercourses and the creation of swamps or waterlogged areas, and the dimensioning of bridges is
                              taking the seasonality of discharges, as well as the proneness to flash floods into account.

                             Most environmental impacts during the construction period will be mitigated by good
                             housekeeping measures. There will be standard procedures for the control and mitigation of
                             emissions, such as dust, noise, exhaust fumes and liquid discharges from camps and the road
                             platform. Surface watercourses will be protected by settling ponds and filters (e.g. straw bales).
                             Wastewater from construction camps will be treated on site in settlement and aeration basins,
                             where biological waste will be processed, before discharge into surface streams or rivers. Septic
                             sludge from toilets will either be composted on site or trucked to existing water treatment plants
                             along the alignment. Groundwater is not expected to be impacted by the project, as no deep
                             excavations or major cuts are expected. Water for the construction activities as well as the camps

                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                           will be extracted in relatively small quantities from existing wells or the public supply system.
                           Generally water availability is unconstrained in the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Noise and exhaust emissions will be minimized by the requirement for Contractors to use modern
                           equipment and machinery complying with modern emission standards, and to maintain the
                           equipment in good working order throughout the project. This will be prescribed in the equipment
                           specifications in the tender documents. Nuisance to the public will moreover be minimized by
                           limiting work hours and not allowing nighttime works. Where works are carried out in close
                           vicinity to residential areas additional measures, such as noise barriers or the installation of
                           insulating windows will be implemented in accordance with good practice and in consultation with
                           the community.

                           Borrow pits will be operated by the Contractors only at locations for which both operational and
                           environmental permits have been obtained. No borrow pit will be operated without a site specific
                           EMP that will contain a plan for its closure, remediation and re-cultivation that will be approved
                           by the local environmental authorities (according to legislation of Kazakhstan) as well as the
                           supervising engineer who will ensure that international good practice is followed.

                           PCR objects were found in construction area and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is
                           triggered. The PCRs are located within the area of 200m from road (protection zone for PCR
                           according to legislation of Kazakhstan and can be affected by project activities). Site management
                           plans for PCR will be developed during preparation of the detailed design of the road sections.
                           Key mitigation measures include avoidance, graphic, photo and video fixation, full archaeological
                           survey/excavation and recovery to museums, if feasible. If the impact cannot be avoided,
                           following full archaeological survey the monuments will be removed from the List of State
                           Registration of Monuments according to legislation of Kazakhstan.

                           All environmental and social management measures to be carried out by the Contractors during
                           the construction period will be integrated in the tender documents and become part of the works
Public Disclosure Copy




                           contracts.The Contractors will be required to have permanent staff on site with the specific
                           responsibility of environmental and social management (including a grievance specialist),
                           reporting to the supervision engineers and local authorities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Road widening will take place mainly within the ROW of the existing road (the length of
                           reconstructed road is 69 km) and no potential indirect and/or long-term impacts are expected.
                           Construction of bypasses (27 km of two-lane Category II road) will involve greenfield
                           construction across open space and agricultural areas.
                           During operation the functionality of noise and traffic safety measures described above in the
                           Section on design will be monitored and maintained. Any required modifications, upgrades or
                           additions (e.g. issues relating to pedestrian safety or to excessive road kills of domestic or wild
                           animals) will be flagged and integrated into the road repair and maintenance plans for rectification.

                           As the road corridor already exists no significant impacts are expected from induced or secondary
                           development. While traffic volumes are expected to increase the optimized alignment will reduce
                           environmental stress in the long term. The road will not contribute to habitat fragmentation in
                           addition to the impacts already in place from historic economic activity.



                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Given that the alignment will follow the existing road, the alignment alternatives were considered
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for by-passes of villages Samsy and Targap only. Also "without the project" and "with the project"
                           alternatives have been considered. The proposed alignment and routing of bypasses has been
                           chosen as having most socio-economic benefits and minimal potential negative environmental and
                           social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including generic project-level
                           Environmental and Social Management Plan (EIA/ESMP) was prepared by the CR for Otar-
                           Uzynagash road section, approved by the Bank and disclosed on May 23, 2016. Site-specific
                           ESMPs will be prepared by contractors, following the pattern already used for the ongoing civil
                           works on other road sections of the project. Site-specific ESMPs will include Monitoring Plan,
                           through which monitoring of the environmental impacts and the implementation of the mitigation
                           measures during the construction phase will be carried out.
                           Environmental impacts of the additional road section appear to be standard for road widening and
                           newly constructed alignment. The steppe vegetation is predominant with grassland and small
                           patches of forest (low value tree species) near rivers and in a valley. Both physical-geographical
                           situation and geotechnical conditions are expected to be very similar to conditions found under
                           EWRP broadly. Mitigation measures to prevent or minimize the potential negative environmental
                           impacts will be provided in the site-specific ESMPs and their implementation will be closely
                           monitored by the Supervision Engineer and by the Client.
                           PCR objects were found in construction area and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is
                           triggered. The PCRs are located within the area of 200m from road (protection zone for PCR
                           according to legislation of Kazakhstan and can be affected by project activities). Site management
                           plans for PCR will be developed during preparation of the detailed design of the road sections.
                           Key mitigation measures include avoidance, graphic, photo and video fixation, full archaeological
Public Disclosure Copy




                           survey/excavation and recovery to museums, if feasible. If the impact cannot be avoided,
                           following full archaeological survey the monuments will be removed from the List of State
                           Registration of Monuments according to legislation of Kazakhstan.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the road are (a) the Committee for Roads, an agency of the Government
                           of Kazakhstan, as the project proponent; (b) commercial and private road users, who will be the
                           primary beneficiaries from improved road quality; and (c) PAPs such as the residents of
                           communities along the road, farmers, herders, and proprietors of roadside services. For this last
                           group there will be benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the
                           project.

                          To ensure that all views and concerns of all stakeholders are appropriately reflected in project
                          design and implementation, and environmental and social safeguards instruments fully capture the
                          baseline situation, the expected impacts and the views and concerns of the PAPs, two sets of
                          consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the Bank financed project. They took
                          place in August 2015 in villages along the alignment in Zhambyl oblast and on July 2015 public
                          hearings were organized by the design organization in Sarybastau in Almaty oblast. The ESIA was
                          disclosed on ESIA on May 23, 2016 and additional public consultations were held on May 27


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           with participation of residents from the nearby settlements located along the alignment in Almaty
                           and Zhambyl oblasts. The ESIA disclosed in the Infoshop on June 15, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      26-Jan-2012
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       13-Dec-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Feb-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       27-Feb-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jacques Bure
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                 Date: 30-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                           Date: 30-Jun-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
