                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC15764

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Philippines                     Project ID:       P157976
                            Project Name:   Second Philippines Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
                                            Support Project
                            Team Leader(s): Bryan Christopher Land
                            Estimated Date 01-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GEEDR                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    1.5                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                          1.5
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objectives of the project are to a) support the Philippine Government in
                           its ongoing efforts to use the EITI process as a tool for increasing the transparency of its extractives
                           sector, and b) increase civil society engagement through its participation on the MSG and through
                           EITI outreach activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           The EITI is premised on the following: 1. Revenue from extractive industries should be regularly
                           published and independently verified; 2. Publication of data should be managed and overseen by a
                           multi stakeholder group (MSG) composed of government, industry, and civil society; and 3. Data
                           should be effectively shared with the country’s citizens and stimulate an informed debate about how
                           natural resources are governed. To operationalize this, the extractive industries such as oil, gas, and
                           mining are required to publish what they pay to the government, while the government is also
                           required to publish what they collect from these industries. In addition to providing reconciliation of
                           these figures, the Independent Administrator is also tasked with providing a detailed overview of the
                           extractives value chain to contextualize this data, and also provide meaningful recommendations for
                         improving both the EITI reporting process and the broader sector policy environment in the country.

                         Listed below is a summary of the activities that will be funded under the proposed EGPS grant, based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on discussions and requests from the EITI National Coordinator, MSG members and the Philippines
                         Government:

                         I. Publication of the Third and Fourth EITI Reports, including development/socialization of
                         reporting templates, production of summary reports, translations, printing, and national launch
                         conference.

                         II. Capacity-building activities for the MSG, technical working group, Secretariat and other EITI
                         stakeholders, including report analysis workshops, communications and public engagement training,
                         international outreach activities, training of local-level stakeholders (government, regional offices,
                         community groups and industry) on EITI implementation, and capacity-building activities specific to
                         the MSG (particularly newly appointed representatives) and National Secretariat staff.

                         III. Improving public understanding of the management of natural resources revenue and availability
                         of data:
                          a.      Communications outreach and public engagement activities;
                               b. Maintenance and further development of EITI website to integrate PH-EITI’s ongoing open
                         contracts portal, and other potential open data tools;

                         IV. Strengthen natural resource-related revenue management systems:
                              a. Collaboration with ongoing Open Government Partnership programs to improve procedures
                         and information collection/sharing infrastructure in relevant agencies;

                         V.       Create opportunities for dialogue and constructive engagement in natural resource
                         management in order to build trust and reduce conflict:
                              a. Regular MSG meetings for continued implementation of EITI and candid discussions of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other relevant sector governance issues between government, civil society and industry.
                              b. Regular forums and dialogue with outside stakeholders to review/update national EITI
                         priorities and reflect them in the annual EITI Workplan.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will provide only TA and there are no physical investments on the ground.
                         Consultations, trainings and dissemination activities will take place in both the capital as well as
                         regions affected by extractive industries, with a broad set of stakeholders, including communities and
                         civil society and community-based organizations and oil/gas and mining companies. The proposed
                         grant will only support the multi-stakeholder group and government agencies to make
                         recommendations related to improving transparency and reporting on financial and sector-specific
                         information and will not make recommendations related to investments for specific sites. Studies or
                         reports developed under this grant will not contribute to further infrastructure investments or policy
                         interventions related to investment promotion in the oil, gas, or mining sectors.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         No safeguard policy is triggered.

                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      No           This is a technical assistance project focused
                           BP 4.01                                        specifically on improving the institutional
                                                                          management of extractive industries, including
                                                                          relevant consultations and training. There are no
                                                                          physical investments being supported under the
                                                                          project. Neither will the TA directly result in
                                                                          any specific studies, plans, program or strategy
                                                                          which may have an impact on the environment.
                                                                          The grant will not finance technical studies or
                                                                          assessments linked to oil and gas; mining and
                                                                          gemstones, or hydropower sectors development
                                                                          or relevant infrastructure. Since none of the
                                                                          project activities have any direct impact on the
                                                                          ground and have zero environmental footprint,
                                                                          nor will it have an indirect impact on a future
                                                                          activity involving construction or infrastructure
                                                                          development, the category is proposed to be C.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                          are not expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                                          habitats (critical or non-critical).
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                          are not expected to have any impacts on the
                                                                          management of forest.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                          not finance the procurement or use of pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           This policy is not triggered as project activities
                           BP 4.11                                        are not expected to have any impact on physical
                                                                          cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                          proposed TA is not confined to specific
                                                                          geographic areas to be able to identify the
                                                                          presence of IPs and their collective attachment.
                                                                          However, as with the first PH-EITI project, this
                                                                          proposed TA will continue ensuring the
                                                                          representation of Indigenous Peoples in the
                                                                          MSG as well as in consultations and capacity-
                                                                          building activities related to ensuring
                                                                          transparency and accountability in the
                                                                          extractives sector (Please see attached letter
                                                                          from Bantay Kita).
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           This policy is not triggered given that project
                           4.12                                           activities are not expected to cause any physical
                                                                                             or economic displacement nor any restriction in
                                                                                             access to natural resources. Also, the project
                                                                                             will not support formulation of studies, plans,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             programs, and policiesthat can cause
                                                                                             involuntary resettlement impacts by themselves
                                                                                             or through their implementation.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                                                                                             not financing any dam construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on the
                                                                                             operations of existing dams.
                           Projects on International                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              not financing any activities in international
                                                                                             waterways as defined by the policy.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           7.60                                                              not financing any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                             defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Bryan Christopher Land
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 30-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 02-Dec-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
