INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13458
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Chile                       Project ID:  P152319
Project Name: CL Integrated Water Resources Management & Infrastructure Development
(P152319)
Task Team       Marie-Laure Lajaunie,Javier Zuleta
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jun-2015                Estimated    15-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), General
transportation sector (20%), Public administration- Transportation (10%), Public
administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (65%), Other public sector governance (15%),
Administrative and civil service reform (10%), Infrastructure services for private
sector development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      47.00             Total Bank Financing:    47.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        47.00
Total                                                                        47.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the Borrower for water
Page 1 of 8


﻿resources management and public infrastructure planning and concession.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Water Resources Management (Total Cost and IBRD Loan US$35.0 million).
The component aims at strengthening the Borrower's capacity for more integrated and participatory
basin-scale water resources management.
Sub-component 1.1: Modernization of the Institutional Framework for Water Resources
a        Management.
The sub-component will support: (a) the detailed design of a new organizational structure for water
resources management; (b) the definition of the instruments required in the implementation of the
institutional design described in (a) above; (c) the estimation of the budget impact of the new
organizational structure and identification of the associated financing means; (d) the implementation
of institutional strengthening activities for the DGA, which may include, inter alia: the update of
procedures and manuals, and the formulation and partial implementation of a capacity building
program.
Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening of the National Water Information System.
The sub-component will finance: (a) DGA's organizational strengthening and capacity building for
the management of the water information system; (b) the upgrading of the water information system;
and (c) the improvement of water information collection and transmission.
Sub-component 1.3: Improvements of the Instruments for Water Resources Management.
The sub-component will support: (a) water resources planning at national level, including: (i) the
formulation of the plan and the regulatory instruments ensuring its effective use, and (ii) the design
of stakeholders' coordination entities and mechanisms for the elaboration, implementation and
monitoring of the plan; (b) the development of tools for the control and enforcement of the Water
Code; and (c) the development of tools for the improvement of dam safety.
Sub-component 1.4: Improvement of Water Resources Management in Two Selected River Basins
(Choapa and Maule).
The sub-component will support the implementation of the tools developed under sub-components
1.3 in the two river basins. More specifically, the Project will support: (a) water planning including:
(i) the formulation of participatory, basin-scale integrated water resources management plans, and (ii)
the establishment of stakeholders participatory mechanisms; (b) the piloting of a strengthened control
and enforcement system; and (c) risk evaluation, instrumentation and design of dam safety
management plans for three selected dams.
Component 2: Infrastructure Planning (Total Cost and IBRD Loan US$3.0 million).
The component aims to consolidate DIRPLAN's planning tools to allow for increased participation
of other Ministries, the private sector and the Regional Governments, in order to achieve a more
equal infrastructure development throughout the country. It comprises three sub-components.
Sub-component 2.1: Support for Updating the National Infrastructure Plan.
The sub-component will help update the National Infrastructure Plan, incorporating new instruments
for inter-ministerial coordination and new policies for decentralization and equitable territorial
development.
Sub-component 2.2: Development of Territorial Equity Indices.
Page 2 of 8


﻿The sub-component will support the design and use of territorial equity indices in the infrastructure
planning process.
Sub-component 2.3: Strengthening the Tools and Technical Capacity of DIRPLAN.
U        The sub-component aims to strengthen DIRPLAN's tools for infrastructure programming and its
technical capacity. To achieve this, the sub-component will: (a) update the ministerial programming
model to include the new decentralization policies; (b) develop a framework for the assessment of
ministerial plans; (c) develop a mechanism for the systematization of the institutional knowledge and
(d) design a training program for staff.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening for Infrastructure Concession (Total Cost and IBRD Loan
US$6.3 million).
The component aims at strengthening the capacity of CCOP. It includes three sub-components:
Sub-component 3.1: Regulatory Framework and Strategic Management.
The sub-component will support: (a) the preparation of the regulatory instruments to implement the
revised law of MOP; (b) the design and implementation of a transition management plan towards a
strengthened infrastructure concession unit and model; (c) the design and partial implementation of a
strategic management plan, and (d) the design and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation
system for the concession program.
Sub-component 3.2: Improvement of CCOP's Operating Model.
The sub-component will help to: (a) assess current operating model of CCOP in each stage of the
concession project cycle (project preparation to contract management); (b) improve project
preparation and contract management processes, procedures, manual and guidelines; and (c) modify
the regulations to implement the recommendations identified in (a) and (b).
Sub-component 3.3: Capacity Building and Information System.
The sub-component will support: (a) the design and partial implementation of a human resources
management policy and strategy; and (b) the development and implementation of an information
system on concessions.
Component 4: Project Implementation (Total Cost and IBRD Loan US$2.7 million).
o        The component will finance overall Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Public Works for water resources
management and public infrastructure planning and concessions, through capacity building and the
development of various tools and methodologies. The Project will focus its support in the water
component in two selected river basins: Maule in the Maule region and Choapa in the Coquimbo
region, where the tools and methodologies developed by the Project will be tested.
Maule is a semi-arid basin of about 21,000 km2 in Central Chile with an average annual precipitation
of about 750 mm. It is home to about 670,000 inhabitants. It is one of the main agriculture basin in
the country with 240,000 ha under irrigation. In this river basin, there is a historical conflict between
hydropower generation and irrigation. Farmers claim that the existing agreements on how to share
water from the dams are today inadequate because the overall context in the river basin has changed.
Drought is another issue, especially in the southern, poorer part of the river basin. Drought is driving
Page 3 of 8


﻿a boom in new groundwater rights requests, a resource still little used in the basin. However, the lack
of knowledge and monitoring of those aquifers pauses a risk of over-allocation of water rights.
The Maule River basin contains three protected areas (Sistema Nacional de Areas Silvestres
U         Protegidas del Estado-SNASPE). In those areas, DGA is not issuing new water rights. The three
SNAPSE are:
- Siete Tazas National Reserve, which hosts several protected animal and plant species. Those
animal species are: pudu deer, trichaue, condor and the plant species are: rauli beech, oak, coigiie
tree, mait6n. This protected area also has recreational attractions including waterfalls from the Claro
River.
- Altos de Lircay Reserve, which hosts several protected species (pudu deer, puma, marsh-
starling). The hualo and huala plants, native to this area, are classified as "vulnerable."
- Los Bellotos del Melado National Reserve, which despite its small area hosts a large
biodiversity. In particular, it is home to a great variety of birds.
This river basin also presents ecological preservation areas and priority sites for biodiversity.
Choapa is a small, arid, basin of about 8,000 km2 and average annual precipitation between 200 and
400 mm. It is located in north-central part of Chile. It is home to 65,000 people. Its main economic
activity is mining. Irrigated agriculture covers 17,000 ha. Its main WRM issues are: water scarcity
accentuated by a prolonged drought, with multi-annual dams almost empty. Water for irrigation has
been curtailed to the benefit of cities, creating conflicts due to important economic losses in
agriculture. Many villages traditionally supplied from shallow aquifers close to the river beds are
now supplied by trucks. Water contamination is also a problem, mostly from past and present mining
activities (Choapa has the highest number of tailing deposits in the country).
The Choapa basin hosts one SNASPE, Chinchillas National Reserve, which remains one of the only
sites that protects the almost extinct Chilean Chinchilla. Its flora has a high phytogeographic value
and presents two vulnerable species: lignum vitae and carbonillo. In addition, the whole river basin
has been declared depleted by the DGA, and a large part counts with an official scarcity decree.
According to the National Commission for Indigenous People (CONADI), there is no Indigenous
a        People Community in the river basins of Maule and Choapa, but there are several indigenous
associations. There are eight indigenous associations in the Maule River basin, and two indigenous
associations in the Choapa River basin. The law 19253 of 1993 that created CONADI and aims at
promoting and protecting the Indigenous Peoples of Chile defines these Indigenous Associations as
groups of individuals not smaller than 25 members that are created to reach a common goal related to
cultural, educational, or economic activities, and explicitly states that these associations do not
replace nor represent the indigenous communities of Chile. These identified associations are diverse
and the information gathered from CONADI is uneven and partial. Some are located in urban areas,
others are composed of mostly women, one is devoted to spiritual purposes, and others have
environmental objectives and cultural revitalization goals. The information received on these 10
associations does not provide enough information to ascertain whether some of them could be
considered Indigenous Peoples Community as per the Bank Policy.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
Page 4 of 8


﻿Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
SEnvironmental          Yes          The Project is categorized as environmental risk Category
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                B because while it does not finance physical works, nor
detailed designs for civil works, it will support the
formulation of water resources management and
infrastructure plans. Although activities prioritized in
those plans, will not be implemented by the Project, some
of them may present potential adverse social and
environmental impacts and risks once executed. For this
reason, the operational policy on Environment
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered. To ensure
conformity with this policy, the methodology/terms of
reference for the plans will include specific reference to
understanding and identifying social and environmental
risks, and will follow rigorous consultation processes with
relevant stakeholders. The environment specialist will
provide training to project implementers, review the ToR
and their adequate implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The two pilot basins selected under Component 1.4.
4.04                                 (Maule and Choapa), include protected natural areas that
are part of the SNASPE and other priority sites for
biodiversity conservation outside SNASPE, including
private conversation areas. While the Project will not
involve conversion of natural habitats and DGA cannot
issue water rights in SNASPE, the policy has been
triggered to apply a precautionary approach in those
protected areas, during the basin planning process. During
the planning process, potential environmental risks and
impacts that might threaten the integrity of protected
areas, and their biological resources and hydrological
services, will be assessed. Accordingly, the environment
specialist will provide training to project implementers,
review the ToR and their adequate implementation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           This policy does not apply since the Project does not
involve, nor support, conversion of forest lands to other
economic alternatives and does not involve any changes
to forest management.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           This policy does not apply since the Project does not
involve procurement or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No           This policy does not apply since the Project activities
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 consist of technical assistance for institutional
strengthening and improvement in planning capacities and
tools. Nevertheless, the terms of reference/methodology
for the plans would make sure that, during the planning
process, the prioritized interventions that, when
Page 5 of 8


﻿implemented, may have negative impacts on physical
cultural resources be identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          According to the latest information provided by DGA
BP 4.10                              through CONADI, eight (8) Indigenous Associations have
been identified in the Maule basin, while two (2)
Indigenous Associations have been identified in the
Choapa basin. The borrower will include the principles of
the policy relating to social assessment, stakeholder
engagement and meaningful consultation into the
guidelines and other planning instruments to be developed
that will later be used for contracting civil works. The task
team's social specialist will provide training to project
implementers, review the ToR and their adequate
implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The policy is not triggered because the project will not
OP/BP 4.12                           require, to reach its objectives or to implement its
activities, the involuntary taking of land, nor involuntary
restriction of access to legally designated parks and
protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the
livelihoods of the displaced persons.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This policy does not apply because the Project will not
4.37                                 support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
it finance any other investments which rely on the
services of existing dams. Since the project includes dam
safety assessment and risk management,explicit reference
to the application of international standards and good
practice on dam safety will be included in the Operations
Manual.
O
Projects on International  No        This policy is not triggered given that the project is not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 financing any detailed design and engineering studies of
O
projects.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not finance activities in disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     defined in the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is not expected to have significant adverse social and environmental impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The Project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts. In particular, improved
WRM will contribute to: (a) improved water quality, thereby reducing negative impact on people's
health and on the environment; (b) improved transparency, efficiency and sustainability of water
resources management, thereby reducing conflicts over water resources nationally and in critical
basins; and (c) more efficient use of water resources, thereby reducing the growth in water demand
Page 6 of 8


﻿and preventing the need for costly inter-basin water transfers (and their irreversible environmental
impacts) and reducing water over-exploitation. Better infrastructure planning and concessions will
contribute to ensuring that all Chileans, in particular vulnerable groups, have access to
infrastructure services. As the methodology for the formulation of the integrated WRM plans is
O
Q)          replicated across the country, the Project's benefits will trickle down to other river basins in the
long term. Regarding infrastructure development, improved inter-sectorial planning processes will
also contribute to territorial equity and social benefits in the long run.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower's institutional capacity to plan and implement safeguard measures is considered
adequate. In terms of environmental safeguards implementation, the DGA has a unit dedicated to
the conservation and protection of water resources, and their Studies and Planning Unit has carried
out several environmental studies on the country's river basins. With regards to the participatory
planning process, the regional DGA units should be complemented with a social specialist each,
with experience in consultations and mediation, and will receive strong accompaniment from the
World Bank team. Relevant social and environmental safeguards aspects will be incorporated in
the methodologies for the infrastructure development and WRM plans at the national levels, and
the implementing units have committed to enhance their capacity in this regard through hiring
professionals who will be trained on these issues if needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders' consultation are foreseen for the preparation of the national infrastructure plan, the
national water plan and the 2 river basin plans. Those consultations will involve civil society,
indigenous people (when relevant), relevant private sector and users as well as public institutions.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
O
Date of receipt by the Bank                                00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                             00000000
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                //
Date of submission to InfoShop                             //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 7 of 8


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ]  No[X]    NA[     ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ ] No [ X ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marie-Laure Lajaunie,Javier Zuleta
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (PMGR)             Date: 14-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


