INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16613
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mauritania                  Project ID:  P151058
Project Name: Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster Project (P151058)
Task Team       Alexandre Hugo Laure,Berengere P. C. Prince,Peter Kristensen
Leader(s):
Estimated        19-Jan-2016                Estimated    24-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC07                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Public administration-
Industry and trade (15%), Ports, waterways and shippi ng (15%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (30%), Other domestic and international trade (15%)
Theme(s):       Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (5%), Infrastructure services
for private sector development (35%), Micro, Small an d Medium Enterprise
support (10%), Export development and competitiveness (25%), Trade
facilitation and market access (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       9.25             Total Bank Financing:     7.75
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            1.50
IDA Grant                                                                     7.75
Total                                                                         9.25
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the proposed project is to support the development of a seafood cluster in
Page 1 of 9


﻿Nouadhibou that promotes sustainable management of fisheries and generates value for the
communities.
3. Project Description
The project will contribute to the Government competitiveness agenda (fisheries, Free Zone, and
national private sector development strategies and investment frameworks) and it will address four
binding constraints that inhibit the competitiveness of the seafood industry in Nouadhibou: (a) excess
fishing effort that threatens sustainability of raw material supply and profitability of the fishing
o        industry, (b) insufficient coordination between actors and product diversification, (c) inadequate fish
landing infrastructure as well as lack of private initiative in developing and managing shared
facilities (including storage) and handling services, and (d) limited linkages effects to the rest of the
economy. Noting that without an appropriate management regime for controlling access to fish
resources, investments aimed at facilitating fish landing or processing could lead to further increase
in fishing effort and overexploitation of fish resources, the Project will comprise two components to
achieve the PDO: (a) Planning, reorganizing and promoting a sustainable seafood cluster in
Nouadhibou and (b) Increasing the value of products produced at and marketed from the seafood
cluster with the participation of local actors in Nouadhibou.
Component 1: Planning, reorganizing and promoting a sustainable seafood cluster in Nouadhibou
(US$5.95 million)
The first component will build the capacity of the Nouadhibou Free Zone Authority and stakeholders
to plan/ design, reorganize and promote the cluster so that the objective of sustainable management
of fish resources is well integrated in the development of a competitive seafood value chain that
originates in Nouadhibou. Component 1 consists of the following two subcomponents, which
together will uplift industry norms and catalyze responsible investments: the first subcomponent will
foster a public-private dialogue to help design and implement a sustainable seafood cluster strategy;
while the second will promote investment opportunities in a way it attracts responsible investors.
The following approach will ensure the transparency of the activities in this component. The process
and output of public-private dialogue, in particular the comprehensive strategy of the cluster, will be
made publicly available, while outreach activities to attract responsible private participants of the
cluster will also be done in a transparent manner by publicly disclosing the solicitation information
and ensuring not to discriminate certain groups against others in terms of access to information. Note
that transparency with regards to publication of selected fisheries management data and the mode of
fishing rights allocation are monitored within the results framework of the SOP C1 project. Further,
the SOP C1 project also includes an activity of integrating the octopus industry in the framework of
international transparency initiatives (e.g. EITI and FiTI). The World Bank will continue to support
such activities to put into practice the concepts of transparency initiatives.
Subcomponent 1.1.: Promote public-private dialogue to develop a vision for sustainable seafood
cluster in Nouadhibou and accelerate nation-wide reforms impeding its development (US$2.6
million).
In 2014, the Nouadhibou Free Zone approved a Master Plan and Investment Plan, and its law
provides for the creation of development zones; the Eco-Seafood Cluster is selected as the first of
such development zones. At the same time, the Ministry of Fisheries and Maritime Economy
completed a sector strategy and a multi-donor investment framework in 2015. It is expected that
fisheries management plans will be implemented, starting with the one for octopus (cephalopod)
Page 2 of 9


﻿which has already been adopted by decree. However, it is not yet well understood by stakeholders
how coordination between implementation of fisheries management plans and activities of
Nouadhibou seafood cluster can catalyze synergies to maximize the benefits of the seafood sector for
the economy. Thus this subcomponent will strengthen Nouadhibou Free Zone stakeholders' capacity
O
in understanding the intricate linkages inherent in the actions of various participants and design the
physical and institutional functions of the cluster accordingly. It will finance consultants' services,
trainings of stakeholders and operating costs in order to: (a) develop a holistic vision of the cluster
that encompasses and clarifies certain key concepts (e.g. sustainability of fish resources, rights and
responsibilities of participants, inclusiveness, transparency, and competitiveness); (b) design a robust
cluster strategy (identification of target value chain, planning process, master & investment plans);
and (c) develop an adequate framework (legal, institutional, fisheries management coordination
schemes) and required operational tools (land GIS, M&E) for the formal establishment of
Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster (NESC).
Meanwhile, this subcomponent will address the two nationwide thematic areas critical to the cluster
development: investment climate and public private partnership (PPP). First, while Mauritania's
investment climate is poor, there is an unprecedented opportunity to build on the ongoing strong
reforms momentum, to which Project preparation has contributed. Mauritania is among the Top 10
Reformers in the Doing Business Report 2016. Second, Mauritania has no legal and regulatory
framework for PPP, neither does it have an institutional mechanism to identify, structure and execute
PPP transactions. Thus this subcomponent will also develop stakeholder's (public and private)
capacity to formulate, prioritize and foster indicator-based reforms in the local (Nouadhibou)
fisheries sector and at national levels (investment climate, PPP) to lower barriers to investment
through: (a) a technical assistance to the ANZF and MAED to establish a strong track-record of
competitive industries efforts and follow up on recommendations, as well as (b) supporting operating
costs that contribute to well-developed and functioning PPD processes. (c) It will also carry out a
program of activities (consultant services, goods and non-consulting services) focusing on the
establishment of a PPP framework and the reduction of investment restrictions and procedures.
Subcomponent 1.2.: Generate responsible investments in Nouadhibou seafood cluster (US$3.36
million).
So far, the Nouadhibou Free Zone has identified flagship projects (such as seafood cluster, deep sea
a         port, new international airport). The seafood industry is already vibrant in Nouadhibou and warrants
further support in light of the sector paradigm shift toward sustainable fisheries, with the
implementation of fisheries management plans and the introduction of total allowable catch (TAC)
for some species. For truly effective management of fisheries resources and successful seafood
cluster, a comprehensive perspective of the entire seafood value chain needs to be incorporated in the
cluster design and implementation, which in turn calls for participation responsible private actors
through Public Private Partnerships (PPP). Thus this subcomponent will carry out a program of
activities aimed at building the implementation capacity of Nouadhibou Free Zone stakeholders in
the development of NESC and identifying/ attracting responsible investors for the flagships projects
through: (a) commercial viability assessment to enable mobilization of private sector and institutional
investor capital, (b) targeted investment promotion activities and media coverage of investment
attraction, facilitation and after-care such as promotional material, communications campaigns,
targeted missions, NESC's website and an Investor Tracking System, and (c) skills training and
technical assistance (environmental, legal, financial, fiduciary) required to generate, negotiate,
facilitate, monitor and retain responsible investments.
Page 3 of 9


﻿Component 2: Increasing the value of products produced at and marketed from the seafood cluster
with the participation of local actors in Nouadhibou (US$3.30 million).
The second component aims at increasing the value of products produced at and marketed from the
O
seafood cluster and increasing the participation of local population in the activities of the cluster.
This will involve, among other things, improving supply chain logistics and infrastructure, and
investing in private sector capacity enabling improved handling of landed fish and a reduction of
post-harvest losses/discards through ports, onshore facilities and services that are managed efficiently
by the private sector. Activities implemented under this component are expected to result in an
increase of investments (in particular in trade logistics), productivity growth and rise of exports in the
fresh fish segment. Component 2 has two subcomponents which together will catalyze investments
and grow exports volume and value of target seafood products: the first subcomponent aims at
improving fish landing and export capacity as well as facilitating trade; and the second will better
integrate local small-scale suppliers and vulnerable groups into target seafood value chains.
The fish landing and export infrastructure, whose operational efficiency to be improved by the
project activities of this component, will serve all responsible participants of the cluster that wish to
use them, without excluding any from accessing the facilities. Transparency of transactions at these
facilities will also be ensured, following the good practices of recording and disclosing information
as recommended by international transparency initiatives. While all of the activities of this project
will be implemented in an inclusive and transparent manner by ensuring that the process of PPD and
preparation for PPP will include all relevant stakeholder groups, activities under this component most
directly benefit the poor and the vulnerable. For example, the improved operation of the port used by
the artisanal and coastal fishing segments (EPBR) will provide smaller-scale fishers stronger links to
the value chain. The technical assistance of capacity building in the second subcomponent can
directly increase the incomes of those engaged in post-harvest handling of fish (where women
dominate) by reducing product losses and raising productivity. Note that a legal covenant of the SOP
Cl project ensures equitable allocation of fishing rights for octopus, hence ensuring that none of
existing fishers will be excluded in the process of initial rights allocation.
o
Subcomponent 2.1.: Improve handling of landed catch and promote export of fresh fish at the
seafood cluster in Nouadhibou (US$2.19 million).
o        Even though much of Mauritanian fish are harvested by foreign fleets, often from Asia and Europe
and are contractually obliged to land in Mauritania, only a limited amount is landed domestically. In
Nouadhibou, the main fishing landing site in the nation, this is partially due to lack of adequate
equipment and human capital at the existing landing infrastructure. Even of the catches of the
national industrial fleet, only 10 percent is off-loaded for processing in Mauritania. Moreover, even
though Mauritania is situated in relative proximity to major seafood consuming market of Europe,
the country does not currently exploit this advantage. While Nouadhibou's main fish products is
frozen whole octopus for export to Europe and Japan, fresh octopus could command much higher
price. Export of fresh filleted fin fish to southern Europe could also achieve high value if conditions
were met, including stability of raw material supply, sanitary and other quality of the products, and
transport and other infrastructure. To the extent it is appropriate vis-d-vis the country's comparative
advantage in landing and processing fish catches, which is to be determined in the analysis for
identifying target fisheries value chain in sub-component 1.1, investing to improve the operational
efficiency of the existing fish landing sites can increase the volume of landings in Mauritania and
investing to improve the conditions to allow higher proportion of fish landed in Nouadhibou to be
exported fresh rather than frozen, including efforts on trade facilitation, can substantially increase the
Page 4 of 9


﻿value of landed catch. Thus this subcomponent aims at improving the organization and management
of three key infrastructures: the commercial port (PAN), the artisanal fishing port (EPBR) and their
extension zones, and the Nouadhibou International Airport). The subcomponent also aims at
improving handling of landed fish and reduction of post-harvest losses through ports, onshore
O
U         facilities and services that are managed efficiently by private sector. The Project will finance: (a)
consultants' services for improving the operation efficiency of the PAN and EPBR and
operationalizing their extensions; (b) works for a refrigerated warehouse freight terminal at
Nouadhibou International Airport; and (c) technical assistance to modernize trade services and
regulations and increase fresh fish exports via ground transport.
Subcomponent 2.2.: Build local suppliers' and vulnerable groups' capacities to capture greater
benefits from productive and inclusive seafood value chains (US$1.11 million).
Negotiations around the EU fishing agreement have included conditions to increase the employment
of Mauritanians on European fishing vessels and greater off-loading of the catch for processing in
Mauritania. The latter would create processing jobs and thus benefit women in particular. In addition,
while there is a priority given in Government strategy to re-focus fisheries development on coastal
and industrial fishing segments, all of artisanal, coastal and industrial segments of fisheries are going
to co-exist in the Nouadhibou Eco-Seafood Cluster. It is particularly important that all fishing
segments understand and become active participants of the new paradigm of fisheries management,
which principally is brought about by the implementation of fisheries management plans. Thus the
proposed Project will strengthen the capacity of stakeholders, including local small-scale fishers and
vulnerable groups (such as women, the less educated, and marginalized population), to promote the
acceptance and participation in the successful implementation of the fisheries management plans, as
well as the capacity for improving post-harvest fish handling in Nouadhibou. This subcomponent
aims at maximizing linkages between the cluster and the local population by better integrating
fisheries' local small-scale suppliers and disadvantaged groups in value chains with potentially high
impacts on their livelihoods. A private sector support facility will be housed at the National Fisheries
Federation (F6d6ration Nationale des P6ches de Mauritanie - FNP) to develop sustainable fisheries
in Nouadhibou in partnership with the Fishing School (Academie Navale), IMROP, and ONISPA.
Based on value chains scan and prioritization exercise, the facility's non-financial support will be
articulated around three main pillars, where the first two will focus primarily on training and
a         promoting champions in the sector while the third will exclusively address participation of small-
scale fishers and vulnerable groups in the cluster. The proposed Project will finance a program of
activities, which includes trainings for all relevant seafood cluster's stakeholders:
*      Management and investment training to support the transition of private enterprises to the
new fisheries management regime under the octopus management plan and rationalize their
harvesting efforts and processing capacity.
*      Technical assistance to help industries and institutions comply with internal product quality
control procedures, and acquire and retain important certifications on food safety and quality
management, on environmental management systems, on conformity assessment, on testing and
calibration laboratories, on quality management systems and eco-certification.
*      Focusing on the artisanal fishing segment and small-scale handling and processing of their
catches (often by women), the project will provide local actors with capacity building training aiming
at (i) reducing post-harvest losses and (ii) promoting good fishing and management practices.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Page 5 of 9


﻿The project is rated category B. The first Administrative Division of the project is Dakhlet
Nouadhibou. Project activities will be implemented in Nouadhibou within the site of the airport.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
O
U         Melissa C. Landesz (GEN07)
Salamata Bal (GSU01)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The policy OP/BP 4.01 is triggered and the project is
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               rated "B". The installation of a refrigerated warehouse for
fish storage under the project entails certain negative
social and environmental impacts during installation and
operational phases.
Negative impacts may include, among others, pollution
and waste generation related to demolition, occupational
and health risks, air pollution and soil contamination.
During operation there is potential for soil contamination,
air pollution and climate impacts, as well as occupational
health risks, among others.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
has been prepared and disclosed. It defines measures to
mitigate the negative impacts associated with this project
during installation and operation in an associated
Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not affect natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will not have any adverse impact on forests,
nor engage in afforestation.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not entail pest management.
Physical Cultural       Yes         The project does not foresee any negative impacts
Resources OP/BP 4.11                physical cultural resources. Procedures for chance finds
during project implementation have been included the
Environmental and Social Management Plan.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no communities in the project area who meet
BP 4.10                             the specific Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project does not involve involuntary resettlement or
OP/BP 4.12                          restriction of access.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve construction of dams nor
4.37                                will it rely on dams.
Projects on International  No       The project does not involve international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Page 6 of 9


﻿Projects in Disputed    No           The activities under this project do not involve disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas between countries, as defined in OP 7.60/
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.11 policies are triggered and the project is rated "B". The installation of
a refrigerated warehouse for fish storage under the project entails certain negative social and
environmental impacts during installation and operational phases. However, those impacts are
expected to be small, site specific and fairly easy to mitigate.
Potential impacts are both at the construction and operations phases:
a. During construction, the following negative impacts have been identified: sites degradation due
to collection of raw material (sand, cement), degradation of air quality due to dust, soil pollution
due to wastes, and workers safety;
b. During operations, the following negative impacts have been identified: quality of air, workers
safety, risk of fire or explosion, nuisance to neighbors, quality of fish stored, energy consumption,
and costs of production.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No further potential indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower prepared an ESIA in compliance with OP 4.01 and 4.11. The ESIA was validated
and consulted on in country, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed on 01/21/2016 in-country and on
on 01/20/2016 at the InfoShop .
o          Activities to plan and implement mitigation measures are described below:
a. During construction, the following negative impacts have been identified (cost at US$ 60,000):
drafting an internal procedures manual, drafting manual for maintenance of the warehouse,
signalization for travelers at airport, technical assistance to management committee of the
warehouse, safety and security equipment, analysis of products stored, evaluation of
implementation progress of the ESMP;
b. During operations, the following negative impacts have been identified (US$40,000 annually):
recruitment of an environmental expert at the Nouadhibou Free Zone Authority, signalization for
users of the warehouse, technical assistance to management committee of the warehouse, safety
and security equipment, analysis of products stored, evaluation of implementation progress of the
ESMP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with various actors were organized between December 15 till 18, 2015.
Stakeholders fell in three broad categories: technical, environmental and social. These included
Page 7 of 9


﻿representatives of the relevant line ministries, representatives of the Free Zone, NGOs, as well as
representatives of project affected people working or involved in the local fishing industry.
Stakeholders' comments and recommendations were recorded and taken into consideration in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the project.
o
B. Disclosure Requirements
O         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               03-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                            20-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mauritania                                                21-Jan-2016
Comments: Disclose on Nouadhibou Free Zone Authority website and the Portail Mauritanien du
D6veloppement website
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
a          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
a          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexandre Hugo Laure,Berengere P. C. Prince,Peter Kristensen
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 27-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Jean Michel Noel Marchat (PMGR)      Date: 01-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


