                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR19250
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Paraguay                                     Project ID:           P095235
                            Project Name:       PY Water & Sanitation Sector Modernization (P095235)
                            Task Team           Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           27-Jan-2009             Estimated     14-Apr-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA04                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        83.50           Total Bank Financing:      64.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              19.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 64.00
                              Total                                                                                                 83.50
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the efficiency, coverage, and sustainability
                           of water supply and sanitation services in Paraguay by (a) improving the governance of the sector,
                           (b) improving water services and increasing access to sewerage services in the AsunciÃ³n
                           metropolitan area, and (c) increasing access to sustainable water and sanitation services in rural areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           Overall, as a guiding theme in all components, the project seeks to promote: (i) transparency, by


                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
                         planning and programming all interventions based on objective and quantifiable criteria; (ii)
                         performance, through the identification of targets for each intervention to be monitored and whose
                         attainment will be the indication of success; and (iii) accountability, through the participation in and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         publication and presentation of the programmed activities and results to the stakeholders.

                         The Project has already contributed to improve access to water and sanitation services for 12,000
                         people in rural areas, 6,000 people in indigenous communities and 60,000 people in the Asuncion
                         Metropolitan Area. In addition, the Project would improve sanitation environment for 300,000
                         people living in Asuncion in the Itay Basin, and provide 6,000 people living in indigenous
                         communities in the Chaco with improved water supply. In total, the project would benefit 384,000
                         people.

                         Component 1: Support to the modernization of the sector governance and institutional strengthening
                         (US$4 million financed by the Bank loan): This component was designed to institutionally
                         consolidate the water and sanitation sector through the following actions: (a) support the Ministry of
                         Public Works (MOPC) in the strengthening of the recently created Water and Sewerage Services
                         Unit,; (b) strengthen the Sanitary Services Regulation Agency (Ente Regulador de Servicios
                         Sanitarios, ERSSAN), and restructure its functions to effectively regulate the sector; and (c) support
                         the Environmental Secretariat (Secretario del Ambiente, SEAM) by strengthening the Water
                         Resources and Environmental Licensing Directorates, classifying the different basins by discharge
                         standards, and improving the environmental licensing process for investments in the water and
                         sanitation sector. This component is almost fully disbursed and has achieved significant strides in
                         strengthening the governance structure of the WSS sector in Paraguay. The inter-institutional WSS
                         coordination group (Mesa Interinstitucional de Agua y Saneamiento) is meeting regularly under the
                         leadership of water supply and sanitation (WSS) Directorate DAPSAN (DirecciÃ³n de Agua Potable
                         y Saneamiento) with the objective to bring all stakeholders together to increase water and sanitation
                         coverage, improve the quality of current services and strengthen sector capacity. The implementation
                         of the Governance Action Plan to improve communication, participation, transparency and
                         accountability in the sector continues to progress well. Each sector institution has developed its own
Public Disclosure Copy




                         website to make public all ongoing activities and works, including information on contracting
                         processes. The preparation of the national water and sanitation policy is being finalized. The
                         concession contract between MOPC and ESSAP has been signed and a Board of Directors
                         established, which gives ESSAP the tools to develop and implement a financial equilibrium strategy.
                         SEAM has developed a framework to improve water resources monitoring and management in five
                         water basins and has successfully revised environmental licensing procedures for WSS infrastructure
                         to meet the provisions of the new Decree 453/13 and align them to international practices and Bank
                         safeguards and operational policies. SEAM has completed the water balance for the country and
                         developed user-friendly interfaces for the registry of water rights.

                         Component 2: Urban water supply and sanitation and institutional strengthening of ESSAP (US$65.5
                         million, of which US$50.5 million will be financed by the Bank loan): This component focuses both
                         on the modernization of ESSAP (Empresa de Servicios Sanitarios del Paraguay) and the financing of
                         urgently needed WSS investments through two sub-components: i. Institutional strengthening and
                         corporate governance of ESSAP; and ii. Priority water and sanitation infrastructure investments.
                         Major sewerage infrastructure works were carried out after updating the Sewerage Master Plan for
                         Asuncion metropolitan area, fully integrating environmental and social baseline information and
                         assessment criteria into the overall planning methodology to provide ESSAP with an analysis of
                         alternatives on which to base the investment decisions in Asuncion metropolitan area. ESSAP has
                         developed a monitoring framework for key management and service delivery indicators, which will

                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         improve their transparency, technical and commercial efficiency. The rehabilitation of 57 km of
                         secondary distribution water networks (US$ 7.31 million value) was finalized in April 2016,
                         benefiting 50,000 people and the construction of 8.4 km of sanitation networks was completed in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         October 2016 and will benefit 10,000 inhabitants with improved sanitation services. The following
                         contracts are under execution: (i) the construction of 29 km of primary sanitation collectors in the
                         Itay basin, part of the larger Itay sewerage system and; (ii) the installation of 88,000 meters
                         representing a progress of 80 percent. These meters, to be installed over a period of two years,
                         contribute significantly to the improvement of ESSAP's technical and commercial efficiency. The
                         contract for the terrain backfilling and the construction of the houses for the 94 families who have
                         chosen to be relocated on the WWTP premises presents 50 percent execution as of October 31, 2016.
                         The backfilling of the area where the houses concluded in August 2016, with the terrain ready for
                         construction (after settling) by December 2016. The livelihood restoration activities under the RAP
                         have been completed and the permanent moves of the remaining families are expected to be
                         completed by August 2017. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been revised and approved by
                         the World Bank to reflect advances in implementation and the associated timeline. Throughout the
                         elaboration and the implementation of the RAP, ESSAP has shown ownership in carrying out a
                         highly participatory process, in full compliance with Bank safeguard policies to prepare the site for
                         the construction of the Bella Vista WWTP.

                         Component 3: Rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene education and institutional strengthening
                         of SENASA (US$14 million, of which US$9.5 million will be financed by the Bank loan): This
                         component aims to scale-up the experience of previous rural water supply and sanitation projects to
                         increase service coverage and quality, by: (a) strengthening the National Service of Environmental
                         Sanitation (Servicio Nacional de Saneamiento Ambiental, SENASA) by supporting its
                         decentralization process, equipment, and strengthening of its environmental and social management
                         units following the ESMF provisions; (b) supporting SENASAs corporate governance; (c)
                         strengthening existing juntas, through the Associations of Juntas; (d) implementing a hand-washing
                         campaign to increase the health impact of the interventions (e) increasing coverage of WSS for
                         indigenous communities; and (f) increasing coverage of WSS in other rural areas. Rural communities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         were prioritized using social indexes applied in the consultation process of the specific sub-projects.
                         SENASA completed the construction of 30 rural water supply systems in December 2013, providing
                         12,000 beneficiaries with improved water services. Technical studies and community mobilization
                         activities for the construction of 31 additional WSS systems in indigenous communities in Chaco
                         have been carried out and will benefit about 6,000 indigenous people. As part of these activities,
                         WSS committees have been created in all target communities and SENASA is in the process of
                         strengthening its presence in the Chaco region through the creation of two regional offices and
                         support to the municipalities to create their own WSS municipal units. So far, SENASA has installed
                         1,200 latrines in indigenous communities in Chaco, providing basic sanitation to 6,000 beneficiaries.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project finances urban and rural water supply and sanitation infrastructure, along with
                         institutional capacity initiatives in selected areas of Paraguay. The main infrastructure civil works
                         under the urban component are taking place in the Asuncion metropolitan area. They include
                         rehabilitation and expansion of water and sewerage systems. Rural works for non-indigenous peoples
                         are being developed in priority areas of the eastern region of the country, and the indigenous in the
                         western region, the Chaco. They all were selected through consultative and participatory community
                         processes, based on specific guidelines developed to this effect.The project finances urban and rural
                         water supply and sanitation infrastructure, along with institutional capacity initiatives in selected


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         areas of Paraguay. The main infrastructure civil works under the urban component are taking place in
                         the Asuncion metropolitan area. They include rehabilitation and expansion of water and sewerage
                         systems. Rural works for non-indigenous peoples are being developed in priority areas of the eastern
Public Disclosure Copy




                         region of the country, and the indigenous in the western region, the Chaco. They all were selected
                         through consultative and participatory community processes, based on specific guidelines developed
                         to this effect.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Vargas Bejarano (GEN04)
                         Graciela Sanchez Martinez (GSU04)

                         6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental              Yes            As expected, no irreversible environmental issues have
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     been generated by the civil works financed through the
                                                                   project, in both rural and urban areas. All environment
                                                                   risks have been assessed and managed following the
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                   (ESMF) of the project, prepared in accordance with
                                                                   national legislation and OP/BP 4.01.

                                                                   Throughout implementation, conventional, site-specific
                                                                   ESIA/ESMP have been prepared for the small-scale
                                                                   construction of water supply systems and basic sanitation
                                                                   solutions in rural areas, and tertiary and secondary water
                                                                   and sewerage networks rehabilitation urban works.

                                                                   To date, appropriate guidelines have been incorporated
                                                                   into the technical environmental and social specifications
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   of construction contracts, duly supervised by the National
                                                                   Service of Environmental Sanitation (SENASA), the
                                                                   public entity responsible for provision of technical
                                                                   assistance in rural areas, and the public utility ESSAP,
                                                                   which provides water and sanitation in urban areas.

                                                                   Even though the Bella Vista WWTP and associated river
                                                                   outfall, as the source of the Project➢❨ s "Category A"
                                                                   classification according to OP/BP 4.01, will be financed
                                                                   with Government funds, all studies, ESIA and engineering
                                                                   design have been carried out according to Category
                                                                   ➢❨ A➢❨ projects requirements, including public
                                                                   consultations and disclosure of key documents. The ESIA
                                                                   was approved by SEAM on September 8, 2014, and
                                                                   granted the associated environmental license, recognizing
                                                                   the adequate identification of associated environmental
                                                                   and social risks and negative impacts, along with
                                                                   measures to prevent, control and mitigate them
                                                                   throughout the ESIA. The World Bank team has closely
                                                                   advised the client during this process and provided No


                                                                    Page 4 of 13
                                                        Objections at key junctures, ensuring that the document
                                                        follows standard international practices and includes the
                                                        Bank➢❨ s requirements for Category A projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        All subprojects, financed by the project carried out a
                                                        stand-alone EA and EMP. Under these instruments, social
                                                        issues have also been included to the point EAs and EMPs
                                                        became ESIA and ESMP. All subprojects were Category
                                                        B, except the Bella Vista WWTP, which is A.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Although any significant conversion or degradation of
                         4.04                           other (non-critical) natural habitats were expected and
                                                        identified during project➢❨ s implementation all
                                                        subprojects included specific criteria and procedures to
                                                        assess and address any impacts on natural habitats as
                                                        included in the ESMF of the Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    This Policy was not triggered because the Project is not
                                                        going to finance activities that impact forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This Policy was not triggered because the project is not
                                                        going to finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The ESIA include specific criteria and procedures to
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           assess and address any impacts on physical cultural
                                                        resources. The project developed a Cultural Property
                                                        Management Manual during implementation before any
                                                        subproject was selected.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has been prepared by
                         BP 4.10                        SENASA to ensure that indigenous communities obtain
                                                        culturally adequate, and informed basic sanitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        water systems in the western region of the country. This
                                                        IPP has been prepared following the Indigenous Peoples
                                                        Planning Framework of the project, which has been
                                                        prepared and disclosed by the Borrower following the
                                                        domestic legislation and OP/BP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   While no involuntary taking of land has been identified
                         OP/BP 4.12                     for rural works, the construction of the Bella Vista
                                                        WWTP of the urban component of the project required a
                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the 133 families that
                                                        lived in the planned work site.
                                                        The RAP has been prepared and disclosed by ESSAP
                                                        after lengthy consultations with the affected families,
                                                        following the Resettlement Policy Framework prepared
                                                        by the project in accordance to the national law and the
                                                        Bank➢❨ s OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     No    This Policy was not triggered because the project was not
                         4.37                           going to finance activities linked to the operation,
                                                        construction or rehabilitations of dams.



                                                         Page 5 of 13
                            Projects on International   Yes           Guidelines for managing OP/BP 7.50 are included in the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      ESMF of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No            This Policy was not triggered because the Project was not
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          going to finance activities in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               To date, implementation of the sub-projects works as part of the Project did not lead to
                              significant environmental impacts. Works located in urban areas consisted in the expansion and
                              rehabilitation of water and sanitation systems, while in the rural areas project resources were
                              directed towards the construction of small water systems and basic sanitation for non-indigenous
                              and indigenous peoples. In both cases, the WB environmental and social policies have been
                              implemented satisfactorily, including the Indigenous Peoples Plan that was prepared for the
                              ongoing 31 WSS systems for indigenous communities of the Paraguayan Chaco, following the
                              Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework of the project. At this stage, no additional safeguard
                              policy needs to be triggered.

                             In terms of remaining works, only the construction of a new wastewater treatment plant and
                             associated river outfall in Bella Vista could be foreseen to jeopardize the natural and social
                             environment if not properly implemented From this WWTP which had led the Project to be
                             classified as Category A, while the first phase of works - consisting in the terrain backfilling and
                             outfall to the river - is being financed by the Bank, and the second and most significant part will be
                             financed by the Government of Paraguay, through an Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
                             loan (project PR-L1029 Programa de Saneamiento Integral de la Bahia y Area Metropolitana de
                             Asuncion approved by the Government of Paraguay (GoP) in April 2016). The total loan of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             IADB project is US$110 million, of which approximately US$25 million will be allocated to the
                             WWTP construction. The GoP expects to tender the WWTP in November 2016, which should
                             allow a seamless transition from site preparation to plant construction.
                             The construction of the WWTP will most likely take place beyond the Project➢❨ s closure in
                             September 2017.

                             Nevertheless, like all studies engineering design of this WWTP, the ESIAESIA and E&S
                             Management Plans, and the RAP (that will allow the construction WWTP, which site was selected
                             due to its proximity to the river and central location in relation to ongoing and planned sewerage
                             network infrastructure), that were prepared, disclosed and consulted according to the Bank➢❨ s
                             Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP
                             4.12) and that are part of the Paraguay Environment License (No. 145887, September, 2014) for
                             the construction and operation of the WWTP will continue to be applied after project➢❨ s closure
                             by updating the E&S documents, and by adding strictly necessary measures according to any
                             changes of the subproject that would need to be addressed by the IADB policies. The RAP➢❨ s
                             main activities (including the physical move of all project affected people to permanent housing
                             and livelihood restoration activities) will finalize in August 2017 and the remaining activities
                             (mainly monitoring, information and communication) will be implemented by ESSAP, following
                             the RAP➢❨ s provisions. The WB will provide budget to continue supervision of the RAP as per


                                                                        Page 6 of 13
                          paragraph 24 of OP 4.12 until the final assessment of the successful completion of the RAP is
                          finalized by January 31, 2018.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The RAP prepared by ESSAP, under the Bank team➢❨ s guidance and supervision in 2013, has
                          been updated in October 2016 to reflect changes in the acquisition of land, extension of temporary
                          accommodations of remaining resettlements and timeline for RAP➢❨ s implementation. The RAP
                          has been satisfactorily implemented with 39 of the 133 planned resettlements completely finalized
                          in 2015. The remaining 94 families (1 additional family from the initially 93 foreseen that arose
                          from a solved claim) that will be resettled in the land area of the WWTP are extending their
                          temporary accommodation due to the delays in the construction of their houses. Land for the
                          houses will be acquired from the Municipality of Asuncion to ensure families will have their
                          houses land titles of property by May 2017, following provisions summarized in the
                          Municipality➢❨ s note of November 2016. Provisions include process, basis for the land social
                          prices and procedures to be followed until titling of the lands in the name of each family.
                          Livelihood restoration activities have been completed and the finalization of the physical
                          relocation of all families is expected to be finalized by August 2017. Information and
                          communication, capacity building (i.e. on health and sanitation) and monitoring activities for one
                          year after project➢❨ s closure would remain for the families being resettled. As all other
                          environmental and social plans, all remaining activities of the RAP - as per paragraph 24 of OP/BP
                          4.12 - will be completed by ESSAP and supervision of the Bank will continue as reflected in the
                          updated RAP (found in http://es.slideshare.net/Essap-Pmsas/plan-de-reasentamiento-ajustado-a-
                          octubre-de-2016).

                           The present restructuring consists in (i) reallocation of loan proceeds between existing
                           Disbursement Categories to support the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP);
                           (ii) increasing from 80 percent to up to 100 percent the percentage of Bank financing of some
                           Disbursement Categories to improve implementation and (iii) introduction of minor changes to the
                           results framework.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The Project has already fostered positive and long-term change to improve the environment,
                           health and well-being in both urban and rural areas.

                          Both the public utility ESSAP, which provides water and sanitation in urban areas, and SENASA,
                          the public entity of technical assistance provider for rural areas, are executing prioritized works,
                          meaning their locations were determined based on the environmental and social selection criteria
                          described in the ESMF and related guidelines. The urban works in the Gran Asuncion area
                          respond to the environmental problems identified in the project➢❨ s original environmental
                          baseline due to low WSS service coverage and the finalized technical design, ESIA and E&S
                          management plans also addressed these issues, including environmental and social specifications
                          in the construction contracts. On the rural side, the water systems and basic sanitation solutions
                          built by the Project are already contributing substantially to improvements in health and well-
                          being, particularly for women and children. Minor environmental impacts have been identified and
                          consist mostly of nuisances such as disposal of low levels of construction waste, dust and noise,
                          erosion control, and the need for the protection of spring catchments, among others. These have
                          being addressed by appropriate guidelines incorporated into the technical environmental and social
                          specifications of construction contracts, duly supervised by SENASA.



                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                          The most significant environmental and social impacts expected under the Project has always been
                          linked to the construction of the Bella Vista WWTP with a river outfall to dispose sewage. Though
                          the WWTP construction will be financed by the Government of Paraguay through a loan from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          IADB, the ESIA and E&S Management Plans for the construction and operation phases of the
                          WWTP were prepared with Project funds, in accordance to domestic law, and the WB safeguards
                          standards for Category A projects will continue to be applied after Project➢❨ s closure. The
                          Project is financing specific expenditures linked to the backfilling of the terrain for the WWTP
                          construction, including an outfall to the river and houses to resettle the remaining 94 families
                          under finalized RAP, which was also prepared following the WB OP/BP 4/12. It is planned these
                          94 families will move to their houses by August 2017.

                          The overall impact of the WWTP is expected to be strongly positive, both from an environmental
                          and social perspective due to river pollution reduction and human and environmental health
                          improvements. The ESIA and E&S Management plans of the Bella Vista WWTP contain detailed
                          programs to address impacts during its construction and operation phases. Careful identification of
                          negative impacts, including alternative analysis, and due integration of their results into
                          project➢❨ s design and environmental and social impact assessments and plans, and the RAP that
                          were prepared in accordance with the domestic law and the Bank➢❨ s environmental and social
                          policies, ensure that unavoidable adverse impacts would be properly mitigated.

                          As described in section 1, so far, the implementation of the RAP has been satisfactory according to
                          the Bank➢❨ s team and the external concurrent audit for the RAP. The Municipality of Asuncion
                          has expressed interest in replicating the RAP➢❨ s good practices in other projects with MOPC. To
                          date, 39 families have been fully compensated and relocated outside of the WWTP terrain, while
                          94 families are being temporarily accommodated in nearby areas under safe conditions while the
                          units of houses for the collective resettlement are constructed. They are all being assisted by the
                          specific Programs of assistance during temporary accommodations of the RAP and formally
                          monitored on a bimonthly basis. The delays linked to the backfilling works and houses
Public Disclosure Copy




                          construction have led to the need for longer temporary accommodation until these works are
                          concluded and the families could move in August 2017. The RAP document has been revised to
                          reflect the described three changes in the RAP, including the new implementation timeline, with
                          families➢❨ moves finalized by August 2017.

                           More details on the RAP are provided in section 4.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Alternatives analysis was incorporated into the screening, selection and design process for the
                           various sub-projects as foreseen in the ESMF of the Project. For urban works this analysis has
                           been done in two stages: at the master planning level and through the specific project technical
                           designs. The first level of analysis was carried out during the revision of the Gran Asuncion
                           sewerage master plan where various alternatives, strategies, and design options were finalized. For
                           sub-projects requiring specific ESIA, such as the rehabilitation of existing water and sewerage
                           infrastructure, and prioritized expansion of sewerage systems in the Gran Asuncion area, including
                           the Bella Vista WWTP, alternatives selection was specifically addressed through project-specific
                           ESIA and technical designs.

                          For rural works, since the project is essentially demand driven and participatory in nature, specific



                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                           alternatives have been discussed in the context of community planning and identification of
                           appropriate rural water and sanitation systems.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The actions planned to strengthen environmental and social institutional capacity at the sector
                           and project level were initiated prior to project approval and continued throughout the Project.

                          At the sector level, the implementation of the Governance Action Plan foreseen in Component 1 of
                          the project and under the leadership of DAPSAN represents a steady step towards improving
                          communication, participation, transparency and accountability in the sector, as does the
                          finalization of the preparation of the national water and sanitation policy and strategy. SEAM,
                          supported as well by the project under Component 1, has put together a very capable team to
                          implement a monitoring and management of water resources improvement program at the national
                          level. ERSSAN, the Sanitary Services Regulation Agency, is launching a water tariffs and
                          regulation framework study to identify the best enhancement to their own activities.

                          At project level, the agencies in charge of the investment sub-projects execution are the Sanitary
                          Services Company of Paraguay (ESSAP) - the national urban water and sanitation utility - and the
                          National Service of Environmental Sanitation (SENASA), the public entity responsible for
                          provision of technical assistance in rural areas. The works➢❨ environmental and social risks and
                          impacts of the typology defined in the ESMF were assessed and managed adequately by ESSAP
                          and SENASA.

                          SENASA has continued incorporating staff with expertise in relevant environmental and social
                          areas.

                          ESSAP➢❨ s Environmental and Social Department has been continuously strengthened
                          throughout the Project. The Environmental Department was created in November 2008, under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Investment Projects Planning and Management Unit (IPPMU), whose principal responsibility is to
                          manage financing with international organizations for ESSAP. The Social Department, which was
                          also created under this Unit, but initially without specific personnel attached, is part of the
                          transformed Social and Environmental Management Unit (SEMU) through the Directorial Act 720
                          issued in June 2011. This Unit operates under the Counsel on Special Projects (the implementation
                          unit of the 7710-PY loan), and is tasked with the environmental and social management of all of
                          the company➢❨ s projects. This new Unit has two departments, one social and one environmental,
                          and since 2012 includes the Departmental of Environmental and Social Works Supervision, where
                          the compliance of Socio-environmental technical specifications of works financed by external
                          sources is supervised, based on the Environmental Impact Studies. Today, the SEMU counts with
                          20 people and is responsible for the review of environmental impact assessments for each sub-
                          project, ensuring the inclusion of the environmental and social specifications in bidding documents
                          and contracts, and for the supervision of contracts. Additionally, direct supervision of contractors
                          is carried out by audit firms hired by ESSAP.

                          These procedures and associated institutional responsibilities were carried out during Project
                          implementation and in accordance to the selected subprojects financed by the Project, according to
                          the Project➢❨ s Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and its Resettlement
                          Policy Framework and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework. All three frameworks were
                          prepared in accordance with the national law and Bank➢❨ s safeguards.


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                           The ESMF procedures have been applied by ESSAP and SENASA, and include: (a)
                           environmental and social screening of works and activities; (b) public consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           procedures; (c) mitigation measures required during and after works implementation; and (d)
                           project monitoring.

                           All conventional, site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and relevant
                           documents have been developed for each investment. To date, all works have duly obtained their
                           environmental permits, as required by the environmental regulations of Paraguay.

                           Regarding the institutional capacity to manage the construction of the Bella Vista WWTP and the
                           implementation of the RAP, ESSAP has handled this highly participative preparation process
                           smoothly and effectively thus far. Institutional arrangements include the full implementation of the
                           RAP by ESSAP, with continuous internal and external monitoring (bi-monthly reports), along
                           with mid-term and final evaluations, all performed by ESSAP and outside actors such as the
                           Directorate for Potable Water and Sanitation (DAPSAN) of the Ministry of Public Works, the
                           Municipality of Asuncion, and the civil society organization COBANADOS. To avoid the misuse
                           of funds, the compensation process will continue involving a series of verifications of affected
                           families➢❨ documentation and account details, along with participation from Legal Advice and
                           the approval from the President of ESSAP for each family resettlement. The results of these
                           processes have been registered by the Financial Coordinator of the Project in the Integrated
                           Monitoring Program System (SIAP) before credit transfer is performed.

                           Processes have been audited regularly, along with ESSAP➢❨ s internal audits, and the concurrent
                           technical and financial audit. The Project team has regularly follow-up on the implementation
                           process to provide ESSAP with any needed support.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             During the preparation of each urban or rural sub-project financed by the project, beneficiaries
                           and relevant stakeholder groups have been involved in choosing their own system option,
                           addressing potential risks, as well as enhancing quality, targeting and benefits of the sub-projects
                           to the population.

                           These consultations have followed the same approach as the preparation stage of the project, in
                           which stakeholders participated in defining the overall project scope and the ESMF framework for
                           environmental and social management and related documents. The disclosure and consultation
                           process for these documents started on April 10, 2008, and have been published on the web sites
                           of ESSAP, SENASA, ERSSAN, and SEAM, as well as in the Bank➢❨ s external website.

                           In the specific case of the Bella Vista WWTP, the Terms of Reference for the elaboration of the
                           ESIA and the subsequent ESIA consultations were carried out according to OP 4.01 standards.
                           While three formal consultation events on the Terms of Reference were carried out in year 2012,
                           the public consultation of the draft ESIA was held on December 2013. No adverse opinions were
                           recorded in these consultations. The documents are publicly available on ESSAP➢❨ s website, and
                           also in the Bank➢❨ s external website.

                           Regarding the RAP, the plan has benefited from broad consultations with the affected families and
                           relevant stakeholders since February 2013, which actually initially resulted in the identification of


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           the need for the Plan itself. The formal consultations included four major areas: (i) the census of
                           population and social baseline, (ii) inventory and valuation of assets - including the topographic
                           survey of the land (iii) options for resettlement and temporary accommodations; and (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           answering inquiries and resolving complains. In addition to these formal events, various
                           consultations activities with the affected families were held. The need of extension of temporary
                           accommodation and timeline of the RAP, including the revised RAP document was duly consulted
                           with the affected remaining 94 families to be resettled in the site of the Plant, and is publicly
                           available since November 10, 2016 ESSAP➢❨ s website and will be in the Bank➢❨ s external
                           website as soon as this ISDS is cleared.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Apr-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-May-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      21-May-2008
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Paraguay                                                         10-Apr-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Paraguay                                                         20-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Apr-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Jan-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Paraguay                                                         10-Apr-2008
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                          94 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          94 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Noreen Beg (SA)                        Date: 02-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Rita E. Cestti (PMGR)                 Date: 10-Dec-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
