                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC14765

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           South Africa                    Project ID:      P149521
                            Project Name:      Technical Assistance Project for Development Carbon Capture and Storage in
                                               SA (P149521)
                            Task Team          Nataliya Kulichenko
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       22-Jun-2016                        Estimated        28-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEE08                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     48.40                     Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                    25.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                 23.40
                              Total                                                                       48.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           20.      The proposed development objective of this TAP is to demonstrate that CCS—one of the key
                           climate change mitigation technologies—is feasible in South Africa, allowing the GoSA to advance
                           to the next phase in its CCS Roadmap: large-scale CCS demonstration.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed TAP is part of the World Bank supported Programmatic Technical Assistance (PTA)
                           that will include World Bank executed capacity building activities and the recipient executed TAP.
                           In particular, the TAP will support two independent components, which contribute to the realization
                           of the GoSA CCS Program: 1) the Pilot CO2 Storage Project (PCSP) and 2) the stand-alone CO2
                         Capture Pilot Plant (CCPP) project. The PCSP will comprise an estimated 90 percent of the activities
                         and costs of the World Bank-supported TAP, because the first priority is to demonstrate that CO2
                         can be stored in South African geological formations. In parallel to the TAP, the World Bank will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         executing capacity-building activities under the PTA will support the geological data collection and
                         analyses needed for the preparation and implementation of the PCSP, as well as the tasks on
                         evaluation and selection of a capture technology for the CCPP. The PTA program will furthermore
                         support capacity building needed to equip the counterpart staff with the necessary technical skills for
                         the implementation of the two pilot projects.

                         Component 1: Pilot CO2 Storage Project (PCSP)

                         The PCSP, envisioned in the GoSA CCS Roadmap, is divided into six sub-components scheduled to
                         be completed in a series of seven consecutive stages between 2014 and 2025. The scope of proposed
                         PCSP component within the TAP is narrower and aims to support the activities planned within
                         Stages 3 to 6, which are scheduled to be completed between 2015 and 2019. The proposed TAP will
                         conclude in 2019, leaving the overall completion (monitoring) of the PCSP thereafter solely in the
                         hands of the GoSA. In order to manage prudently the PCSP activities, a review will be conducted at
                         the conclusion of each stage in order to determine whether the results warrant proceeding to the next
                         stage. This process is hereafter referred to as a “decision point.” The first stage, Project Initiation,
                         was supported and completed by the TAP implementing agency – South African Center on Carbon
                         Capture and Storage (SACCCS) in 2013, and a decision was made by the South Africa Department
                         of Energy (DoE) and the SACCCS Board of Governors to proceed with the preparation and
                         implementation of storage pilot project (PCSP).

                         Component 2: CO2 Capture Pilot Plant (CCPP)

                         The CCPP involves the design, construction, and operation of a CO2 capture pilot plant to be
                         installed at an existing coal-fired plant. The capture plant will become a CO2 capture learning facility
                         for industry and academia. Eskom has indicated that they might be interested in hosting the CCPP at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         one of its coal-fired generating stations. A capacity building and research program associated with
                         the CCPP will not be restricted to just South Africa, but will serve as a hub for capture research
                         across the Southern African region and beyond. Overall, the CCPP development will entail the
                         following eight tasks, the first three of which will be undertaken as part of the World Bank-supported
                         PTA program:

                         i.       Review of South Africa’s technology options with respect to a CO2 capture pilot plant;
                         ii.      Assessment and selection of the most suitable commercial capture technology;
                         iii.     Cost estimates based on the assessment and selection of a host site (a power plant);
                         iv. Project development, including concept design, preliminary costing and scheduling, evaluating
                         plant options, selecting preferred plant and basic design (including civil design);
                         v.        Project execution, including plant procurement and construction;
                         vi. Plant commissioning;
                         vii. Operation and testing, including running a capture research program; and
                         viii. Plant decommissioning.

                         The first three tasks will be supported through the WB executed activities under the PTA. Tasks (iii)
                         through (viii) will be supported by the recipient executed TAP scheduled to be completed between
                         2015 and 2019. As with the PCSP, the CCPP includes comprehensive reviews to be conducted at the
                         end of each task to inform decision-making to proceed to the next task, ensuring that the basis for
                         continuing with project implementation is justified.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Both components of the TAP have environment and social risks that might require addressing their
                         mitigation. Technically, large CCS projects run the risk of having significant environment and social
                         impacts due to injection of CO2 into deep, permeable geologic formations. If the operation is not
                         planned properly, potential adverse events could include leakage of CO2 through the impermeable
                         confining stratum (caprock); release of CO2 via injection wells; induced seismicity; degradation of
                         water quality in shallow aquifers (as a result of drilling exploration and injection wells, or due to
                         leaking CO2); and changes in soil chemistry and micro biota caused by leaking CO2. Managing the
                         risks of these impacts depends on proper selection of an injection site based on extensive geological
                         data, application of good industrial standards in the design and installation of wells and tanks, and
                         implementation of adequate monitoring systems and procedures. As part of the selection process for
                         the proposed PCSP, sites will be pre-evaluated using a number of specific criteria including the
                         identified potential environmental and social impacts. Presently available information indicates that
                         the magnitude of these impacts will not be significant. For example, because of the pilot nature of the
                         project, local seismic events that might occur when fluids are injected underground (similar to
                         geothermal projects) will likely be small or negligible. Workplace and community health and safety
                         risks from a sudden CO2 release—either from the well or a ruptured storage tank—are not expected
                         to be an important issue, either, since any release would involve a relatively small amount of gas, and
                         it would be into an open rather than into a confined space. Therefore, the gas quickly would disperse
                         in the atmosphere. Other impacts, not unique to CO2 injection, that will need to be managed are
                         those associated with exploration (temporary access roads and well drilling); with the construction of
                         facilities (permanent access road and storage, compression, and injection equipment); and with
                         transport of CO2 to the site by truck. CO2 injection is not specifically covered under South African
                         environmental law, but a preliminary interpretation suggests that the project will require a waste
                         management license from the Department of Environmental Affairs, which in turn will require
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation of an ESIA. Concomitantly, an ESIA will be conducted, and will include an analysis of
                         alternative project locations before a selection is finalized or project activities on the ground are
                         initiated. The support to the environmental regulatory and permitting aspects of PCSP will be
                         provided through both the WB executed activities and TAP under the PTA.

                         The specific locations for seismic testing and exploratory drilling have not been identified or
                         selected, meaning that the site of the injection well is not yet known. However, two general
                         geographical areas have been pre-identified identified as potential locations: the Algoa and Zululand
                         Basins. The Algoa Basin is sparsely populated, and the Zululand Basin has extensive wetlands. Both
                         locations are home to several parks and reserves. However, the SACCCS and DoE made it clear that
                         a selected location will not be within the boundaries of national parks and reserves. It is likely that
                         some natural habitat will be affected by exploration, construction, and operations associated with the
                         PCSP, while other critical natural habitat will need to be avoided. Activities under the project that
                         could have adverse environmental impacts include a seismic survey and drilling of test wells in both
                         target basins to evaluate the feasibility of CO2 injection and storage. Basin exploration, site
                         characterization, and PCSP operation activities are all routine practices in the oil and gas industry
                         and will be executed in accordance with existing international health, safety, and environmental
                         guidelines.
                         Furthermore, environmental and social risks will be mitigated through a site-specific environment
                         and social management plan (ESMP), which will be legally binding for the recipient and all project
                           contractors. The SACCCS is in the process of producing this ESMP, an environmental management
                           plan for the basin exploration and site characterization stages, and similar plans for the operation,
                           closure, and post-closure stages. In order to further limit environmental and social risks (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the risk of CO2 leakage), a comprehensive plan will be developed to ensure that all risks have been
                           fully considered and that processes are in place to limit and remediate any impacts should they occur.
                           Obtaining public acceptance of and support for the project will also be of primary importance. The
                           SACCCS is committed to working with the national public and local communities to address any
                           concerns, and has developed national and local stakeholder engagement plans that have already been
                           initiated.
                           For Component 1, the PCSP, overall environmental and social impact risks have been rated
                           “Substantial.” Similarly, the “Substantial” rating has been assigned for the overall project preparation
                           risk, while a “High” risk rating is proposed for overall implementation.
                           For Component 2, the CCPP, the environment and social risk s are considered relatively low. This is
                           due to the fact that the CCPP will most likely be hosted at an existing industrial facility away from
                           communities and sensitive environments, and will involve chemical capture processes widely used in
                           the production of liquid fuels from coal, as well as in the petrochemical industry in South Africa.
                           Mitigation measures for environmental impacts from these similar chemical industry operations are
                           well determined under the current South Africa’s environmental regulations and, thus, would be
                           relatively easy to implement.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed implementing agency is the SACCCS, a division of South Africa National Energy
                           Development Institute, which the legal entity responsible for the preparation and implementation of
                           the TAP. The SACCCS is funded and guided by its core members and participants as well as its
                           parent organization, the South African DoE. The SACCCS will be responsible for the overall
                           planning and implementation of the pilot project. The SACCCS team will include environment and
                           social experts to guide preparation of a comprehensive assessment of risks and impacts associated
                           with the pilot project, including stakeholder engagement. The SACCCS has never been an
                           implementing agency for World Bank-financed projects. Thus, an assessment of its environment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social management capacity will be undertaken as part of the ESIA. Based on the results of this
                           assessment, an action plan will be developed and training offered as part of project implementation to
                           strengthen the SACCCS’ capacity to manage environmental and social risks. In order to understand
                           and mitigate any potential CCPP project impact risks, an ESIA and ESMP will be developed to cover
                           preparation of plant design and its subsequent operation.
                           The team proposes assigning the TAP to Environment Category A, which has a policy on
                           environmental assessment and natural habitat that will trigger the requirement of a comprehensive
                           ESIA.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU07)
                           Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)
                           Sanjay Srivastava (GEN01)
                           Thomas E. Walton (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The PCSP (Component 1) that includes pilot testing
                                 OP/BP 4.01                                                                             could cause significant environment and social
                                                                                                                        impacts due to injection of CO2 into deep, permeable
                                                                                                                        geologic formations. An ESIA will analyze the risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        and impacts associated with leakage of CO2 through
                                                                                                                        the impermeable confining stratum (caprock); release
                                                                                                                        of CO2 via the injection well; induced seismicity;
                                                                                                                        degradation of water quality in shallow aquifers as a
                                                                                                                        result of drilling exploration and injection wells, or
                                                                                                                        due to leaking CO2; and changes in soil chemistry
                                                                                                                        and micro biota caused by leaking CO2.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 Yes                        The ESIA will assess possible direct or indirect
                                                                                                                        impacts on any critical or natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                         There is no possibility of the presence of or impacts
                                                                                                                        on forest resources, as these will be avoided.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No                         There is no possibility of involvement of pesticides.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                         There is no possibility of the presence of or impacts
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             on physical cultural resources, as these will be
                                                                                                                        avoided.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There is no possibility of the presence of or impacts
                                 4.10                                                                                   on indigenous communities.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         The project is unlikely to involve any involuntary
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                resettlement, as such potential locations would be
                                                                                                                        avoided.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESIA for the TAP two proposed components is under preparation by the SACCCS, and will
                                      be ready for public consultation around June 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nataliya Kulichenko
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                                                                               Date: 22-Jul-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Sameer Shukla (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 22-Jul-2016
                                 Manager:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
