INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13485
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Montenegro                 Project ID:  P149743
Project Name: Revenue Administration Reform (P149743)
Task Team       Shilpa B. Pradhan
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-Dec-2015                Estimated    16-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO15                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Tax policy and administration (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      11.24            Total Bank Financing:   11.24
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      11.24
Total                                                                      11.24
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the project is to improve effectiveness of operational functions and
reduce the compliance burden on taxpayers. The higher level goal is to increase overall revenues.
The long-term vision is a tax administration that operates with a higher capacity to streamline risk-
based business processes that contribute to the efficient collection of taxes and social contributions
Page 1 of 5


﻿that are owed from all sources of economic activity. Increased compliance will generate a more
robust revenue stream to provide essential services to citizens. Improvements in capacity will also
support the country's goal for EU accession and economic integration with EU member states.
3. Project Description
The project seeks to improve MTA's institutional arrangements and management systems to take full
advantage of a highly automated, low-discretion, risk-based system. The project entails an
investment of Euro 10.0 million over a period of five years for: organizational restructuring, the
a        development management and infrastructure changes necessary for optimal performance of the
current tax administration system. The project includes financial and technical support for: revenue
collection methodologies and procedures; information technology and other technological
infrastructure and training, tax audit and operational systems refinements and technical assistance to
underpin MTA's management decisions on organization structure and capacity to ensure that the
economy reaps the full benefits of the investment. This project consists of three components.
Component 1: Improving Operational Efficiency. The component will help enhance the strategic
focus of management, increase attention to integrity, strengthen staff management and training,
improve the analytical capacity required to support strategic management within MTA, improve the
legal framework and the appeals function and to institute a modern revenue administration on par
with best practice in the EU. Subcomponent one will focus on institutional and organizational
development, enhancing strategic focus and planning capacity; strengthening executive, managerial,
technical and operational capacity; and includes the introduction of an enhanced monitoring system
to assist in the management of the MTA's performance. Subcomponent two will focus on
strengthening the capacity for managing the change process. This subcomponent will ensure that all
changes that take place in MTA are based on common understanding of the purpose of the change.
This sub-component will support the change process to build commitment of all staff involved in the
change process and will facilitate the institutional development of the MTA. Subcomponent three
will strengthen the MTA's capacity to coordinate project implementation. Particularly, this
subcomponent will finance the recruitment ofproject management and administrative support to
ensure the necessary expertise for the management of the project during implementation. The
subcomponent will also finance office equipment and operational expenditures training for project
management and fiduciary activities that will be undertaken for the project.
Component 2: Increasing effectiveness of operational functions. The activities within this
component support modernized business processes and increased operational effectiveness of MTA.
This component has two sub-components. Subcomponent one will introduce international best
practices into the operational functions of the MTA, strengthen registration and return processing,
formalize risk analysis in audit selection and enforcement activities, improve business analytics to
identify where limited MTA resources should be deployed to return the best results or meet specific
MTA objectives, and improve the responsiveness and consistency of the appeal / objections process.
Subcomponent two will: stabilize MTA's current IT system in the first years of the project by
cleansing data and rationalizing their current custom built software that supports MTA operations;
review the capabilities of the current IT system and prepare a gap analysis of the functionality of the
current system relative to that of offered by commercial systems; develop a conceptual design and
technical re quirements for an integrated system; and procure the necessary equipment required to
support hardware and software at both a primary and disaster recovery site. This project does not
include financing for an integrated revenue management system (IRMS). However, based on the
findings of the gap analysis, the Government of Montenegro may request additional financing for the
procurement and implementation of an IRMS at a later stage.
Page 2 of 5


﻿Component 3: Reducing Compliance Burden to Taxpayers. This component will finance activities
to: modernize taxpayer services and increase understanding of revenue laws, procedures, and rights
and obligations of taxpayers and thus reduce the compliance burden to taxpayers; establish a modem
O
U         contact (call) center to provide advanced services to taxpayers; and strengthen external and internal
communications. This component will review current taxpayer services and staffing needs and
identify recommendations for improvements. Training curricular and materials will be developed for
taxpayer services staff. The functions, staffing needs and hardware and software requirement for the
contact center will be assessed and hardware and software procured through this component.
Assistance will be provided for improving taxpayer relations including establishing charter of
taxpayer rights, communication campaigns, and establishing performance standards for taxpayer
services. The project will also finance activities for strengthening internal communications in the
MTA.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Agnes I. Kiss (OPSPF)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No           No Civil Works included in the project.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Page 3 of 5


﻿and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shilpa B. Pradhan
Page 4 of 5


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)             Date: 09-Nov-2015
Manager:
P
Page 5 of 5


