                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23990




                         May 14, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category     Country
                                                             Burkina Faso Improving
                           P166596                           Education of children with   C - Not Required (C)       Burkina Faso
                                                             disabilities
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit              Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Boubakar Lompo                                                 GED07
                                                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                       3.00
                                 Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                  3.00


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase the access to schooling of vulnerable children with a focus on children
                           with disabilities.

                           C. Project Description
                           Community Driven Activities

                                  Identification of children with disabilities to benefit from the project will be done at the community
                                   level by the communities supported by the social services technical bodies and the local NGO;
                                  School improvement plans to respond to the obstacles to the schooling of children with disabilities
                                   will be developed by school management committees at the school level, and they will identify the
                                   activities to be implemented and the modalities of implementation;



                         May 14, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities




                                  Income-Generating Activities will be implemented at household level by the households themselves,
                                   grouped into cooperatives;
                                  Decentralized structures of the State and municipalities will be part of the steering committee to
                                   learn and appropriate the project;
                                  The implementing agency oversees monitoring and evaluation of the whole activities, training of the
                                   beneficiaries using a training of trainers’ approach to make sure the community really appropriates
                                   the project;
                                  A complaints management mechanism will be put in place to ensure that the project receives the
                                   beneficiaries’ feedback of the implementation of the projects and processes them without delay, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          To increase the access to schooling of vulnerable children with a focus on children with disabilities from poor
                          households including at least 50 percent girls in the five poorest regions of the country and Ouagadougou.
                          According to project activities, the Component 1: Improving access to preschools and primary schools
                          (US$513,500) aims to implement an activity with potential environmental impacts and risks with
                          Improvement of school environment by making small physical adjustments in schools to facilitate the
                          mobility of children with disabilities or to organize remedial classes for children with disabilities at risk of
                          school failure, etc. The risks seem to be Low in the civil works view. The Borrower has experience in
                          managing World Bank operations and have benefitted from other (past and ongoing) IDA projects (Education
                          Access and Quality Improvement EAQIP (P148062)).



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Borrower has experience in managing World Bank operations and have benefitted from other (past and
                          ongoing) IDA projects which provided/are providing relatively sufficient capacity for understanding and
                          applying safeguards policies. However, the Borrower and its potential Counterparts capacities have been
                          assessed and evaluated and required to conduct environmental screenings on subprojects, reviewed and
                          approved by the National Agency (BUNEE) and the Bank. The assessment and management of risks and
                          impacts and the nature of this project environmental outcomes may also be influenced by or be dependent
                          upon the role played by third interested parties.




                         May 14, 2018                                                                                               Page 3 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Leandre Yameogo, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Gertrude Marie Mathilda Coulibaly Zombre, Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                 Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                   According to project activities, the
                                                                                                   Component 1 (Improving access to
                                                                                                   preschools and primary schools aims to
                                                                                                   implement an activity with potential
                                                                                                   environmental impacts and risks with
                                                                                                   Improvement of school environment by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   making small physical adjustments in
                                                                                                   schools to facilitate the mobility of children
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No
                                                                                                   with disabilities or to organize remedial
                                                                                                   classes for children with disabilities at risk
                                                                                                   of school failure, etc. However, simple
                                                                                                   mitigation measures plan (Environmental
                                                                                                   requirement) will prepared and included in
                                                                                                   the bidding documents for the contractors
                                                                                                   and monitored by the project
                                                                                                   implementation unit.
                                                                                                   The project activities will not be
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No                    implemented in areas hosting natural
                                                                                                   habitats.
                                                                                                   The project will not support activities
                                                                                                   related to forest exploitation or
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No
                                                                                                   management or might have potential
                                                                                                   adverse impacts on forested areas.
                                                                                                   The project does not involve pest
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                                                                                                   management.
                                                                                                   The project activities are not expected to
                                                                                                   infringe or impact any cultural artifacts in
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                                                                                                   its targeted areas (schools to be
                                                                                                   rehabilitated with minor civil works).
                                                                                                   No indigenous people in the sense of this
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No
                                                                                                   Policy are located in the project areas.
                                                                                                   The project will not finance activities that
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No                    involve land acquisition leading to physical
                                                                                                   and economic displacement.
                                                                                                   The project will not finance dams, not rely
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No
                                                                                                   on dams.
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50     No                    The project is not expected to affect


                         May 14, 2018                                                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Burkina Faso Improving Education of children with disabilities



                                                                                                                      international waterways
                                                                                                                      The project will not be located in a disputed
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No
                                                                                                                      area.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           26-Mar-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              .
Public Disclosure Copy




                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Boubakar Lompo

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Maman-Sani Issa                                   17-Apr-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Meskerem Mulatu                                   11-May-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         May 14, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5
