                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16823
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Eastern Africa                     Project ID:   P151847
                            Project Name:      Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence (P151847)
                            Task Team          Arun R. Joshi,Reehana Rifat Raza,Xiaonan Cao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          16-Feb-2016                        Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (60%), Health (5%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry
                                              sector (15%), General energy sector (10%), Informat ion technology (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Technology diffusion (10%),
                                              Other rural development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     148.00           Total Bank Financing:                 148.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                140.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                    8.00
                              Total                                                                                      148.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen selected Eastern and Southern African higher education institutions to deliver quality
                           post-graduate education and build collaborative research capacity in the regional priority areas.


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed ACE II project will support the governments of eight participating countries ?
                         Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia in strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the selected ACEs to deliver quality post-graduate education and build collaborative research
                         capacity in the regional priority areas. With the view of achieving the above described vision and
                         objective, the proposed ACE II operation will implement three sets of activities: (i) strengthening 24
                         selected ACEs for ESA in a set of defined regional priority areas (US$140 million); (ii) providing
                         capacity building support to these ACEs through regional activities (US$3 million); and (iii)
                         supporting coordination and management of the implementation of Components 1 and 2 (US$5
                         million). Outlined below are the proposed activities to be financed under ACE II, including the key
                         features of design and implementation. Their details can be found in Annex 2.

                         A.      Project Components

                         Component 1: Strengthening Africa Centers of Excellence (ACEs) in Regional Priority Areas (US$
                         140 million)

                         Under this component, the IDA Credit will finance the strengthening of 24 ACEs in five clusters of
                         regional priorities ? Industry, Agriculture, Health, Education and Applied Statistics. Each of these 24
                         specialized regional centers will receive a grant of up to US$ 6 million for implementing its proposal
                         in a specific regional priority area. All these ACEs are expected to perform the following tasks:

                         (a)      Build institutional capacity to provide quality post-graduate education with relevance to the
                         labor market;
                         (b)      Build institutional capacity to conduct high quality applied research, relevant to addressing a
                         key development challenge/priority;
                         (c)      Develop and enhance partnerships with other academic institutions (national, regional and
                         international) to pursue academic excellence;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (d)      Develop and enhance partnerships with industry and the private sector to generate greater
                         impact;
                         (e)      Improve governance and management of the institution and set up a role model for other
                         higher education institutions; and
                         (f)      Deliver outreach, and create an impact, to society by delivering excellent teaching and
                         producing high quality applied research.

                         The ACEs financed under the ACE II project were selected through an open, objective, transparent,
                         and merit-based competitive process. The Call for Proposals was followed by a two-step evaluation
                         process conducted by the Independent Evaluation Committee (IEC) : a technical evaluation and an
                         onsite and leadership evaluation. Out of the 92 eligible proposals submitted, RSC conditionally
                         selected 25 proposals to be ACEs, out of which only 24 will be financed under the project based on
                         the following criteria : (a) address a specific challenge in one of the five priority areas in the region ?
                         industry, agriculture, health, education and applied statistics; (b) be of the highest quality; (c) have
                         institutional capacity; (d) provide geographical balance; and (e) have IDA funding eligibility and
                         availability. These selected ACEs underwent financial management (FM), procurement and
                         safeguards assessments.

                         The proposed ACEs are expected to address specific development challenges facing the region
                         through graduate training (Master?s, PhD, and short-term courses) and applied research in the form


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         of partnerships and collaborations with other institutions and the private sector. These are highlighted
                         below for a quick illustration of their potential impact.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      Industry. There are nine selected ACEs in the areas of energy, extractives, ICT,
                         manufacturing, railways, and water, based in Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania,
                         Uganda, and Zambia. The center in energy will try to alleviate constraints which have resulted from
                         low energy access and adoption of technologies in rural areas and poor inter-state energy trading in
                         ESA. The centers in mining and oil and gas will take the lead on sustainable development of the
                         extractive industry through the provision of education, training programs and research solutions in
                         the field. The center in ICT will educate Africans who will develop and deploy innovative ICT
                         services. The two centers in the water sector will address water and sanitation challenges in the
                         region to ensure safe water and sanitation requirements for water provision; apply technology to use
                         ground water for agricultural applications; and improve municipal and industrial water management.
                         The center in railways will produce trained graduates who can fill the manpower needs of the
                         burgeoning railway sector. The centers in manufacturing will utilize nanotechnology to fill the gap in
                         promoting value addition of primary produce.

                         (b)      Agriculture. There are eight selected ACEs in the agriculture area, based in Ethiopia, Kenya,
                         Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda. They will address development challenges of food insecurity and
                         rural poverty by focusing on sustainable agriculture and agribusiness development and management,
                         e.g., developing value chain capacity in the use of biotechnology and climate smart agriculture to
                         increase crop and livestock productivity and fisheries; developing technology to exploit the potential
                         of edible insects as a source of protein; increasing the relevance of their training programs through
                         internships, tracer studies, and wide stakeholder consultations; and producing scientists who can
                         address issues of climate change adaptability, agricultural sustainability, and food insecurity.

                         (c)      Health. There are five selected ACEs in the health area, based in Ethiopia, Malawi,
                         Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. These centers will address development challenges in the areas of
                         infectious diseases, public health, and drug development by providing leadership in postgraduate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training and research in molecular biology, analytical epidemiology, traditional medicine, and
                         pharma-biotechnology. These centers will provide a regional platform for innovative drug
                         development, including exploring the use of traditional medicine, and support equitable access to
                         medications and diagnostics in the region.

                         (d)     Education. The selected ACE in education in Rwanda aims to improve the quality of
                         mathematics and science education through facilitating the delivery of innovative pedagogical
                         approaches, supporting the development and implementation of curriculum reforms, supporting
                         research in mathematics and science education to alleviate learning barriers in these subjects and
                         promote STEM education, and outreach programs targeting all education levels in the region.

                         (e)      Applied Statistics. The selected ACE in applied statistics, based in Rwanda will become an
                         international multidisciplinary center that combines expertise in statistics, economics, business,
                         computer science, and engineering to use big data and data analytics to support evidence-based
                         decision-making, help solve complex real-world problems related to development, monitor and
                         evaluate performance of public intervention programs, and stimulate innovation.

                         These selected ACEs are expected to produce measurable results in the form of increased quality and
                         quantity of graduates (Master?s and PhD), and research in the priority areas as well as of increased
                         quality and quantity of research, and increased collaboration and partnerships with industry and other

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         higher education institutions, both regional and international. According to their proposals, over the
                         project duration of five years, collectively these ACEs plan to:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)    produce more than 3,500 graduate students in the regional development priority areas, out of
                         which more than 700 will be PhD students and more than 1,000 will be female students;
                         (b)    publish almost 1,500 journal articles;
                         (c)    launch more than 300 research collaborations with private sector and other institutions; and
                         (d)    generate almost US$30 million in external revenue.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building Support to ACEs through Regional Interventions (US$ 3 million)

                         Under this component, the IDA Grant will finance activities at the regional level to enhance the
                         capacity of the ACEs and help them overcome key challenges for achieving the PDO. The ACE I
                         experience indicates that additional support is needed to ensure that the selected ACEs achieve the
                         intended outcome and impact of the project. Areas of additional support include: (a) capacity
                         development to address key institutional inadequacies such as partnership development with the
                         private sector; and (b) competitive scholarships to award top future talents and encourage regional
                         student mobility. Under the ACE Scholarship Program, regional students will be financed for two
                         years to attain a Master?s degree in any of the ACEs It is envisioned that the ACE Scholarship
                         program will acquire the prestige of a Rhodes type scholarship program, identifying and cultivating
                         future leaders for the region. Some elements of this component could be implemented by specialized
                         TA firm(s) which will be overseen by the RFU.

                         Component 3: Facilitation, Coordination and Administration of Project Implementation (US$ 5
                         million)

                         This component will be financed in the form of a Regional IDA Grant to the RFU. The sheer
                         number of countries and institutions participating in ACE II makes the project implementation
                         complex and requires a RFU that has a designated team for helping manage the project. The main
Public Disclosure Copy




                         role of the RFU is to deliver some capacity development activities under Component 2. The RFU
                         will explore networks of regional institutions and industries within and outside of the ESA region
                         and manage TA firm(s), as needed, to ensure effective project preparation and implementation, and
                         oversee, administer, and coordinate M&E activities across the ACEs to ensure their achievement of
                         the agreed DLI results. The Inter-University Council for East Africa (IUCEA), a regional body under
                         the aegis of the EAC, was selected by the RSC as the RFU for the project through a competitive
                         process (see Annex 3 for more details on the selection process). To fulfill the responsibility as the
                         RFU, IUCEA is forming a team which comprises a project coordinator, a financial specialist, a
                         communication officer and others. IUCEA has already received an IDA Grant of US$1 million as
                         part of the Project Preparation Advance (PPA).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The locations of the ACEs are as follows:

                         Ethiopia: Addis Ababa (3 ACEs) and Dire Dawa (1 ACE)
                         Kenya: Bondo, Eldoret and Njoro (1 ACE each)
                         Malawi: Lilongwe and Blantyre (1 ACE each)
                         Mozambique: Maputo (1 ACE)
                         Rwanda: Kigali (4 ACEs)


                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                           Tanzania: Arusha and Morogoro (2 ACEs each)
                           Uganda: Kampala (2 ACEs), Mbarara (1 ACE) and Nkozi (1 ACE)
                           Zambia: Kitwe and Lusaka (1 ACE each)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSU07)
                           Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes        Environmental and social impacts of rehabilitating
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  academic/research institutions are expected to be
                                                                   moderate. ESMP should be prepared for each candidate
                                                                   institution to manage environmental and social impacts.
                                                                   ESMPs have been prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                   disclosed by all the ACEs.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No         The project will include rehabilitation and minor
                            4.04                                   construction within existing university/institution campus
                                                                   grounds. Thus natural habitats will not be affected by
                                                                   project activities.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         The project will not involve forestry activities.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project activities do not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural        No            The project activities will not affect physical/cultural
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            The project activities will not affect indigenous peoples.
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement No            Project activities are only expected to include minor civil
                            OP/BP 4.12                             works since the project focuses on quality improvements
                                                                   and not on expanding capacity to more students. All civil
                                                                   works, if any, will take place on existing campus grounds.
                                                                   Sub-projects involving land acquisitions leading to
                                                                   involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                                                                   resources or livelihoods will not be financed by allowed
                                                                   for this project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         Project activities do not involve construction of or
                            4.37                                   reliance on dams.
                            Projects on International   No         Project activities are not expected to impact on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         Project areas do not include disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           The project focuses on quality enhancements of the selected ACEs, which primarily requires
                           "softer items" i.e. faculty and curriculum development. Some of the ACEs may undertake some
                           rehabilitation of their existing facilities. However, there will be no new land acquisition for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ACEs and any rehabilitation will be based within the existing institutions. Thus, the impact on
                           environment is low.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Most project activities are in teaching/training, learning, research and application. Their long term
                           impacts on environment are low.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Each ACE has developed its own ESMP to safeguard its activities.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           See table above.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Each ESMP has been disclosed on the ACE institution➢❨ s website or on campus for public
                           access.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          22-Feb-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       22-Apr-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kenya                                                            22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Malawi                                                           22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Mozambique                                                       22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Rwanda                                                           22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Tanzania                                                         22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Uganda                                                           22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                           Zambia                                                           22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arun R. Joshi,Reehana Rifat Raza,Xiaonan Cao
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)               Date: 03-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)                 Date: 03-May-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
