INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16289
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uzbekistan                 Project ID:  P119939
Project Name: Talimarjan Transmission Project (P119939)
Task Team       Sunil Kumar Khosla
Leader(s):
Estimated       11-Jan-2011               TEstimated    15-Mar-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO3                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Regulation and
competition policy (20%), Managing for development resu Its (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     203.04            Total Bank Financing:  110.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        93.04
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          110.00
Total                                                         203.04
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
To improve the reliability of the electricity supply to residential and business consumers in South
Western Uzbekistan.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Page 1 of 7


﻿To improve the reliability of the electricity supply to residential and business consumers in South
Western Uzbekistan.
3. Project Description
O
U         The restructuring project will have same two components: (a) investments in power transmission
network and (b) institutional strengthening for UE.
o
Component 1: Strengthening power transmission network (estimated cost US$ 130 million). The
investments will include construction of: (a) about 220 km. single-circuit 500 kV transmission line
from Talimarjan TPP to Sogdiana substation; (b) 500/220 kV open switch-yard at Talimarjan TPP;
(c) a bay extension at Sogdiana substation; and (d) a 500 kV connection line from the 500/220 kV
open switch-yard                           at Talimarjan thermal power plant to the Karakul-
Guzar transmission line.
Component 2: Institutional strengthening by providing technical assistance (TA) to build
Uzbekenergo capacity (estimated cost US$ 10 million). This component will support: (a) project
implementation support consultant to assist UE during the project implementation; (b) capacity
building to strengthen fiduciary capacity of UE; (c) Strengthen technical capacity of UE; (d)
technical assistance to UE                          in the renewable energy development
program; (e) mitigation of avian risk during the project implementation and operation; (f) project and
UE audits in accordance with internationally accepted auditing standards; and any other areas agreed
between the Bank and UE.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The 500 kV transmission line will start from Talimarjan TPP and pass through the territory of
Samarkand (87 km) and Kashkadarya (131 km) regions (oblasts).
From the border of Samarkand region, the route goes through hilly piedmont terrain, undeveloped
lands, and the hilly valley of the river Kum-Darya. It traverses some irrigated fields, lands used for
dryland cereal crops and cotton, and through unused lands as well as non-cropped land used for
livestock pasture. In summary, over the total length of the route of the high voltage line, land use is
primarily irrigated agriculture (cotton, cereals), livestock pasture, and undevelped. There are no
protected or declared conservation areas or nature reserves within the project site or surrounding
areas that might potentially be affected by project activities. The existing vegetation cover of the
transmission line construction area contains no sites with rare plant species.
The Adyr lands in Kashkadarya oblast are ecologically significant for birds, both resident nesting
species and migratory species, and the region is one of the key bird flight routes in Central Asia. The
project will not affect flora and fauna in Kashkadarya Province, since it will occur along existing
roads and facilities. Also, the route will not pass through areas with medicinal and indigenous plants;
rather, it will run along the edge of fields to minimize potential damages to crops. Installation of the
transmission towers for the 500 kV lines at high elevations and in uplands along both sides of water
bodies will have no negative     impacts on biocoenosis and ichthyofauna.
The Outdoor Switchyard (OSY) will be constructed adjacent to the Talimarjan TPP on land that was
transferred from the local administration to the Talimarjan TPP.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 2 of 7


﻿Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Q         Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
a         4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As the proposed changes are revisions to the Project Closing Date and the total Loan amount no
O
new activities are respectively no new triggered safeguards policies or new impacts are
anticipated. During construction of both the open switch-yard and the transmission line, the only
issues are those primarily associated with the movement of workers, machines, and materials (e.g.
dust, noise and disposal of construction wastes, crossing of surface waters, and worker health and
safety). All these impacts are short term and site specific and can be mitigated easily by applying
relevant measures and best construction works practices. During operation, the main issues are
avian mortality, public health and safety from the electromagnetic fields generated at the
substation and along the transmission line right-of-way, and noise produced by corona discharge.
The project was tentatively assigned Category A during concept review because of the uncertainty
regarding the avian mortality risk issue identified in the Uzbek EIA document. Subsequently, an
avian risk assessment (ARA) prepared by an international avian risk expert concluded that this risk
was minimal and the project was formally as signed Category B. Nonetheless, EA procedures
followed the requirements of a Category A project because the avian risk level (outcome of the
ARA) was not known during the early project preparation stages.
The OP 4.12 was triggered as UE needed to acquire approximately 12.03 ha of land on a
permanent basis and 159.42 ha on a temporary basis from 114 leasehold farms in Kashkadarya and
Samarkand oblasts. The large majority of farms grow cotton and wheat: a small percentage has
Page 3 of 7


﻿orchards and small crops. Resettlement activities were finished in April 2013. In total, 141 farmers
and Hokimiyats in 8 districts in Kashkadarya and Samarkand provinces received compensation.
Most land acquisitions to accommodate the transmission towers were small (1,1 ha on average),
with the exception of one Project Affected Person (PAP) for the sub-station (26,7 ha). The farmer
O
agreed to vacate a plot of land that he rented adjacent to the Talimarjan power station, in exchange
for another equivalent plot of land that he could farm. The farmer also received cash
compensation to cover income losses associated with this transfer.
Changes in numbers of PAPs from the RAP reflects the Government optimization program to
combine farms and increase farm size that resulted in some changes. In addition, an audit was
carried out on behalf of the PIU by the Director of the plant and land surveyors from each of the
affected Hokimiyats. This audit led to further revisions of the number of affected farmers as well
as minor changes to the size of acquired land. The basis for calculating compensations as detailed
in the entitlement matrix approved by the Bank was not modified.
Participation of project-affected parties was provided at the earliest stages of project preparation.
During the initial assessment of social impacts conducted in September 2009 and February 2010,
as well as two rounds of public consultations conducted in July 2010, farmers' opinions were
discussed regarding the need to use part of their land holdings on a temporary or permanent basis.
During these discussions, farmers expressed their preferences regarding: (a) the acceptability of
the decision to acquire land from farmers and what consequences this would have for the private
farms; (b) preferred alternatives for compensation; and (c) mechanisms for paying compensation
to farmers. Their views were subsequently taken into account in the preparation of the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
In compliance with OP 4.12, all measures were taken in establishing the route of the transmission
lines to avoid impacts on residential areas and/or immovable built assets.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Three routes were considered for the transmission lines. Alternative 1 (218 km) was the route
chosen because it has the lowest social and environment impact. Alternative 2 (196 km), would
have been a straighter route, but more than 30% of the line would have passed through mountains,
which, although shorter, would raise costs. Alternative 3 (227 km) would run along the existing
500kV transmission line of Karakul-Guzar-SS Sogdiana, but more than 70% of the route would
pass through mountains.
The assessment of these routes demonstrated that for environmental reasons, alternatives 1 and 2
would have minimal impact. Neither route crosses environmentally protected areas or
archaeological and historical sites; nor would they require displacement of residents or farm
enterprises. However, Alternative 1 is more feasible from the technical and economic point of
view because it will require fewer towers. Also, construction and maintenance during operation
will mainly use existing roads, which means only a few minor temporary roads would need to be
built. Further, it is the most preferable in terms of mortality risk to migratory birds because it is
situated at the lower/flatter lands (avoiding mountains). Alternative 2 would include many sections
built in the mountains, which would require construction of a large number of heavy support
towers. As mentioned above, this would increase project costs. In addition, routing in
mountainous areas is technically more complicated because special drilling techniques and
construction of many roads would be needed. The mountainous terrain would create maintenance
difficulties during line operation.
Page 4 of 7


﻿Alternative 3 has significant environmental, economic, and technical disadvantages; e.g. it would
pass through some parts of the Kitab Natural Park, which is on the International List of
Conservation Areas. Further, the part of the route in densely populated areas would require a great
deal of resettlement. Also, this mountainous route would increase maintenance costs during
O
operations. As in the  case of Alternative 2, construction of many support towers would increase
project costs.
Thus, Alternative 1 was considered the more effective route and is the most acceptable from both
environmental and social perspectives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project was tentatively assigned Category A during concept review because of the
uncertainty regarding the avian mortality risk issue identified in the Uzbek EIA document.
Subsequently, an avian risk assessment (ARA) prepared by an international avian risk expert
concluded that this risk was minimal and the project was formally as signed Category B.
Nonetheless, EA procedures followed the requirements of a Category A project because the avian
risk level (outcome of the ARA) was not known during the early project preparation stages.
Uzbekistan Environmental Assessment Regulations required an Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) for the project. UE prepared the EIA which was approved on March 12, 2010
by the State Committee for Nature Protection. However, the government approved EIA did not
contain sufficient information to satisfy World Bank EIA requirements for a Category A project.
Thus, UE engaged an independent consultant to prepare an EIA Supplement.
The government approved EIA taken together with the EIA Supplement constituted all the
information required for a World Bank Category A EA document. The EIA Supplement included
the following aspects (not included in the Uzbek approved EIA): (i) an Executive Summary; (ii)
description of the Uzbek policy, legal and administrative framework; (iii) a due diligence review
of the environmental performance of the existing Talimarjan TPP (connected project); (iii)
analysis of alternative transmission line routes; and (iv) environmental management plan (EMP).
The ARA mitigating recommendations were incorporated into the EMP Section of the EIA
Supplement prepared by the independent consultant. UE has agreed to implement the EMP. UE
also prepared a RAP.
Because the land to be acquired was known prior to project appraisal, UE was required to prepare
O
a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) under OP 4.12. In meeting the Bank's policy requirement, UE
prepared a RAP in consultation with the affected farmers that identifies the affected farms and
*           describes the measures that will be taken to compensate the affected farmers for their losses, the
principles that were incorporated in formulating the RAP, the institutional arrangements for
implementing the plan, grievance and redress measures, and arrangements for monitoring RAP
implementation.
A dedicated project management unit (PMU) with adequate technical skills has been established to
manage the Talimarjan Transmission project. In addition, the World Bank team has provided the
PMU on the job training on their safeguard policies in particular with regard both preconstruction
and post-construction avian risk monitoring. Special training for post construction mortality
monitoring have been provided by an international consulting company, with a focus on
standardized approaches for avian collision and electrocution monitoring of transmission lines and
towers. UE has agreed to implement any additional avian risk mitigating actions should avian
mortality monitoring results indicated such actions are required.
The PMU included a specialist on land acquisition internal monitoring who developed detailed
plans and indicators for monitoring the implementation of the RAP to ensure that all affected
farms have been compensated as planned, and that all affected parties are fully informed about
Page 5 of 7


﻿grievance procedures. During Project Launch and subsequent implementation support missions,
the Bank task team included a social development specialist to provide guidance to the PMU
related to RAP implementation.
The project environmental performances until now are considered as satisfactory. The project
O
activities are being implemented in compliance with the WB and national environmental
requirements. The visited construction sites and discussions with the contractors, Supervising
Engineer, and the PMU prove the implemented activities are in compliance with the EMP
requirements, - during the reporting period all waste was disposed in special available space and
no complaints from communities in the area were received by the authorities with regard to
environmental issues; no human casualties happened; no technical failures occurred that likely to
affect the environment such as spill of fuel or lubricants. The EU safeguards institutional capacity
is adequate.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
UE held two public consultations with locally affected groups to discuss the TORs for the EIA
Supplement and the draft EIA Supplement. A first round of public consultations to discuss the
TORs of the EIA Supplement was conducted by the independent consultant on July 1, 2010 in
Kashkadrya Province and on July 2, 2010 in Samarkand Province. A second round of public
consultations to discuss the EIA Supplement was conducted by the independent consultant on July
27, 2010 in Samarkand Province and July 28, 2010 in Kashkadarya Province. The final EIA
Supplement, in English and Russian languages was disclosed in Uzbekistan (UE website) on
November 5, 2010 and the Bank's InfoShop on November 11, 2010 and the ARA have been
disclosed in Russian and English on the UE website on December 17, 2010. In addition, the EIA
executive summary in English and Russian languages was disclosed on the UE website on October
1, 2010 and in the Bank Info shop on November 23, 2010. The EIA executive summary has also
been disclosed in the Uzbek language on UE's website on November 5, 2010.
With regard to land acquisition, participation of project-affected parties was provided at the
earliest stages ofproject preparation, and their opinions are reflected in the RAP. Two
consultations were conducted with project affected parties in both Kaskadarya and Samarkand
Oblasts on July 28, 2010 and July 27, 2010, respectively. The draft RAP in Russian and English
languages was made available on September 19, 2010 on UE's website, and in English language
O
on September 27, 2010 at the World Bank InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Nov-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                           1 1-Nov-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 6 of 7


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes    No         NA
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
a          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sunil Kumar Khosla
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 21-Dec-2015
Practice Manager!     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)              Date: 29-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


