INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSCI 1815
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          World                      Project ID:   P154429
Project Name:     The Harmonization of Price Statistics and National Accounts Activities and
Production of Biennial PPP Estimates in Western Asia
Team Leader(s): Mizuki Yamanaka
Estimated Date    30-Mar-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    DECDG                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):         Analysis of economic growth (25%), Economic statistics, modeling and
forecasting (50%), Macroeconomic management (25%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.38841              Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                         0
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                0.38841
O
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The overall objective of the project is to build the capacity of countries in the areas of price statistics
and national accounts, in order to advance the data foundation for measuring sustainable
development, and to support evidence based policymaking and effective monitoring.
Specific objectives include:
1. Improving the country' statistical capacity in the compilation of detailed disaggregated national
accounts expenditure data, and addressing gaps identified in the 2011 round of International
Comparison Program (ICP) in the compilation of GDP expenditures.
2. Harmonizing price collection activities of the countries' Consumer Price Index (CPI) activities
with ICP activities and producing regular Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs).
3. Improving the countries' statistical in developing price indices for difficult areas such as housing,
government services and gross fixed capital formation.
4. Promoting partnerships between national statistics offices (NSOs) and international agencies by
sharing good practices and building human capital and national partnerships.


﻿C. Project Description
To enhance the capacity of countries' national practices and methodologies in the fields of national
accounts and price statistics, and to produce indices to match the international recommendations, the
project activities are mainly:
1. Workshops: these workshops will aim at (i) planning and promoting a strategic approach for the
integration of CPI and ICP activities, including reviewing existing ICP and CPI item list and
constructing a harmonized list; (ii) identifying and assessing the gaps encountered in the compilation
a of detailed disaggregated GDP expenditure data such as housing, financial services, net purchases
abroad, services provided by non-profit institutions serving the households, government services,
gross fixed capital formation, inventories and valuables; (iii) identifying and addressing certain areas
with difficulties in price comparison such as cost of housing rentals, government services and gross
fixed capital formation; and (iv) supporting data quality processes.
2. Preparation of training materials: the materials will help in (i) improving survey design and price
data collection and processing methods; (ii) helping countries further understand national accounts
concepts and data compilation process for detailed disaggregated level; and (iii) strengthening data
quality processes.
3. Technical assistance: this activity will aim at (i) preparing a 'Needs-Assessment' evaluation for
each country; and (ii) providing countries with direct technical support to ensure proper
implementation and execution of the recommended methodologies with a focus on the gaps and
difficulties encountered in the price statistics and expenditure data compilation.
Also, through the three activities, the project aims to strive forward with the momentum gained and
leveraged through previous international efforts and investments, such as ICP 2011, in terms of
human capital, national partnerships, etc.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
0
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
O
Projects on International          No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):          Name: Mizuki Yamanaka
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Takeaki Sato (SA)                            Date: 22-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Grant James Cameron (PMGR)                    Date: 22-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


