                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR15330
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ghana                                        Project ID:           P114264
                            Project Name:      Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)
                            Task Team          Johannes Georges Pius Jansen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Dec-2011                                  Estimated   22-Mar-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA01                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (60%), Irrigation and
                                               drainage (12%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade ( 11%), Crops (10%),
                                               Agricultural extension and research (7%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (38%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (33%), Rural markets (18%), Land adm inistration and
                                               management (9%), Rural policies and institutions (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         100.00
                              Total                                                                                               100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                Page 1 of 13
                         The project development objective (PDO) is: increased access to land, private sector finance, input-
                         and output-markets by smallholder farms from private-public partnerships in commercial agriculture
                         in Accra Plains and SADA zone. PDO level indicators are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. Yield per hectare (percentage increase) of major crops on both nucleus farms and the associated
                         out-grower schemes benefiting from project support. This will be disaggregated by crop, especially,
                         for rice, soya and maize, and for Accra Plains and SADA zone;

                         2. Area (ha) under formal commercial arrangements such as out-grower schemes and contract
                         farming. This will disaggregated between land under nucleus farms and land under out-grower
                         cultivation, and will be disaggregated by Accra Plains and SADA region;

                         3. Formal and/ or semi-formal marketing arrangements for small-holder farms (number) and will
                         indicate the number of new arrangements fostered by the project. For each new arrangement
                         documented, information will be gathered on their location, i.e Accra Plains or SADA, farm size and
                         the nature of the arrangement, i.e. formal contract or semi-formal agreement;

                         4. Gross margins for selected crops (percentage increase) and disaggregated by Accra Plains and
                         SADA zone;

                         5. Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which are female (%) (IDA Core Indicator).
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective (PDO) is: increased access to land, private sector finance, input-
                         and output-markets by smallholder farms from private-public partnerships in commercial agriculture
                         in Accra Plains and SADA zone. PDO level indicators are as follows:

                         1. Yield per hectare (percentage increase) of major crops on both nucleus farms and the associated
                         out-grower schemes benefiting from project support. This will be disaggregated by crop, especially,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for rice, soya and maize, and for Accra Plains and SADA zone;

                         2. Area (ha) under formal commercial arrangements such as out-grower schemes and contract
                         farming. This will disaggregated between land under nucleus farms and land under out-grower
                         cultivation, and will be disaggregated by Accra Plains and SADA region;

                         3. Formal and/ or semi-formal marketing arrangements for small-holder farms (number) and will
                         indicate the number of new arrangements fostered by the project. For each new arrangement
                         documented, information will be gathered on their location, i.e Accra Plains or SADA, farm size and
                         the nature of the arrangement, i.e. formal contract or semi-formal agreement;

                         4. Gross margins for selected crops (percentage increase) and disaggregated by Accra Plains and
                         SADA zone;

                         5. Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which are female (%) (IDA Core Indicator).
                         3. Project Description
                         The restructured project will have seven components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening investment promotion infrastructure and facilitating secure access to

                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         land.

                         This component will be frozen at current expenditure level (as of May 31 2015) but allowing for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commitments made already which may not have been disbursed. Total revised funding amount is US
                         $ 5.9 million; IDA US$ 2.8 million, USAID US$ 3.1 million.

                         o       Subcomponent 1.1: Investment promotion and investment climate. Same as in original
                         design but frozen at current expenditure and commitment level.

                         o        Subcomponent 1.2: Improving land governance in support of inclusive land access. Same as
                         in original design but frozen at current expenditure and commitment level.

                         o       Subcomponent 1.3: Support for outgrower arrangements. Same as in original design but
                         frozen at current expenditure and commitment level.

                         Component 2: Securing PPPs and smallholder linkages in the Accra Plains.

                         This component is substantially changed to reflect the ground realities of Ghana and the
                         unsatisfactory progress made thus far in securing the interest of potential investors in large scale
                         commercial irrigation investments in the Accra Plains. The original sub-component 2.1 would be
                         frozen at its current level (as of 31 May 2015) and the unutilized funds would be reallocated to sub-
                         component 2.2. The original sub-components 2.3 and 2.4 would be deleted and funds would be
                         reallocated to the new component 5. The original sub-component 2.2 would be maintained but
                         without the provision of a Transaction Adviser. The revised sub-component 2.2 would finance the
                         full feasibility study for the Accra Plains PPP. An investor conference will be arranged to generate
                         significant interest among global investors. Support will be provided under sub-component 2.2 to
                         assess alternative mechanisms for smallholder participation in an irrigation-based PPP, including for
                         instance through equity stakes or other innovative arrangements. Total revised funding amount is US
                         $ 4.9 million (IDA only).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Securing PPPs and smallholder linkages in the SADA Zone. This component is the
                         same as the original Component 3 but with a substantially reduced scope.

                         o      Sub component 3.1: Assisting with financing of establishment costs and facilitating
                         development of out-grower schemes and contract farming arrangements. This sub-component will
                         remain unchanged. Total funding US$ 5.9 million; IDA US$ 2.9 million, USAID US$ 3.0 million.

                         o        Sub-component 3.2: Investing in land development for commercial agriculture. Due to
                         delayed recruitment of the consultants firm and lack of clarity regarding scope of work in the terms
                         of reference, until now none of the physical investments provided for under this sub-component has
                         materialized. Given the uncertainty in attracting potential investors and securing adequate Public-
                         Private Partnerships with small-holder linkages within the remaining project period and based on the
                         experience of both the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the French Development
                         Agency (AFD) who are working on similar concepts in the SADA zone, this subcomponent has been
                         reduced to target about 4000 ha from a previous 10,000 ha. At an estimated average cost of US$
                         3000 per ha, the funding requirement for this sub-component would reduce from US$ 37 million to
                         about US$ 19 million and consist of development of inland valleys for improved rainfed rice
                         cultivation (US$ 12 million); and preparation of Infopacks and consultancies for small-scale
                         irrigation development (US$7 million). Total revised funding amount is US$ 19.1 million; IDA US$

                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                         5.8 million, USAID US$ 13.3 million.

                         o         Sub-component 3.3: Rehabilitation and new construction of agricultural storage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure and processing facilities. With the reduction in inland valley development under sub-
                         component 3.2, the total amount of incremental production of cereals would also be reduced.
                         Consequently the number of storage facilities to be rehabilitated as well as the number of new
                         storage facilities to be built would be adjusted to US$ 4.8 million from US$ 14.8 million allocated
                         under this sub-component to reflect the reduced incremental production. Following the
                         recommendations of a pre-feasibility study carried out by the project, investments in storage facilities
                         would also be limited to new construction with no rehabilitation of existing government-owned
                         facilities. Given the current situation of availability of paddy milling capacity in the SADA zone, it
                         would not be prudent to continue considering refurbishing existing but underutilized rice mills. Thus,
                         the US$5 million allocated for this purpose in the original project would be removed and reallocated.
                         The US$ 0.6 million for consultancies will be maintained. Thus, the total funding requirement of
                         restructured sub-component 3.3 will be US$ 5.4 million, a reduction of US$ 15 million. Total revised
                         funding amount is US$ 5.4 million; IDA US$ 2.7 million, USAID US$ 2.7 million.

                         o       Sub-component 3.4: Business development services among agricultural service providers
                         and investing in processing businesses. This sub-component remains unchanged.

                         Component 4: Project management including M&E and impact analysis.

                         There is no change in this component except for the revised structure, composition and skill mix of
                         the PIU which would require additional funds to cover salaries and expenses of the restructured PIU
                         for the remainder of the project including the extension period. Details of the restructured Project
                         Implementation Unit and institutional arrangements for project implementation are provided in the
                         Implementation Arrangements section of this restructuring paper. Support will be provided for the
                         efficient functioning of the PIU including provision of modern information technology equipment
                         and necessary training and capacity building for the staff. Fund allocation will be revised to reflect
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the above. Total revised funding amount is US$ 21.9 million; IDA US$ 14.7 million, USAID US$
                         7.2 million.

                         Component 5: Investments in physical rehabilitation and modernization of selected public irrigation
                         and drainage infrastructure.

                         Recognizing the importance of irrigation and drainage facilities in improving and sustaining
                         commercial agricultural production in Ghana, a new component to rehabilitate and modernize
                         selected existing irrigation and drainage infrastructure would be introduced in the restructured
                         GCAP. Agreement has been reached with MoFA that the irrigation and drainage infrastructure of
                         these schemes would be fully rehabilitated, modernized and completed using funds from the project.
                         However, the management of these rehabilitated and modernized schemes would be under a scheme
                         management entity selected through a competitive bidding process - except for the Tono and Vea
                         schemes in the Upper East Region where a different approach would be explored as described under
                         Component 6 below. There may be a need to support the scheme management company with
                         financing from Government sources for an initial period of five years on a declining scale. The exact
                         terms and conditions under which private entities would assume scheme management responsibilities
                         would differ by scheme and be studied in detail by the consulting firms selected for the design of the
                         schemes. Total funding is US$ 65 million; IDA US$ 50 million, USAID US$ 15 million.



                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         o       Sub-component 5.1: Rehabilitation/modernization of Kpong Right Bank irrigation and
                         drainage infrastructure. Support will be provided for the preparation of detailed designs, cost
                         estimates, construction drawings, bidding documents, safeguard documents as well as the actual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments required for the physical rehabilitation/modernization of Kpong Irrigation Scheme
                         located on the right bank of the Volta River below the Kpong dam. Total funding is US$ 20 million
                         (IDA only).

                         o       Sub-component 5.2: Construction of Kpong Left Bank irrigation and drainage infrastructure.
                         Support will be provided for the preparation of detailed designs, cost estimates, construction
                         drawings, bidding documents, safeguard documents as well as the actual investments required for the
                         construction of Phase 2 of the Kpong Left Bank Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure and
                         completion of on-farm works in the Phase 1 area of this scheme. Total funding is US$ 20 million
                         (IDA only).

                         o       Sub-component 5.3: Rehabilitation/modernization of Tono and Vea irrigation schemes.
                         Support will be provided for the preparation of detailed designs, cost estimates, construction
                         drawings, bidding documents, safeguard documents as well as the actual investments required for the
                         physical rehabilitation/modernization of Tono and Vea schemes located in the Upper East Region of
                         the SADA zone. Total funding is US$ 20 million; IDA US$ 5 million, USAID US$ 15 million.

                         o       Sub-component 5.4: Rehabilitation/modernization of other smaller irrigation schemes.
                         Support will be provided for the preparation of detailed designs, cost estimates, construction
                         drawings, bidding documents, safeguard documents as well as the actual investments required for the
                         physical rehabilitation/modernization of other smaller irrigation schemes distributed throughout the
                         country Afife, Ashaiman, Avyeme, Bontanga, Dawhenya, Kpondo-Torkor Weta, Sankana, Weija,
                         etc. Total funding is US$ 5 million (IDA only).

                         Component 6: Support for the restructuring and strengthening of public irrigation and drainage
                         institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This is a new component to provide support for efforts to ensure the sustainability of the physical
                         investments made under Component 5. Rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation and
                         drainage infrastructure cannot be carried out without reforming the public sector institutions
                         responsible for this sector. There are two primary Government organizations that are responsible for
                         operating and managing these assets. These include the Ghana Irrigation Development Authority
                         (GIDA) as the Government organization responsible for planning and development of all irrigation
                         and drainage assets in the country, and the Irrigation Company of Upper Region (ICOUR)
                         responsible for operating and maintaining the Tono and Vea schemes in the Upper East Region. Both
                         these organizations have become moribund with bloated organizational structure and staff numbers
                         and have been underperforming substantially over the last three decades. To bring sustainability in
                         the operations, it is essential that these organizations are substantially reformed and their mandates
                         revised.

                         o       Sub-component 6.1 Staff retrenchment in GIDA and severance payments. Following the
                         third implementation support mission of GCAP (July-August 2014) and based on a number of
                         discussions with GIDA, MoFA, and GCAP management, plus detailed analyses carried out by the
                         Human Resources and Labor consultants employed by the project, a substantial downsizing of GIDA
                         and a new organogram for GIDA have been agreed upon by the Government of Ghana. GIDA will be
                         downsized from its existing staff capacity of 349 persons to 141 persons in a phased manner

                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                         stretching over a period of maximum 3 years. At the same time when rehabilitation/modernization of
                         schemes is taking place, modalities for scheme management by farmer-based organizations and
                         private sector scheme management entities would be worked out and operation and management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         responsibilities would be transferred to these new institutions. In the meantime and to ensure that no
                         disruption takes place in the operation and management of the existing schemes, 49 existing staff will
                         be kept in GIDA as a transitional measure. These staff will be retrenched as soon as the new
                         institutions take over scheme management responsibilities. GIDA is currently supervising small civil
                         works contracts in a number of schemes and 14 GIDA staff members have been deployed for the
                         supervision of the contractors. The employment contracts of these 14 staff have a duration of about
                         18 months. It has been agreed that these 14 persons will be retrenched after the end of their current
                         contracts. The total amount of severance payments for GIDA staff has been estimated at US$ 3
                         million. Support will be provided under this sub-component to cover the costs of downsizing based
                         on applicable Ghanaian Law and negotiations with the Unions. Total funding amount is US$ 3
                         million (IDA only).

                         o        Sub-component 6.2 Staff retrenchment in ICOUR and severance payments. ICOUR was
                         formed in the 1980s to provide operation and management services for the newly constructed Tono
                         and Vea schemes. Initially the management contract for both schemes was given to a United
                         Kingdom (UK)-based company who were also entrusted with the task of setting up ICOUR, a
                         government-owned company to take over their responsibilities. ICOUR has become a bloated
                         organization over time, taking on many responsibilities and performing most of them in an
                         unsatisfactory manner. The Government of Ghana has requested the Bank to include the reform of
                         ICOUR in the restructuring of GCAP. Based on many discussions between the Bank team and
                         management of ICOUR, the Government of Ghana has agreed to reduce the total number of ICOUR
                         staff from the current 138 persons to 30, as well as change the skill mix in the remaining 30 persons
                         to bring in good business management discipline to the institution. With this, a reformed ICOUR is
                         expected to operate at par with other private sector scheme operators that would emerge for other
                         schemes. A reformed ICOUR will be given first preference to operate and manage the Tono and Vea
                         schemes given the long association of key staff with these schemes and their intimate knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         about the schemes, the farming community of the area and the agricultural practices of the area.
                         ICOUR will be brought under direct supervision of GIDA through the Scheme Management
                         Oversight office to be located in Tamale as part of the restructured GIDA organogram. Performance
                         of ICOUR based on strict business guidelines will be monitored over the next two years and
                         corrective actions if required will be taken to ensure the sustainable operation and management of the
                         Tono and Vea schemes. Support will be provided to cover the costs of downsizing ICOUR estimated
                         at US$ 2 million (IDA only).

                         o        Subcomponent 6.3: Strengthening technical and managerial capacity of restructured GIDA.
                         Strengthening the technical and managerial capabilities of the reformed GIDA will be supported
                         under this sub-component. This will include support for training at other institutions both in Ghana
                         and abroad, study visits, memberships in engineering institutions (national and international),
                         subscriptions to engineering and scientific journals (national and international) including support for
                         a fully functional digital Library which can be accessed from regional offices of GIDA. In addition,
                         provision of appropriate Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) for GIDA would be
                         supported. The estimated cost of this sub-component is US$ 4 million (IDA only).

                         o        Subcomponent 6.4: Strengthening operation & maintenance and management capacity of
                         restructured ICOUR. Support would be provided to train the remaining staff of ICOUR to operate
                         and maintain a fully rehabilitated/modernized Tono and Vea schemes in an efficient manner.

                                                                      Page 6 of 13
                         Appropriate ICT tools and computer training would be provided to operate the system. A twinning
                         approach with a modern irrigation district in an advanced country would be supported for a period of
                         two years to ensure sustained operation and maintenance of the Tono and Vea Schemes. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         estimated cost of this sub-component is US$ 1 million (IDA only).

                         Component 7: Support for the development of Water Users’ Associations and private scheme
                         management entities.

                         Support will be provided to establish WUAs at the appropriate levels in each scheme and to develop
                         modalities for private sector involvement in the operation and management of larger schemes.

                         o        Subcomponent 7.1 Establishment and operationalization of Water Users Associations. Some
                         form of WUAs already exists in most of the schemes, but these are not underpinned by effective
                         legislation. Support would be provided to finalize the draft of the legislation prepared with Bank
                         support and currently under review by the Attorney General’s office. Once the legislation is
                         approved by the Government of Ghana, support would be provided to draft the by-laws, rules and
                         model memorandum of agreement between the bulk water provider and WUA. Support will be
                         provided for the formation of WUAs in each scheme under the new legislation and to train these
                         associations in several aspects of water management, maintenance of simple structures, revenue
                         collection, book-keeping, dispute resolution and other topics associated with effective sustainable
                         functioning of the associations. Support would be provided to train the farmers in executing their role
                         in the operation, maintenance and management at appropriate levels of water distribution
                         infrastructure on a scheme-by-scheme basis. The training will be conducted in Ghana by both
                         international and national experts. Following an earlier study visit to India in February 2015, farmers
                         will be taken on study visits to well-functioning WUAs in other countries. Office buildings and
                         necessary information technology tools would be provided to each WUA. The estimated cost of this
                         sub-component is US$ 2 million (IDA only).

                         o         Subcomponent 7.2 Establishment and operationalization of private scheme management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         entities. As described under Component 5, the operation and management of the large schemes
                         would be under the auspices of private scheme management entities. Support would be provided to
                         develop alternative models for these entities and the development of legal agreements betweenthese
                         entities and GIDA. Support would be provided, if required, to pay a subsidy for a limited period of
                         time on a declining scale to get these e ntities operational in a sustainable manner. The estimated cost
                         for this sub-component is US$ 1 million (IDA only).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The restructured project will have national coverage through policy interventions and physical
                         interventions in rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation schemes in Northern Ghana
                         (SADA zone) and Accra Plains, including large-scale irrigation at Tono and Vea in the Upper East
                         Region, Kpong in Accra Plains and Kpong Left Bank in Accra Plains/Volta Region; and small scale
                         irrigation at Afife, Ashaiman, Avyeme, Bontanga, Dawhenya, Kpondo-Torkor Weta, Sankana,
                         Weija, etc; rehabilitation and construction of agricultural storage and processing facilities through
                         grant support to agricultural enterprises at various locations throughout Ghana; and establishment of
                         outgrower schemes, contract farming and land development in inland valleys for improved rainfed
                         rice cultivation in the SADA zone.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                           Demba Balde (GSURR)
                           Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)
                           Jonathan Mills Lindsay (LEGEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Martin Fodor (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes           Correction of mistake in the original ISDS
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes
                            Physical Cultural           Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project may affect land ownership, land use, and livelihoods resulting from the involuntary
                              acquisition of land for civil works such as the construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of
                              irrigation canals, extension of power lines, construction of warehouses and processing facilities,
                              etc. The project will not finance the state acquisition of land for agricultural purposes.
                              Nevertheless, it may lead to land use changes if community lands are reorganized to facilitate lease
                              agreements with investors or the reconfiguration and improvement of plots in connection with
                              outgrower schemes. This may result in the relocation of land users which in turn may negatively
                              impact their livelihoods and restrict their access to resources. These shifts may have
                              disproportionate effects on women who may be susceptible to losing access to medicinal plants,
                              water sources, or face increasing time burdens associated with domestic responsibilities such as
                              fuel collection, etc.

                             Potential environmental risks could include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, other
                             issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative environmental impacts
                             associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes or small-scale civil works on water stations
                             and/or warehouses for food processing or storage: (i) construction, rehabilitation and maintenance

                                                                        Page 8 of 13
                           of irrigation canals, extension of power lines to connect commercial farmers and agro-processing
                           facilities; and (ii) agricultural development and commercialization which will lead to increased
                           production volumes and value added processing and marketing capacity of agribusiness involved
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in commodity chains and warehousing facilities. There may be impacts on forests and natural
                           habitats which are adjacent to project areas however these are expected to be minor.

                           The ESMF prepared for the original project has set forth the basic principles to be followed once
                           there is a clear definition of project intervention areas during implementation. Likewise, the PMP
                           is mainly driven by the fact that intensification of agricultural activities could lead to increased use
                           of pesticides and herbicides which, if unmanaged, could result in negative impacts on the physical
                           and natural environment. Similarly, the RPF provides the basic principles the Borrower and
                           private investors would have to comply with vis-a-vis land use, once intervention areas have been
                           clear defined. Provisions have been laid out by the ESMF to ensure appropriate capacity building
                           for all key stakeholders involved in GCAP activities and sub-project intervention zones. Once the
                           physical locations and design of the GCAP sub-projects are defined, the Borrower will prepare
                           site-specific Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIAs) and/or Resettlement Action
                           Plans (RAPs) as necessary, and submit them to the World Bank for approval. Like the ESMF and
                           the RPF, the ESIA/RAPs will also be publicly disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to the
                           start of the corresponding activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Long-term impacts and risks are those associated with potential increases in the use of pesticides
                           for agricultural production, intensification of crop production, and diversification and potential
                           increases in disease vector populations associated with operation of irrigation schemes.

                           Mitigation measures under the Project will include the application of integrated pest management
                           (IPM) practices and the application and promotion of pesticide management practices outlined in
                           the guidelines of the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides; risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management for transgenic crops through the national biosafety framework and international best
                           practice; and the use of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) as appropriate for
                           civil works.

                           With respect to dam safety, the Volta River Authority (VRA) the operator of the Kpong hydro-
                           power dam has carried out a dam safety assessment in 2011. MoFA is relying upon the results of
                           the assessment for Component 5. However OP 4.37 recommends that VRA should continuously
                           carry out the dam safety assessment since the safety of the Kpong dam influences the performance
                           of the project. The recipient, through an agreement with VRA, requires VRA to carry out periodic
                           inspections of the dam (every two years); and implement any necessary additional dam safety
                           measures stemming from such inspections.

                           Through rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation schemes, the restructured project will
                           maintain the scheme’s effects on the hydrology through withdrawals and discharges of irrigation
                           water, with corresponding impacts on quantity and quality of flows remaining within the scope of
                           the original project or less.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Analysis of alternatives will be carried out in the context of site-specific ESIAs with a view to
                           locate sub-projects in a way that avoids or minimizes adverse impacts.

                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             In order to comply with national regulations and World Bank safeguards policies, the Borrower
Public Disclosure Copy




                           has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to comply with OP4.12, an Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to comply with OP/BP 4.01 which also addresses
                           issues related to OP 4.04; 4.11; 4.36 and 4.37; and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) to comply with
                           OP 4.09.

                           The restructured project will benefit from hands-on experience and safeguards lessons derived
                           from its implementation so far. The existing safeguards frameworks (ESMF and RPF) and other
                           instruments will continue to be used. However, the project safeguards management will be
                           strengthened by ensuring continued staffing of the PIU with dedicated environmental safeguards
                           and social safeguards specialists in Accra, and recruiting an environmental safeguards specialist
                           and social safeguards specialist for the Project’s SADA zone office. Safeguards capacity will be
                           enhanced by continued training and close attention of GCAP management to lessons that have
                           emerged from application of the safeguards frameworks in the context of matching grants, and
                           collaboration with EPA and MoFA staff in the field and at the central level.

                           To address issues associated with international waters, the original project issued riparian
                           notification, and will scale its activities to which the policy applies so that they remain within the
                           scope of the original notification.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Unlike other projects that directly support small-holder production, this project is seeking to
                           provide opportunities for the entrepreneurial poor by leveraging private investments in agricultural
                           production and processing from commercial investors – across a spectrum of scale – that provide
                           immediate and identifiable improvements in input and output marketing opportunities for
                           smallholders. Nevertheless, for GCAP, key stakeholders include smallholders, local communities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local NGOs, local representatives from MoFA, EPA, etc. Local NGOs, smallholders and
                           communities in the project area were involved not only during the preparation of project activities,
                           but remain closely involved throughout the project cycle. To that effect, they are benefiting from
                           awareness raising, participatory public consultation, training concerning community's rights and
                           obligations, benefit sharing approach through a well-designed corporate social and environmental
                           responsibility mechanism and grievance redress mechanisms. MoFA through the project has
                           continued to pursue its consultation and communication process during implementation, in
                           particular through consultation of potential project affected groups and local nongovernmental
                           organizations on the project’s environmental and social aspects. The project has been initiating
                           these consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, has provided relevant
                           material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language (s) that are
                           understandable and accessible to the group being consulted.

                           The ESMF, PMP and RPF were prepared for the original project in compliance with national
                           regulations and Bank safeguard policies, as well as USAID regulations. Their preparation
                           followed a broad participatory consultation process with all relevant stakeholder groups. Issues
                           that were raised during the consultation included concerns about land use and compensation
                           (including as regards migrant farmers, valuation, and pastoralists access to land), training on
                           pesticide use, impacts on the environment including water pollution, and benefit sharing. This
                           participatory approach has continued throughout Project implementation, supervision and


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           evaluation. The ESMF and PMP have been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on November
                           22, 2011 while the RPF was disclosed in-country on January 13, 2012 and in the InfoShop on
                           January 30, 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Prior to disclosure of all safeguards instruments, and as part of the processing of category A
                           project, the borrower undertook extensive public consultation and participation meetings. Hence a
                           series of stakeholder workshop were organized by MOFA, involving Project stakeholder groups in
                           public agencies in the Accra Plains and the SADA regions and representatives of various others
                           government entities including extension services, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
                           professional organizations, farmer organizations and civil society/NGOs. This approach was used
                           to present the results of the various studies, foster ownership, and garner input from these
                           stakeholders to improve the quality and soundness of the instruments. All these stakeholder
                           workshops were captured into a Public Consultations and Participation report that was disclosed
                           in-country on January 9, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   ////
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            22-Nov-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   ////
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            13-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   ////
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            22-Nov-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Johannes Georges Pius Jansen
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 07-Oct-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                       Date: 08-Oct-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
