                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC15325

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Egypt, Arab Republic of         Project ID:       P157526
                            Project Name:   STRENGTHENING POLICIES AND REGULATIONS TOWARDS
                                            PROMOTING RESPONSIBLE FINANCIAL INCLUSION IN EGYPT
                            Team Leader(s): Laurent Gonnet,Ghada Ahmed Waheed Ismail
                            Estimated Date 15-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GFM05                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):            Banking (50%), General finance sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):             Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (30%), Anti-Money
                                                  Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (20%), Other Financial
                                                  Sector Development (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3                               Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              MENA Transition Fund - IBRD as Implementing Agency                                                3
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) to strengthen policies and regulations towards
                           promoting responsible financial inclusion in Egypt
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project comprises of three main components: (i) conducting a financial inclusion
                           Market Diagnostic for Egypt; (ii) promoting financial consumer protection; and (iii) developing a
                           Risk Based Approach to KYC processes for cheaper and more accessible banking products to
                           enhance access to finance. The total cost of the project is US$ 3 million.
                           Component I: Conducting a Financial Inclusion Market Diagnostic for Egypt (US$ 1.5 million).The
                           key objectives of the market diagnostic exercise are to (i) provide policy makers with an accurate
                           picture of the current status of financial inclusion in the country, including information on the supply,
                           access, demand and quality of both formal and informal financial services in the country; (ii) help
                           inform a national dialogue around the definition and vision for financial inclusion in Egypt, (i.e.
                         identifying policy priorities around access, usage, quality or impact) and (iii) provide a baseline on
                         access and usage of financial services for poor and low income people in Egypt, against which to set
                         time-bound action plans and targets. This component comprises of the following sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)      Providing TA to establish a National Steering Committee. The committee will be chaired by
                         the CBE to help coordinate the market diagnostic process; determine data needs based on existing
                         sources of supply side data (CBE, EFSE, ENPO, MoF, SFD, MoA) as well as individual and
                         household data including national household and income surveys, SME census data, financial
                         capability survey, etc; and provide guidance and oversight of data mapping efforts. The Steering
                         Committee will include all key stakeholders including commercial banks, NGOs, Microfinance
                         Institutions (MFIs), government agencies and regulators, National Statistics Bureau, and research
                         houses, to ensure buy in for the process and that results are useful and provide maximum impact.
                         (ii)     Advisory services to develop the scope of work for Data Mapping. The members of the
                         Steering Committee will work together with the GIZ facilitated process to identify the key policy
                         questions to be examined (e.g. willingness and ability of clients to use internet, mobile or agent
                         banking); assess existing data in the country which can be built on or drawn from to reduce costs and
                         avoid duplication of efforts, particularly the supply side data noted above; determine areas of specific
                         interest to be measured (access, usage, quality, impact) and market segments to be included (e.g.
                         geographic breakdowns, women, youth, small holder farmers, etc.) through a nationally
                         representative demand survey. The project will work in partnership with the Central Agency for
                         Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS). Given that this will be the first financial inclusion
                         mapping exercise done in the Egypt, the project will draw on the expertise of qualified external
                         research firms (such as FinMark, Microfinance Center of Poland, Bankable Frontiers, Gallup, IFMR
                         trust etc.) that have an established methodology in place, which can be adapted to the local context to
                         ensure local ownership of data and data processes, as well as the replicability of data collection in the
                         future.
                         (iii)    Improving quality of supply side data. There are a number of bodies currently collecting
                         financial inclusion relevant data in Egypt from financial service providers as part of their supervisory
                         function, most notably CBE as part of its offsite activities for the banking sector and EFSA for non-
                         bank financial institutions. However, the scope and quality of this data is relatively limited and does
Public Disclosure Copy




                         not include information on accounts held at the ENPO or PBDAC, significantly understating access
                         figures. At the same time, much of this data is aggregated and does not provide information on client
                         demographics (geographic distribution, age, gender) or active use/dormancy, which is useful for
                         private as well as public sector actors. The project will provide technical assistance to the CBE on
                         improving the scope, quality and use of supply side financial inclusion data by addressing the
                         technological and human capacity constraints to collecting this data, so that future financial inclusion
                         data collected reflects thebroader set of financial inclusion priorities identified by the national
                         steering committee.
                         (iv)     Designing and conducting demand survey. An external research team will be selected
                         through an international competitive process to work with the Steering Committee on developing a
                         survey to fit the policy objectives and needs of the Egyptian context, ensuring that the survey is
                         appropriately tailored to the domestic environment and the priorities identified by stakeholders. The
                         external research team will work with CAPMAS and/or a local research house to pilot test a sample
                         survey and train local enumerators for conducting field work, ensuring local capacity exists to update
                         and repeat the survey in the future, as part of the national monitoring and evaluation plan.
                         (v)      Analyzing data and dissemination of findings. Once the field work has been complete, the
                         external research firm will work with a local partner to write up findings from both the supply and
                         demand side data collection efforts and make evidence based policy recommendations that can
                         stimulate debate and lead to effective public and private sector interventions. The survey results will
                         be discussed in and utilized in a series of workshops and conferences to identify opportunities for
                         greater financial inclusion in the country.

                         Component II: Promoting Financial Consumer Protection (US$750,000). This component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support CBE in developing a robust consumer protection capacity within the banking sector, and in
                         developing financial literacy amongst target population groups. The tasks related to consumer
                         protection will be handled by CBE’s Complaints Unit through expanding the unit’s mandate in line
                         with international practice in Consumer Protection regulation and supervision with the support of the
                         project. This component comprises of five sub-components: (i) developing and finalizing a consumer
                         protection regulation in harmony with EFSA; (ii) providing advisory services on consumer protection
                         specific supervisory tools; (iii) conducting study tours and on the job training in countries which
                         have well developed systems for financial consumer protection; and (iv) building the capacity of the
                         Complaints Unit to cater for the consumer protection regulation through training seminars and
                         workshops.

                         Component III: Developing a Risk Based Approach to KYC processes for cheaper and more
                         accessible banking products to enhance access to finance (US$750,000). This component will
                         support CBE and financial institutions in designing KYC processes that meet the national goal of
                         financial inclusion, without compromising the measures that exist for the purpose of combating
                         crime. It will also provide technical assistance to help CBE comply with the latest technology in the
                         field of document scanning, and thus enable them to maintain document integrity, and mitigate
                         document loss risks. Specifically, this component will support CBE through six main sub-
                         components by: (i) defining high level existing or prospected product list, covering payment, deposit
                         and credit services; (ii) defining categorized services list, based on different risk factors, including
                         but not limited to; non-face-to-face relationships and anonymity, geographical reach, methods of
                         funding, and access to cash; (iii) developing a risk matrix for the list of services; (iv) developing
                         possible risk-based exemption from KYC processes for some of the services; (v) developing risk
                         mitigation measures including customer due diligence; loading, value and geographical limits;
                         source of funding; and record keeping, transaction monitoring and reporting; and (vi) developing
                         level of KYC processes proportional to the level of risks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The surveys and technical assistance will cover the whole country, however, no safeguards issues are
                         related to the Project activities as no civil works are expected, therefore, the Bank OP 4.01 on
                         Environmental Assessment does not apply. If a need arises during implementation for the financing
                         of any civil works, the Bank may reassess the application of OP 4.01 and require further
                         environmental assessment.

                         Based on the information provided at this stage, the project will not involve civil works activities,
                         therefore, from social perspective, no land acquisition will be needed and OP 4.12 will not be
                         triggered. However, if in the future the financing would eventually lead to components that may
                         entail land acquisition, a framework requiring a TOR for a resettlement instrument might be required.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Because the Project is Category C, with no specific requirements for the borrower’s institutional
                         capacity
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah (GSURR)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/      No            The project is limited to conducting surveys,
                           BP 4.01                                         analysis, providing training and capacity
                                                                           building and different TA activities. The project
                                                                           will not involve any civil works that would
                                                                           cause any impacts on the environment
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            As long as the project is limited to survey,
                           4.12                                            analysis and training, and no land acquisition is
                                                                           expected to occur, therefore, no major social
                                                                           impacts are foreseen.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                               i. Explanation

                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 15-Oct-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):         Name: Laurent Gonnet,Ghada Ahmed Waheed Ismail
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 27-Sep-2015
                           Practice Manager/       Name: Aurora Ferrari (PMGR)                        Date: 28-Sep-2015
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
