                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15838
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P149485
                            Project Name:      Ningbo Sustainable Urbanization Project (P149485)
                            Task Team          Alessandra Campanaro
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Mar-2016                       Estimated   15-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU08                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Financial Sector (15%), Urban Transport (45%), General
                                              water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (10%), Urban planning and
                                              housing policy (25%), Municipal finance (15%), City-wide Inf rastructure and
                                              Service Delivery (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     343.00           Total Bank Financing:                 150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  193.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     150.00
                              Total                                                                                     343.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to improve the use of urban public space, improve urban mobility and
                           reduce flood risk in selected counties in Ningbo municipality.



                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                          3. Project Description
                         The project will finance investments in selected counties of the Ningbo project, as defined in the
                         Project Implementation Plan (PIP). The investments will span the following sectors and activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Urban regeneration. The objective of this component to create a vibrant and safe urban
                         environment by adopting people-centered design strategies and improving the quality of open space
                         and public services. Urban regeneration refers to a comprehensive package of investments in public
                         infrastructure and service delivery in existing urban areas. Priority will be given to activities that
                         provide lower income households and migrant workers affordable transport options to job centers,
                         offer the elder and the youth safe access to medical and educational institutions, and/or contribute to
                         the preservation of cultural identity and improvements of social inclusion in local communities. This
                         component will fund activities, inter alia, in the following typologies: upgrade public space along
                         main transport corridors and commercial streets; comprehensive regeneration of lagging behind
                         communities; Improvements to road safety and traffic management efficiency.

                         Component 2. Urban transport. The objective of this component is to strengthen connectivity by
                         expanding urban road network to disconnected areas and improving the capacity, reliability,
                         coverage and accessibility of the bus system. Typically, the public transport network has very low
                         ridership and the connectivity between local and regional transport is unsatisfactory. These
                         investments are closely linked to Component 1 and ensure a stronger urban transport system is
                         created to improve the overall network efficiency within the city by better integrating non-motorized
                         systems at the neighborhood level with public bus systems for longer-distance trips within the
                         county. This component will fund activities, inter alia, in the following typologies: completion of city
                         road network; bus terminal/depot; bus stops and facilities; upgrade and expansion of the bus fleet.

                         Component 3. Flood Risk Management. The objective of this component is to reduce the
                         vulnerability of the counties to the risks of floods. The selected measures will help the cities to better
                         prepare and protect critical assets and vulnerable people to potential floods in the future. Investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be designed with the following principles and features: protection of natural water systems,
                         reduction of storm water runoff and peak flows, protection of water quality and ecosystem by
                         increasing filtration and retention, and upgrade of flood protection and drainage infrastructure. An
                         important aspect will be to increase opportunities for the water to infiltrate into the ground rather
                         than (or before) channeling it to the fixed capacity drains and pipes. Infiltration trenches, filter strips,
                         vegetated swales and planter beds all work by retaining water. This component will fund activities,
                         inter alia, in the following typologies: structural investments and non-structural investments.

                         Component 4. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. This objective of this component is to
                         create more livable local communities by supporting local governments in finding cost-effective
                         solutions based on sound financing plans. This component will fund activities, inter alia, in the
                         following typologies: Sustainable local development and planning. Capital Investment and Asset
                         Management; Innovative financial mechanisms for public service delivery; Project Management and
                         Supervision.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ningbo Municipality is located in the Northeast part of Zhejiang Province, just 2 hours south of
                         Shanghai. It is bounded on the east by the East China Sea and on the north by Hangzhou Bay. Its
                         land area is 9,816 square kilometers, with 1,562 km of coastline. The city proper of Ningbo is


                                                                         Page 2 of 9
                         sandwiched between the ocean and low-lying mountains to the southwest, with coastal plain and
                         valleys in between. The here are 531 islands in the municipality and important peninsulas include the
                         Chuanshan Peninsula and the Xiangshan Peninsula.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ningbo has a humid subtropical climate with four distinctive seasons, characterized by hot, humid
                         summers and chilly, cloudy and drier winters (with occasional snow). The city receives an average
                         annual rainfall of 1,440mm and is affected by the plum rains of the Asian monsoon in June, when
                         average relative humidity also peaks. From August to October, Ningbo experiences the effects of
                         typhoons, and is affected by an average of 1.8 storms annually, though the city is not very often
                         struck directly by these systems. Counties under its jurisdiction have similar climatic and geographic
                         conditions, due to the small size of Ningbo Municipality.

                         Xiangshan County is the first subproject that was assessed by appraisal. The segments of 15 streams
                         in Xiangshan to be dredged under the project are all in urban area or downstream. They have long
                         become de-facto drainage channel for sewage and rainwater (thus poor water quality). Moreover
                         most of them have been dredged or rehabilitated before, thus rather artificial by now.

                         Project counties are on the way to rapid urbanization. Most project activities will take place near or
                         right at the center of county towns, where there are concentration of residents housing. Activities
                         planned at the suburban areas will involve collective land.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Aimin Hao (GSU02)
                         Xin Ren (GEN02)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            The project aims at improving urban livability and flood
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       resilience. The component on transport involves building
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     of new road and bus facility as well as upgrading existing
                                                                     streets. The component on flood management will mainly
                                                                     fix problems identified in the existing drainage network
                                                                     through upgrading and cleaning some pipelines, creating
                                                                     or improving flood retention facilities or dredging part of
                                                                     drainage channels. Major environmental impacts are
                                                                     construction related, such as noise, dust, spoil disposal
                                                                     and temporary storage on-site, soil erosion at borrow pit,
                                                                     wastewater discharge, vegetation loss, traffic impact,
                                                                     social disturbance and safety. These impacts are of
                                                                     temporary nature, mostly site-specific, few if any of them
                                                                     are irreversible and in most cases mitigation measures can
                                                                     be designed more readily than for Category A projects.
                                                                     Therefore, a category B is assigned. Environmental
                                                                     Assessment (EA) was conducted for project activities in
                                                                     Xiangshan, identified and assessed by appraisal, as per
                                                                     domestic and the Bank's requirements.

                                                                     For those sub-projects to be prepared during
                                                                     implementation (e.g. in Ninghai and Fenghua County), an


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                        Environment and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) has been prepared that describes the
                                                        environmental and social screening, preparation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        implementation, and monitoring process of sub-projects
                                                        according to the relevant World Bank safeguard policies.
                                                        An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
                                                        report which includes a chapter for Environment
                                                        Management Plan (EMP) and a chapter from the Social
                                                        Assessment Report which has been prepared separately by
                                                        the social team. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                        has been prepared to guide future resettlement work if
                                                        land acquisition and/or resettlement is unavoidable in
                                                        subprojects. The ESIA and ESMF have been disclosed
                                                        locally in November 2015 and February 2016 respectively
                                                        and through World Bank's Infoshop in December 2015
                                                        and February 2016.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The project will bring positive impacts on streams and
                         4.04                           rivers running through urban area by dredging and
                                                        cleaning up. Systematic survey during the EA preparation
                                                        confirms that the Xiangshan project does not affect any
                                                        sensitive areas such as nature reserves or important
                                                        habitats as defined by this policy. Segments of 15 streams
                                                        in Xiangshan under the project are all in urban area or
                                                        downstream. They have long become drainage channel
                                                        for sewage and rainwater (thus poor water quality).
                                                        Moreover, most of them have been dredged or
                                                        rehabilitated before, thus are hardly any natural habitat as
                                                        defined by this OP. However for future subprojects, there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        might be affected area that amount to natural habitat. The
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) has included provisions to identify and avoid
                                                        impacts on important habitats and ecosystems through
                                                        proper subproject and site selection.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project will not involve any forestry related activities.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not result in the use or procurement of
                                                        pesticides. The policy OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   A survey of physical cultural resources has been
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           conducted during the EA preparation which discovered
                                                        several local temples beside the new alignment of road in
                                                        Xiangshan County. Relevant measures and Chance-find
                                                        procedures have been included in the EMP section ofthe
                                                        ESIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Based on social assessment findings, ethnic minority
                         BP 4.10                        people accounts for 0.09% of total population in
                                                        Xiangshan county, and the two districts with selected



                                                         Page 4 of 9
                                                                      project investments have ethnic minority accounting for
                                                                      0.12% and 0.02% respectively. These people live
                                                                      scattered in project area by natural mobility through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      marriage and work. No ethnic minority people as
                                                                      described by the criteria in OP/BP4.10 identified. No
                                                                      evidence found that there are ethnic minority concentrated
                                                                      areas in Xiangshan, Ninghai and Fenghua County and
                                                                      planned project investments will not adversely impact
                                                                      ethnic minorities. Therefore OP/BP4.10 is not triggered
                                                                      for identified sub-projects. However, the ESMF will
                                                                      include screening procedures to assess and manage ethnic
                                                                      minority, resettlement, gender and vulnerable groups to
                                                                      guide management of OP/BP4.10 policy for sub-projects
                                                                      that will have detailed design information at a later stage.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The project will finance the construction of roads,
                            OP/BP 4.12                                transport and water related infrastructure and facilities all
                                                                      of which might require land acquisition and resettlement.
                                                                      OP/BP 4.12 is triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                      (RAP) has been prepared. Since not all sub-projects will
                                                                      have detailed design to inform the level of resettlement
                                                                      impact by appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework as
                                                                      part of the ESMF has been prepared to guide future
                                                                      management of OP/BP4.12.

                                                                      The RAP and RPF, and Social Assessment Report have
                                                                      been disclosed locally in November 2015. The InfoShop
                                                                      disclosure was done in December 2015.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project will not involve any dams. The policy is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37                                      triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            This policy is not applicable and triggered.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No            This policy is not applicable and triggered.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment
                              The project is expected to bring positive impacts on the environment mainly by rehabilitating
                              rivers and improving local public transport. The potential impacts come mainly from construction
                              phase, such as dust, noise, waste disposal, vegetation loss, sewage discharge, traffic impact,
                              workers' health and safety, social and traffic disturbance. Off-site impacts caused by disposal of
                              spoil from new road building and dredged material for flood control in Xiangshan demand more
                              attention, given the rising amount anticipated from the alternative alignment which aims at
                              reducing resettlement. During operation, main impacts include noise and air emission from road


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           traffic, and sewage and garbage generated from the bus terminals

                           Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Since identified project interventions will mostly take place near and in the center of Xiangshan
                           county town, land acquisition and resettlement is unavoidable. However, no large scale
                           resettlement is expected, and the project owner has been advised to consider alternatives when
                           designing project activities to minimize negative impacts to livelihoods of local communities. A
                           total number of 203 households with 798 people will be affected by land acquisition both by the
                           project and linked project. A total 347.03mu collective land will be acquired, with 65.6mu from
                           linked project. Residential housing demolition will impact 63 households with 222 people from
                           both linked project and project activities.
                           With improved public transportation, public spaces, and better flood control mechanism, the
                           project will contribute to a better livable city. Through wide public participation in project design,
                           implementation and management, monitoring and evaluation introduced by citizen engagement
                           efforts, project outcomes will be more sustainable.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide design
                           and implementation of project activities in Ninghai and Fenghua counties in a later stage.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           More long term impacts occur during operation, such as air pollution and noise from traffic and
                           operation of bus terminals, as well as road safety. Potential impacts from future subprojects need
                           to be controlled within the current category assigned to the overall project.

                           Induced impacts by project's activities on improving urban planning, urban public space and
                           public transport management include a better livability and connectivity of old urban centers
                           which benefit greatly local people and the environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During EA preparation, alternative analysis of different design options was undertaken, including
                           a without project scenario, to avoid or minimize negative impacts from the outset. Different
                           alignments of new road especially the west ring road were analyzed on their impacts on the
                           environment versus resettlement and other social impacts. Different configuration and ancillary
                           facility design for the bus terminal were compared. Alternatives with less social and
                           environmental impacts and more user friendly were recommended. These recommendations from
                           the EA have been incorporated in the feasibility studies and will feed into the design.

                           The project owner has been encouraged to consider alternatives wherever possible to reduce
                           adverse impacts. During the design of road improvements at West Ring Road, the design team was
                           requested to make three proposals to minimize resettlement impact. At the project site where flood
                           control channel will be constructed, an alternative route was adopted to avoid the originally
                           proposed route which will run through an entire village.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Ningbo Environmental Institute, a certified EA institute with substantial experience in preparing
                           EA for the WB projects in the region, was engaged to prepare EA for subprojects in Xiangshan
                           County. Based on the EA, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared which
                           specifies mitigation measures based on experience from similar projects, the WB/IFC's General


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                          Guidelines on Environmental, Health and Safety, Chinese construction code of conduct and
                          recommendations from the public consultation. The EMP will be referred in bidding documents
                          and contracts with contractors and supervisors to ensure its implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The Ningbo PMO has extensive and recent experience preparing and implementing the WB
                          projects for years. It has been working closely with County project implementation unit (PIUs) on
                          the preparation of this project and ensuring the project complies with the Bank's Safeguards
                          policies and procedures. Capacity building of the clients has focused on PIUs at county level
                          throughout the preparation process. To ensure EMP implementation, a budgeted training plan is
                          also included in the EMP which forms part of the overall training plan of the project. The EMP is
                          the result of close collaboration between the PMOs and the EA consultants. This ensures the
                          EMP's ownership by the project entities which in turn helps guarantee its effective
                          implementation.

                          For those sub-projects to be prepared during implementation, an ESMF has been prepared under
                          which the Bank team and the Ningbo PMO will select subprojects according to a set of
                          environmental and social selection criteria, advise and review the impact assessment, and
                          supervise their implementation to manage the impacts and risks according to the relevant World
                          Bank safeguard policies. The ESMF included guidance in the areas of safeguards compliance,
                          gender equality, equal share of project benefits by vulnerable groups, and wide public consultation
                          and engagement.

                           The project owner commissioned an experienced team to assess resettlement impacts and prepare
                           necessary safeguards documents required by bank policy. Although for Xiangshan county this is
                           the first bank funded project, but since project preparation is largely guided by Ningbo project
                           management office, who is among the most experienced PMOs managing bank funded
                           investments in China, the risk of not meeting bank??s safeguards policies is low. Future guidance
                           from Ningbo PMO to other counties selected to carry out project activities has been secured.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           There were two rounds of public consultation undertaken following public disclosure. The first
                           round was in Sep 2015 after notification about the project and the ToR for ESIA was disclosed in
                           local newspaper, official website of PMO of both Ningbo and Xiangshan. For the second round,
                           the draft ESIA/EMP and ESMF were disclosed in November at local newspaper and official
                           website of PMO of both Ningbo and Xiangshan with information about access to the ESIA
                           hardcopy. The primary objective was to collect the public opinion about the project, the EA
                           findings and the sufficiency of mitigation measures. Altogether nearly 120 people directly affected
                           by the project with a wide range of background were surveyed. In addition, about 29 entities were
                           consulted in other county towns selected for the project (Ninghai and Fenghua) for the ESMF for
                           future subprojects. Measures to address these concerns are incorporated in the ESIA/EMP and
                           ESMF, and conveyed to the PMOs.

                          Public consultations were carried out during the social assessment process, and also during land
                          acquisition and resettlement impact assessment between October 2014 and June 2015. Activities
                          included stakeholder workshops, key informant interviews, focus-group discussions, and
                          questionnaires. These consultations investigated affected people??s awareness of the project, their
                          willingness to resettle, and their preferences on compensation and mitigation measures. Project
                          information has been publically announced by Xiangshan Development and Reform Bureau at


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           government website, broadcasting, and local newspapers. Detailed information of public
                           consultation and information disclosure has been included in the Social Assessment Report, which
                           itself has been disclosed both locally and through World Bank??s infoshop in December, 2015.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            06-Nov-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Nov-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            06-Nov-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             222 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             798 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alessandra Campanaro
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 02-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                        Date: 02-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
