INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16663
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Liberia                    Project ID:  P155293
Project Name: Liberia Social Safety Nets Project (P 155293)
Task Team       Suleiman Namara
Leader(s):
Estimated       19-Feb-2016                Estimated    28-Apr-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSP07                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      16.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
US Agency for International Development (USAID)                             6.00
Total                                                                      16.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to establish the key building blocks for of a basic
national safety net delivery system and provide income support to extremely poor and food insecure
households in Liberia.
Page 1 of 5


﻿The key building blocks for of a basic national safety net delivery system include: (a) a Social
Registry (SR); (b) data collection and household registration, including information intake into the
SR; (c) eligibility screening; (d) an integrated Management Information System enabling monitoring
across participating programs as well as program-specific management modules for enrollment,
U         payment, grievance redress and monitoring and evaluation.
3. Project Description
The proposed operation will support the creation of a basic national social safety net system,
a        focusing on a cash transfer program that will target extremely poor and food insecure households.
This will include households which have become extremely poor as a result of the Ebola outbreak, as
well as households that suffer food insecurity and chronic poverty. While the systems will be built to
cover the entire country, cash transfers will initially cover a few targeted counties selected based on
transparent criteria. Bomi, Maryland, Grand Kru and River Gee counties have been selected because
they have the highest rates of poverty and food insecurity in comparison to all other counties in
Liberia. As well as regular cash transfers beneficiary households will also be supported through
accompanying measures that aim to promote healthy eating and home production of vegetables.
Given the high degree of malnutrition among children and the lack of dietary diversity in the most
food insecure and chronically poor households, these accompanying measures will encourage
beneficiary households to improve consumption and invest in the human development of their
families, particularly young children as well as pregnant and lactating mothers.
The proposed project is expected to have the following components:
Component 1. Strengthening of the National Social Safety Net System
27.    The objective of this component is to improve efficiency, enhance capacity and strengthen
the national social safety net system in Liberia through the development of the basic building blocks
of an SP delivery system. This component will finance the development of a Social Registry (SR) - a
database with information on households that are potential and actual beneficiaries of social
protection programs in Liberia. As well as the SR, this component will support the development of
data collection and household registration tools, an accurate eligibility screening mechanism for the
Social Cash Transfer program and an integrated Management Information System (MIS) that
facilitates tracking of beneficiaries, payment delivery, grievance redress, and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E).
Component 2: Cash Transfers to Extremely Poor and Food Insecure Households
The objective of this component is to continue the Social Cash Transfer Program and provide income
support to approximately 10,000 extremely poor and food insecure households in Liberia through
regular cash transfers and accompanying measures. This component will be implemented in Bomi,
Maryland, Grand Kru and River Gee counties. These counties have been selected because they have
the highest rates of poverty and food insecurity in comparison to all other counties in Liberia (see
annex 2 for the details on the ranking of counties).
This component will build on the SCT Pilot and SCT-REPLI cash transfer programs. There are 3,800
existing beneficiaries in Bomi (1,900 households benefiting since 2009) and Maryland (1,890
benefiting since 2012) from these programs. These beneficiaries will be recertified before inclusion
using the updated data intake, registration and screening processes developed under the LSSN.The
transfers will be delivered to households on a quarterly basis throughout the year and will vary
Page 2 of 5


﻿according to the size of households. The transfers will be made to the female member in the
household with the most competence and responsibility for household spending in order to increase
the potential for higher program impacts on nutrition and food security of household members, as
well as human capital investments in children. Based on the economic analysis of the poverty gap
O
U         and household consumption among extremely poor households, the transfer amount has been pegged
at US$10 to 34 per month depending on the size of the households. The size of the transfer will be
reassessed when the 2014 HIES data becomes available, and updated if there are changes to the
poverty gaps and value of household consumption or the food poverty line
Component 3. Project Management and Capacity Building
The objective of this component is to finance program management and administration of the LSSN
project implemented by the MGCSP. The component will also strengthen coordination among safety
net programs at the national and sub-national levels. This includes equipment, vehicles, fuel, office
space, and communications costs, and incremental project-related operating costs under the MGCSP
for the implementation Components 1 and 2 of the project. This support will include the procurement
of service providers to implement operational aspects of the cash transfers, including data collection,
electronic registration, payments mechanisms and auditing.
Capacity building on safety net tools and systems. In order for the cash transfers and the
accompanying measures to be effectively managed and administrated it will be necessary to provide
capacity building to stakeholders at central and local levels. This will include training for community
communication and sensitization, implementation and operationalization of the GRM, training and
coordination workshops on the roll-out of the accompanying measures, and training on the use of the
tools and systems developed under Component 1, as well as training on the program's operations, and
on the respective responsibilities at national and regional levels
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project activities will have no or negligible environmental social safeguards impacts, and the
project does not involve land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access
to resources or livelihoods. There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
o         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU0 1)
Sekou Abou Kamara (GENO1)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          This project activities will not pose any threat to the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               natural environment
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          this project will not invest in activities likely to affect the
4.04                                natural ecosystem.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          No investment in forest or protected areas is involved
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          Project activities will not require the use of pesticides
Page 3 of 5


﻿Physical Cultural      No           The project avoids impact on sites with any cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                significance
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
U         BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project will not finance any activities that will result
O
OP/BP 4.12                         in impacts detailed in OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No           No dam construction is involved in this project
4.37
Projects on International  No       The project activities will not be supporting activities with
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                potential impact on international water ways
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes  No [    NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 4 of 5


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Suleiman Namara
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)           Date: 03-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


