INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC 11810
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Mongolia                   Project ID:   P154413
Project Name:     Mongolia NSO Capacity Enhacement Project
Team Leader(s): Altantsetseg Shiilegmaa
Estimated Date    30-Sep-15
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GMF02                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Central government administration (70%), General public administration
sector (30%)
Theme(s):         Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (40%), Other public sector
governance (30%), Managing for development results (30%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.50                 Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                       0.02
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                   0.48
O
Total                                                                          0.50
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
To enhance the capacity of the NSO and of selected state entities to measure the progress of the
Recipient's development agenda and impacts of its policies and programs.
C. Project Description
The project will have the following four components:
Component 1: Further improvement of economic statistical domains by: a) improving constant
prices at macro level; b) construction of environmental-economic accounts (energy account) and c)
estimation of impacts of mining on economy.
Component 2: Measure economic growth and its impacts on household livelihood by developing
relevant methodologies for measuring impacts of economic growth on a) household livelihood; b)
poverty; c) employment; and d) inequality at aimag and soum levels. Training and capacity building


﻿for enhancing skills and knowledge of staff at NSO and local levels
Component 3. Enhance local statistical capacities through: (1) implement data quality policies at
aimag and soum levels to ensure high quality local data sets in areas important for the Government;
and (2) enhance analytical skills of local statistical officers as well as government officers in charge
O
U       of local development policies and programs.
Component 4. Institutional development to ensure user-oriented service and enable open data by
having technical assistance on improving metadata and developing policies on open data, non-
traditional data use for statistical purposes; and by training the staff to enhance their skills to use
metadata and expand open data.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Urban (Ulaanbaatar and some district offices of NSO)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
N/A as this is not safeguard triggered project
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Altantsetseg Shiilegmaa
Approved By:


﻿Regional Safeguards        Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)                          Date: 23-Apr-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/          Name: Mathew A. Verghis (PMGR)                        Date: 09-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


