                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC16568

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Vietnam                         Project ID:       P158817
                            Project Name:        Vietnam Logistics Statistical System
                            Team Leader(s):      Duc Minh Pham,Charles Kunaka
                            Estimated Date       02-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTC02                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General transportation sector (50%), General industry and trade sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):            Export development and competitiveness (20%), Regional integration (20%),
                                                 Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Other trade and integration (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.51846                        Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                       0.02
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.49846
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The main development objective of this project is to support the Government of Vietnam to establish
                           a national system for collecting, processing and publishing transport and trade logistics statistics on
                           an annual basis. The statistical data will be used by Government agencies for strategic planning
                           purposes and to formulate and monitor implementation of policies related to transport infrastructure
                           and trade logistics development and to help the private sector, in particular trade and by the private
                           sector logistics firms to access to reliable data for their business development. The trade logistics
                           data system will therefore contribute to improved transparency in the business environment in
                           Vietnam.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will consist of four main components as follows:

                           Component 1: Developing standardized trade logistics indicators and the methodology of collection,
                           processing and reporting trade logistics data on an annual basis.
                         This component will define key logistics indicators and identify sources of trade logistics data to be
                         collected, from government agencies, terminal operators, multi-modal transporters, and logistics
Public Disclosure Copy




                         firms etc., propose, discuss and develop the guidelines for collecting and processing data and
                         reporting them in standardized indicators.

                         i.      Projected cost for Component 1: $128,500.

                         ii.     Key activities: Consulting services for (i) identifying and defining indicators and developing
                         of guidelines for collecting, processing and reporting trade logistics data; (ii) contextual design of
                         VLSS (assessing available software, identifying a suitable data format and potential agencies /
                         partners to share data with including potential integration into existing portals) and (iii) extensive
                         consultations with relevant stakeholders from public and private sector to assess different data needs.

                         iii.      Expected outputs: (i) agreed types of indicators for different types of stakeholders (policy
                         level, strategic, decision-making); (ii) definition of indicators and guidelines for the collecting,
                         processing, and reporting trade logistics data on annual basis; (iii) design of a comprehensive pilot
                         survey; data processing and reporting; (iv) report preparation and detailed documentation of
                         technical design of system, including rationale and results; and dissemination of report

                         Component 2: Conducting one comprehensive pilot survey- to collect data in accordance with the
                         guidelines provided from the Component 1.

                         The survey is to collect the comprehensive data for one pilot trade logistics statistical annual reports
                         in 2017. It should also provide specific data on major corridors, especially the North-South Corridor
                         which links major economic centers and key national trade gateways.

                         i.      Projected cost for Component 2: $190,160.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.       Key activities: Consulting services for: (i) design of survey: after a desk review of the
                         current status of data on trade logistics and its associated sources, and a review of key data providers,
                         and consultation workshops with the private sector, a set of questionnaires will be designed, pilot
                         tested, and then finalized; (ii) development of survey plan: based on the above point, a survey plan
                         will be developed including modifications to sample design and other aspects of survey
                         implementation to minimize non-sampling error; and (iii) conduct of the survey and dissemination of
                         its results.

                         iii.   Expected output: (i) comprehensive survey report on pilot basis with processed data and
                         results; (ii) revised definition of indicators and guidelines to collect, process and present logistics
                         data on annual basis; and (iii) detailed documentation on rationale, technical input received, lessons
                         learned and results.

                         Component 3: Prepare and disseminate the pilot annual report on trade logistics statistics.

                         The report will be based on the guidelines provided from Component 1 and the results of the surveys
                         provided from Component 2.

                         i.      Projected cost for Component 3: $92,500.
                           ii.     The activities: Consulting services and related consultations to publish one pilot annual
                           report on trade logistics statistics. Through publishing an annual report and consulting process, this
                           component will provide feedback to improve the guidelines developed under the Component 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           iii.     Expected output: (i) published pilot annual report on trade logistics statistics.(ii) released
                           data in open data format;

                           Component 4: Activities to support the project implementation.

                           This component is to provide training and consultation for enhancing capacity of the project
                           implementing agencies.

                           i.      The activities will include workshops, and training courses;

                           ii.     Projected cost for Component 4: $87,500

                           iii.      Expected outputs: (i) MOT’s enhanced capacity for collecting and reporting trade logistics
                           data; (ii) fast and effective implementation of the activities under the TF; and (iv) approved
                           definition of indicators and guidelines to collect, process and present logistics data on annual basis
                           for the TF outcome sustainability and a proof of the capacity built remain with the recipient.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No                The activity is limited to data collection and the
                           BP 4.01                                                 development of an IT-based statistical system.
                                                                                   The system will be housed in the existing
                                                                                   premises of the client. As such, implementation
                                                                                   of the activity will not impact the environment
                                                                                   under OP/BP 4.01 and the other safeguards
                                                                                   policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No                See above for OP/BP 4.01
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   Same as for OP/BP4.01. The nature of the
                           4.12                                                              activities is such that there will not be any
                                                                                             involuntary resettlement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Duc Minh Pham,Charles Kunaka
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 20-Jan-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Mona E. Haddad (PMGR)                                        Date: 26-Jan-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
