INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA3377
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Argentina                  Project ID:  P133193
Project Name: Protecting Vulnerable People Against Noncommunicable Diseases Project
(P133193)
Task Team       Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin,Luis Orlando Perez
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Feb-2015                Estimated    14-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (70%), Public administration- Health (30%)
Theme(s):       Injuries and non-communicable diseases (70%), Health system performance
(30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    437.50             Total Bank Financing:  350.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   87.50
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     350.00
Total                                                                     437.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To contribute to (i) improving the readiness of public health facilities to deliver higher quality NCD-
services for vulnerable population groups and expanding the scope of selected services; and (ii)
protecting vulnerable population groups against prevalent NCD risk factors.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The Project will have the following three components:
Component 1: Improving the readiness of public health care facilities to provide higher quality
services for Noncommunicable Diseases (NCDs) for vulnerable population groups and expanding the
scope of selected services.
This component will support a change in the model of care in provincial health care networks, the
o        ones that provide services to the population without access to social security. This change in the
model of care will: (i) provide continuous and programmed care to patients; (ii) support patient's
self-care; (iii) improve case management for people with complex needs who are intensive-users of
unplanned secondary care; (iv) develop clinical information systems; and (v) strengthen clinical
support systems.
Component 2: Protecting vulnerable population groups against prevalent NCD risk factors.
This component will support the implementation of population-based interventions focused on
healthy diets (particularly the reduction of sodium and trans fat intake, and the promotion of fruit and
vegetable consumption), physical activity, and tobacco control.
Component 3: Supporting the National and Provincial Ministries of Health to improve surveillance,
monitoring, promotion, prevention and control of NCDs, injuries, and risk factors.
This component will support the following: (i) Capacity strengthening of National and Provincial
Ministries of Health and autonomous agencies under their responsibility to, inter alia: (a) design,
implement and monitor policies aimed at prevention and control of NCDs; (b) strengthen the
surveillance and monitoring system of NCDs and injuries; and (c) support the reorientation of the
model of care at public health facilities. (ii) Support for Project implementation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project general location is nationwide. Based on the information available at this stage, the
Project will not involve natural habitats, forests or cultural property. Most of the Project investments
are planned to take place in existing infrastructure. The acquisition of equipment, and the
readjustment of local laboratories to enable local authorities to monitor the reduction in sodium and
trans fat, will focus on the Central Laboratory INAL and six Argentine provinces. (i) Region of the
NOA, Laboratory of Bromatology SI.PRO.SA - San Miguel de Tucumdn. Province of Tucumdn; (ii)
Region of the NEA, the Provincial Laboratory of Bromatology, Resistencia-Chaco Province; (iii)
PATAGONIA region: Regional Coordination of Environmental Health - Environmental Protection
Department - Villa Regina - Province of Rio Negro. (iv); CUYO region: Laboratory Bromatology
Department - Direction of Nutrition and Food Hygiene - Ministry of Health - Mendoza, Province of
Mendoza; (v) PAMPEANA, and Great Buenos Aires regions: - Central Public Health Laboratory -
Biological Institute Tombs Per6n-La Plata, Province of Buenos Aires. - Laboratory of the Santa Fe
Food Safety Agency - ASSAL-Santa Fe-Santa Fe Province.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Isabel Tomadin (GSURR)
Marcelo Roman Morandi (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Page 2 of 8


﻿Environmental           Yes          This is a Category B Project because while there are
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                potential environmental impacts from medical and IT
hardware waste disposal, they present a low to moderate
risk and are readily manageable with known technology.
The Project mainly involves the potential collection,
management and disposal of hazardous medical wastes.
Lab diagnostics generated through detection and
surveillance of NCDs; the generation of technological
waste; the modifications to labs could have direct or
induced impacts on the environment. The Project will
utilize an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to guide the management of Project
related medical wastes, including electronic waste and
those resulting from modifications to labs. In principle the
"improvements in regional labs" will include the
acquisition of new equipment. The set-up of this
equipment could eventually lead to very small
interventions. This could involve the adequacy of spaces
or the adoption of security elements for laboratories to
control gases like extractors, fireplaces, special deposits
reagents, etc. At this stage and given that labs are not
known, these interventions could lead to the generation of
waste containing asbestos, old pipes, as well as obsolete
unused equipment that could contain, batteries, mercury,
coolants, and expired reagents. The Project will not
support investments in major physical works.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The ESMF will include screening criteria to prevent the
4.04                                 potential storage or disposal of medical or hazardous
waste in areas that could lead to a potential degradation or
impact natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The Project will not affect the health or management of
forests nor will affect any forest dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Project will not finance the procurement of pesticides nor
will it support activities which lead to the increased use of
pesticides or other hazardous chemicals for the
management or control of NCDs.
Physical Cultural       No           No modifications will be made to existing buildings of
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 historical or cultural importance. The ESMF will include
screening criteria to ensure that no sub-project will be
eligible for financing if it affects PCRs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          The Project will directly benefit indigenous communities
BP 4.10                              and dispersed rural populations. 20 of the 24 provinces in
Argentina have indigenous populations. During the
implementation of the previous Bank-financed projects
five new provinces triggered the policy. The 15 provinces
previously identified have IPPs developed under the FESP
Page 3 of 8


﻿I and II (P090993 and P110599), Plan Nacer, Phases I and
II (P072637 and P095515) Projects. These IPPs included
measures on all diseases covered by FESPII and thus also
on NCDs. Five IP Social Assessment in the provinces
that triggered the OP 4.10 were submitted to the Bank and
received No Objection. These assessments evaluated all
diseases in FESP II (including NCDs). An Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared; which
was built upon the existing IPPF and IPPs under the FESP
I and II, Plan Nacer, Phases I and II, as well as on lessons
learned from the Project's implementation. The Project
will continue to articulate with existing areas within the
Ministries of Health, such as the Community (Health)
Doctors Program (Indigenous Peoples areas) and the
Areas of Indigenous Health at the provincial level as well
as with NCDs National and Provincials Directions. The
IPPF includes direct beneficiaries, direct, indirect and
potential expected impacts on them. The outcome of the
free and informed prior consultation of the IPPF is
available for publication. A consultation with Indigenous
Peoples was carried out on November 27, 2013; the IPPF
received their support as reflected in the Act signed by the
Indigenous Peoples representatives. Among others,
participants suggested the creation of a Department or
Program for indigenous health, functioning as rector of
health policies for indigenous peoples at the level of
Ministry of Health of the Nation. They also suggested at
provincial level the creation of Indigenous Peoples
advisory boards, legitimized by the communities and
indigenous organizations. On Project activities, they
suggested the inclusion of the ethnic variable in the
surveillance surveys and that these variables are designed
by indigenous peoples. They also suggested including the
ethnic variable in information systems (medical records).
They also suggested to recognize and includes the
wisdom of traditional medicine in the territories,
socializing them. Some of the suggestions received
during consultations have started to be implemented,
some with support of other World Bank financed projects
(FESP II and Programa Sumar), including: (i) the
inclusion of the communities in the intersectoral working
tables of the National Program of Municipalities Healthy
Communities; and (ii) the establishment of provincial
areas of Indigenous Health.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The Project will not support any activity requiring the
OP/BP 4.12                           involuntary taking of land or restrictions in access to
protected areas.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The Project will not support the construction or
4.37                                 rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International  No        This Project will not finance activities involving the use
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 or potential pollution of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           This Project will not be implemented in disputed areas.
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment:
This is a Category B Project. While there are potential environmental impacts from medical and
IT hardware waste disposal, they present a low to moderate risk and are readily manageable with
known technology. The Project mainly involves the potential collection, management and disposal
of hazardous medical wastes. Lab diagnostics generated through detection and surveillance of
NCDs; the generation of technological waste; and modifications to labs could have direct or
induced impacts on the environment. The Project will utilize an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the management of Project related medical wastes,
including electronic waste, and those resulting from modifications to labs. In principle the
"improvements in regional labs" will include the acquisition of new equipment. The set-up of this
equipment could eventually lead to small interventions. This could involve the adequacy of spaces
or the adoption of security elements for laboratories to control gases like extractors, fireplaces,
special deposits reagents, etc. The Project will not support investments in major physical works.
At this time the dimensions of the equipment, construction or design they require are not available,
the MGA integrates the concepts and recommendations for construction, and construction waste as
well as unused equipment and reagents expired. These interventions could lead to the generation
O
U           of waste containing asbestos, old pipes, as well as obsolete unused equipment that could contain
batteries, mercury, coolants, and expired reagents. During project preparation, the Borrower
O           updated the ESMF currently used in FESP II project and the following identified gaps were
covered in the updated ESMF: (i) placement of fireplaces, extractors, etc. to control possible gas
o           emissions from the new equipment to be installed in laboratories of the RENALOA network
(regional food labs linked to INAL);(ii) adequacy of spaces for the correct storage of inputs and
waste from laboratories; (iii) training of lab staff (at provincial and/ or municipal level); (iv) the
completion of the tool for diagnosis and Management of waste hazardous chemicals (including
cytotoxic) in laboratories and staff training in laboratories and provincial health facilities
supported; (v) the design of an integrated management system of electrical and electronic waste
equipment (RAEEs). This ESMF aligns with the Guidelines GBE EHS for health facilities, in
particular in relation to the management of hazardous waste.
To improve multisectoral coordination and its relationship with non-communicable diseases, the
client considered that the best integration with the provincial and municipal levels is by linking
with the national program of healthy municipalities and communities of the MINSAL where
already involved more than 1000 municipalities.
The EMF incorporates capacity building and institutional measures for preparation, supervision,
Page 5 of 8


﻿and monitoring of the Project from an environmental and social standpoint. Health Care Waste
Management Plans may also be utilized based on typologies of activities. The framework will
build on the existing Environmental Management Framework and Environmental Action Plan
under FESP II as well as on lessons learned from Project implementation. Supervision functions
O
will be included in the Environmental Management Plan of the laboratories and associated costs
included in project budget costs. The Project is fully mainstreamed with the FESP II in the
national health waste management and is supporting preparation of the environmental safeguards.
Indigenous People:
No new health waste treatment or storage facilities will be financed by the Project. Rehabilitation
activities of laboratories will also conform to Bank, WHO, and national health and safety
standards. In addition, current waste management practices will be reviewed for the laboratories
and will include mitigation or capacity-building measures as necessary.
Regarding the social safeguard, this Project will benefit from Argentina's broad experience in the
management of IP safeguards, particularly with the Essential Public Health Functions (EPHF) I
and II (P090993 and P110599), Plan Nacer Phases I and II (P072637 and P095515), and the
Provincial Public Health Insurance (P106735) projects which are currently under implementation.
Under these projects the Government developed indigenous people plans frameworks and
provincials indigenous peoples plans, and environmental tools, which will be assessed during
Project preparation to determine their adequacy to address possible specific impacts of this new
operation. For this project, a new IPPF was developed and Indigenous Peoples gave their support
to it. To better adapt the strategy and deepen the expected reforms aimed at increasing the
capacity of the Ministries of Health to design and implement interventions aimed at the
surveillance, prevention and control of NCDs, some activities (i.e. work with educational
institutions) were revised. Such changes do not affect the development of the Indigenous
Safeguard and substantive aspects of the free and informed consultation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
0
No negative indirect or long term impacts are expected from the activities in the Project areas.
Improved health should provide positive benefits for both the human and natural environment.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project does not include any new treatment plants or storage facilities for health waste
including chemicals, or biological. The Project will continue supporting technical assistance for
waste management in support of the national and provincial planning in this regard in coordination
with the FESP II team and the NMOH.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This Project will benefit from Argentina's experience in the management of safeguards,
particularly with the Essential Public Health Functions (EPHF) I and II (P090993 and P110599),
Plan Nacer Phases I and II (P072637 and P095515), and the Provincial Public Health Insurance
(P106735) projects which are currently under implementation.
Hospital environmental diagnoses for hospital waste are performed by FESP II, and include
hospital waste management mechanisms. Argentina has comprehensive national legislation in
place to guide health care waste management practices. The teams in charge of implementing
Page 6 of 8


﻿environmental safeguards have demonstrated good capacity.
Project environmental and social management is based on the existing Safeguards Unit which has
been created in 2012 for the FESP II Project. This unit is already staffed.
o
The implementation of electronic medical records will probably require the renewal of a large
number of hardware with the consequent generation of technological residuals. As this is a new
situation where legal frameworks and policies are still under development, there is no adequate
institutional capacity. Best practices procedures will be adopted by the Project.
Laboratory audits and specific training will be needed in the fields of storage, handling, use, and
disposal of specific chemicals.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations on environmental documents was made on 06-25-2013
Consultation to Indigenous Peoples was carried out on November 27th, 2013 and received their
support
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                20-Nov-2014
Comments: http://wbdocs.worldbank.org/wbdocs/drVobjectId/090224b0828804f4
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                04-Nov-2014
Comments: http://wbdoes.worldbank.org/wbdocs/drl/objectId/090224b0828344f7
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ] NA[]
report?
Page 7 of 8


﻿If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]   No[    ]  NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
o          related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin,Luis Orlando Perez
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


