                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17650
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:   P153544
                            Project Name:      Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods Project
                                               (P153544)
                            Task Team          Anjali Acharya,Binh Thang Cao,Greg J. Browder
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       29-Feb-2016                           Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN02                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), General water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection sector (40%), Public administ ration- Water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Water resource management (25%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (10%), Environmental policies and instituti ons (15%), Natural
                                              disaster management (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     384.00           Total Bank Financing:                 307.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         77.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               307.00
                              Total                                                                                     384.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           22.     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance tools for climate-smart planning

                                                                       Page 1 of 21
                         and improve climate resilience of land and water management practices in selected provinces of the
                         Mekong Delta in Vietnam. The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital
                         investments, technical assistance and capacity building for farmers in the selected provinces of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mekong Delta in Vietnam and government institutions at national and sub-national levels.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project is a critical part of the long-term World Bank engagement in the Mekong Delta to
                         strengthen integrated climate resilient management and development, across different sectors and
                         institutional levels. More specifically, it will support information systems, the institutional
                         arrangements, and the roadmap for building provincial and district-level planning capacity for
                         sustainable Delta-wide development. In parallel, the project will also seek opportunities for 'low
                         regret' investments and scope out longer term development options to be financed under future
                         phases. The project would comprise of a combination of structural and non-structural investments,
                         and has been informed by the World Bank financed Building Resilience in the Mekong Delta TA
                         (P149017).The project is proposed to span a period of 6 years, with the financing of US$ 384 million
                         ($307 m from IDA; $77 m from GoV). The project is seeking additional resources from the Global
                         Environment Facility (GEF) to finance research and innovation activities relating to climate resilient
                         solutions for the Mekong Delta. If the GEF grant funds are obtained during project implementation,
                         they would finance activities which are complementary to the project and will be processed
                         separately (“partially blended”).

                         The five components under the project are:

                         Component 1: Enhancing Monitoring, Analytics, and Information Systems (Estimated US$59.2
                         million, of which US$53.8 million will be financed by IDA).
                         Putting the Mekong Delta on a more sustainable and resilient trajectory in the face of climate change,
                         upstream Mekong basin development, and environmentally damaging practices within the Delta
                         itself, will require investments in both infrastructure and the enhanced capacity to monitor, plan, and
                         manage the Delta’s land and water resources. Component 1 provides the framework for ensuring the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity to undertake “smart investments” and cope with anticipated wide-scale environmental
                         changes.

                         Sub-component 1.1. Monitoring Systems to Enhance Mekong Delta Knowledge Base: This
                         subcomponent upgrades and expands MONRE’s monitoring systems for groundwater and surface
                         water, and enhances its remote sensing capacity. MONRE will also undertake studies on specialized
                         topics including river and coastal morphology, and groundwater management. MARD will develop a
                         computer based operations system for hydraulic infrastructure which will improve the operation of
                         the complex network of gates and canals in the Delta. MARD will also undertake an inventory of sea
                         dykes and mangrove belts along the 700 km Delta coastline.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Infrastructure and Information Systems for Enhanced Decisions. This
                         subcomponent finances the establishment of the Mekong Delta Center, which will serve as a hub for
                         Delta-wide information, including water, land use, environmental and climate change information,
                         education and outreach. A Mekong Center business plan will be developed which examines options
                         for sustainable funding and possible expansion. The foundation of the Center will be a “knowledge
                         management platform” (KMP) which will be a GIS-based computer system providing MONRE and
                         other stakeholders with the capability to integrate various data bases and models to help investigate
                         the environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate change and basin developments. A
                         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience Assessment will also be formulated which will provide a set of


                                                                      Page 2 of 21
                         recommendations to help guide planning at the regional, provincial, and sectoral levels.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Mainstreaming Climate Resilience into Planning Processes. This sub-component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will provide the linkages between the data and information systems with Vietnam’s planning
                         processes in the Mekong Delta. Led by MPI, this subcomponent will seek to collaborate with line
                         ministries (primarily MARD and MONRE), sectors and provinces to draft regulations on pilot
                         regional coordination for climate change adaptation, and climate-resilient solutions in the Mekong
                         Delta. It will also finance reports to advise on land-use planning, spati al and territorial development,
                         and identifying priority low-regret and climate resilient investments. Using the Mekong Climate
                         Resilience Assessment, the subcomponent will seek to update the Mekong Delta Socioeconomic
                         Master Plan, relevant sectoral master plans, and provincial SEDPs.

                         Component 2: Managing Floods in the Upper Delta (Est. US$ 101 million, of which US$ 79.1
                         million will be financed by IDA)
                         The Upper Delta area is characterized by natural occurring deep floods in the wet season. The
                         development of an extensive agricultural flood control system has shifted the flood waters to other
                         areas in the Delta and also reduced the beneficial effects of flooding including replenishing soil
                         fertility, groundwater recharge, and sustaining aquatic eco-systems.

                         The primary objective of this component is to protect and/or reclaim the benefits of controlled
                         flooding (flood retention) measures while increasing rural incomes and protecting high value assets
                         in An Giang and Dong Thap provinces. This will potentially consist of: i) modifying water and
                         agricultural infrastructure to allow for more beneficial flooding (expanding flood retention capacity)
                         in rural areas and offer new agricultural/aquaculture cropping alternatives; ii) providing livelihoods
                         support measures to farmers so they have alternatives to the wet season rice crop, including
                         aquaculture; iii) constructing/upgrading infrastructures for protecting select high value assets; iv)
                         develop flood diversion channels to lower the peak flows in the Middle Delta; and iv) facilitating
                         agricultural water use efficiency in the dry season.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-projects selected to be financed under this component include infrastructure schemes aimed at
                         increasing flood retention capacity, irrigation and upgrading of reservoirs, livelihoods improvement
                         (i.e. demonstration and agriculture extension support for transition from triple rice to alternative
                         cropping), and ecosystem restoration. Details are in Annex 2.

                         Component 3: Adapting to Salinity Transitions in the Delta Estuary (Est. US$ 109.1 million, of
                         which US$ 82.0 million will be financed by IDA)
                         The Mekong River divides into 9 distributaries which flow into the East Sea through the Estuary
                         zone. This area is naturally characterized by low flows during the dry season which allow saline
                         water to extend far inland. Over the past twenty years, closed freshwater systems designed for rice
                         production have been developed in this area consisting of large polders ringed by dikes and with
                         sluice gates to control saline water intrusion. The long-term sustainability of this strategy is
                         questionable due to reduced dry season water availability and sea-level rise. In addition, farmers are
                         rapidly converting to more profitable shrimp farms along the coast, often accompanied by destruction
                         of mangrove forests.

                         This component aims to address the challenges related to salinity intrusion, coastal erosion,
                         sustainable aquaculture and improved livelihoods for communities living in the coastal areas of Ben
                         Tre, Tra Vinh, and Soc Trang provinces. This will potentially consist of: i) construction of coastal
                         defenses consisting of combinations of compacted earth embankments and coastal mangrove belts;

                                                                       Page 3 of 21
                         ii) modification of water and agricultural infrastructure along the coastal zone to allow flexibility for
                         sustainable aquaculture activities and adapt to changing salinity levels; iii) support to farmers to
                         transition (where suitable) to more sustainable brackish water activities such as mangrove-shrimp,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rice-shrimp, and other aquaculture activities; and iv) supporting climate smart agriculture by
                         facilitating water use efficiency in the dry season.

                         Sub-projects to be financed under this component will include restoration of mangroves along the
                         provincial coastline, construction/upgrades of river and coastal embankments, and sluice gates to
                         improve water quality, efficiency and sustainability of aquaculture in the brackish water zone, and
                         supporting a gradual transition from rice and other freshwater crops in the saline intruded zone to a
                         brackish water economy including aquaculture through demonstration and aquaculture extension
                         together with necessary adjustments to land-use plans in a longer term. Details are presented in
                         Annex 2.

                         Component 4: Protecting Coastal Areas in the Delta Peninsula (Est. US$ 101.4 million, of which US
                         $82.2 million will be financed by IDA)
                         In contrast to the adjacent estuary zone, there are no distributaries of the Mekong River flowing
                         through the peninsula and historically the peninsula was covered by dense mangroves sustained by
                         localized rainfall. In recent decades, there has been an explosion of shrimp farming along the coast
                         which relies heavily on groundwater abstraction to maintain the proper salinity level. The over-
                         abstraction of groundwater has resulted in land subsidence. The natural mangrove forest has been
                         significantly reduced, although there are still some protected mangrove zones. An extensive canal
                         network has been developed to bring freshwater from the Mekong River into the peninsula to allow
                         rice production.

                         This component aims to address the challenges related to coastal erosion, groundwater management,
                         sustainable aquaculture, and improved livelihoods for communities living in the coastal areas of Ca
                         Mau, Bac Lieu and Kien Giang provinces. This will potentially consist of: i) restoration of coastal
                         mangroves and/or rehabilitation of coastal dikes in erosion areas; ii) modification of water control
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure along the coastal zone to allow flexibility for sustainable aquaculture activities; iv)
                         control of groundwater abstraction for agricultural/ aquaculture and enhancing freshwater supplies
                         for domestic use; v) support to farmers to practice more sustainable brackish livelihoods such as
                         mangrove-shrimp; and vi) support to climate-smart agriculture through water use efficiency.

                         Sub-projects to be financed under this subcomponent include restoration of mangroves to enhance
                         coastal defense, transition of shrimp farming into integrated mangrove-shrimp, construction/
                         upgrades of river and coastal embankments, and sluice gates to manage water conditions and
                         demonstration and aquaculture extension to improve efficiency and sustainability of brackish water
                         aquaculture. Details are presented in Annex 2.

                         Component 5: Project Management and Implementation Support (Est. US$ 13.2 million, of which
                         US$9.9 million will be financed by IDA)
                         This component supports project management and capacity building for MARD, MONRE and MPI
                         to implement the Project. This component is expected to provide incremental operating costs and
                         consultant and advisory services for overall project management, financial management,
                         procurement, safeguards and monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                       Page 4 of 21
                         The Mekong Delta population has been identified one of the most vulnerable to the impacts of
                         climate change. Agriculture and aquaculture is likely to be affected by changes in freshwater supply
                         due to salinity intrusion, flooding, increasing tropical cyclone intensity, and increasing temperatures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Domestic freshwater supply is expected to become less reliable due to erratic rainfall and salinity
                         intrusion into groundwater resources. Marine fisheries, particularly coral reef fisheries, are expected
                         to be impacted by sea-level rise, warmer oceans, and ocean acidification associated with rising
                         atmospheric and ocean CO2 concentrations. Coastal infrastructures are exposed increased tropical
                         storm intensity, long-term sea-level rise, and sudden-onset fluvial and coastal flooding. In addition,
                         changes in fishing and farming practices, (heavier use of pesticides and fertilizers) and increasing
                         industrialization and river traffic has led to a deterioration in air, surface and groundwater quality.
                         Poor construction practices and intensified land use has led to increased mangrove deforestation,
                         resulting in increased coastal erosion and increased vulnerability to natural disasters.

                         The three project components described below fall within the Mekong Delta. The Mekong Delta is
                         characterized by the tropical monsoon climate, although cold air from Siberia and China occasionally
                         penetrates the Mekong Delta. The general circulation is dominated by two monsoon flows: the
                         northeast in winter and southwest one in summer periods. The southwest monsoon or the rainy
                         season, normally affects the basin from mid-May to early October and the northeast monsoon occurs
                         in the dry season from early November to mid-March. In the Mekong Delta, the rainfall has clear
                         temporal and spatial distribution patterns. In the south-west area of the Delta (including Ca Mau and
                         Soc Trang) the rainfall (of 2400 mm) has historically been much higher than that (1200 mm) in the
                         coastal area of the East Sea (an area that includes Dong Thap).

                         Component 2: Upper Delta Environmental Zone (An Giang/Dong Thap/Kien Giang Provinces) This
                         area is characterized by natural occurring deep floods in the wet season. The development an
                         extensive agricultural flood control system has shifted the flood waters to other areas in the Delta and
                         also reduced the beneficial effects of flooding which historically included replenishment of soil
                         fertility, groundwater recharge, and the preservation of aquatic eco-systems. In An Giang Province, a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         large bird sanctuary exists at Tra Su Forest. With an area of 850ha, Tra Su Forest is home to 70
                         species of birds including two rare species of birds recorded in Vietnam's Red Book: Mycteria
                         leucocephala and Anhinga melanogaster. Tràm Chim National Park is a national park in Dong Thap
                         Province, created to protect several rare birds, in particular the Sarus Crane (Grus antigone), a
                         species listed in the IUCN Red Book. In Kien Giang, U Minh Thuong National Park contains over
                         243 plant species and has a rich mammalian population, including hairy-nosed otters and fishing cats.
                         A total of 187 birds have been recorded here, including the oriental darter, spot-billed pelican, black-
                         headed ibis, glossy ibis, greater spotted eagle and Asian golden weaver. There are also a total of 39
                         amphibian species and 34 species of fish in the park.

                         Component 3: Delta Estuary Environmental Zone (Soc Trang, Tra Vinh, Vinh Long and Ben Tre
                         Provinces): The Mekong River divides into 9 tributaries which flow into the East Sea through the
                         Estuary zone. This area is naturally characterized by low flows during the dry season which allow
                         saline water to extend upwards of 100 km inland. Over the past twenty years, closed freshwater
                         systems designed for rice production have been developed in this area consisting of large polders
                         ringed by dikes and with sluice gates to control saline water intrusion. The long-term sustainability of
                         this strategy is questionable due to reduced dry season water availability and sea-level rise. In
                         addition, farmers are rapidly converting to more profitable shrimp farms along the coast, often
                         accompanied by destruction of mangrove forests. In Tra Vinh, bird sanctuaries are located Tra Cu,
                         Chua Huang, and Duyen Hai. In Ben Tre, Thanh Phu is an important nature reserve of 4,510 ha,


                                                                      Page 5 of 21
                         comprising a strict protection area of 1,788 ha, a very critical coastal protection area of 949 ha, and a
                         scientific research area of 1,773 ha. Thanh Phu Nature Reserve comprises a narrow strip of coastline
                         between two of the mouths of the Mekong River: the Co Chien and Ham Luong estuaries. As is the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         case with other sites on the eastern coastline of the Mekong Delta, Thanh Phu Nature Reserve is
                         strongly affected by erosion as well as accretion. Ben Tre also contains a planted mangrove forest at
                         Bao Thuan, and a large bird sanctuary at Ham Vo.

                         Component 4: Delta Peninsula Environmental Zone (Ca Mau, Kien Giang and Bac Lieu): In contrast
                         to the adjacent estuary zone, there are no tributaries of the Mekong river flowing through the
                         peninsula and historically the peninsula was covered by dense mangroves sustained by localized
                         rainfall. In recent decades, there has been an explosion of shrimp farming along the coast which
                         relies heavily on groundwater abstraction to maintain the proper salinity level. The over-abstraction
                         of groundwater has resulted in significant land subsidence. The natural mangrove forest has been
                         significantly reduced, although there are still significant protected mangrove zones, particularly at
                         Dam Roi. The Mui Ca Mau Park is home 60 species of upper plants, up to 26 mangrove tree species
                         and two species of double mangrove and “quao” tree that are listed in Vietnam's Red Book. The Bac
                         Lieu Bird Sanctuary is notable for its 50-odd species of bird, including a large population of white
                         herons.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ha Thi Van Nguyen (GEN02)
                         Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSU02)
                         Pierre Arnoux (GSU02)
                         Son Van Nguyen (GEN02)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            This policy is triggered due to the potential adverse
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       impacts associated with construction activities under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Component 1, 2, 3, and 4 and implementation of the
                                                                     sustainable livelihood models, requiring the identification,
                                                                     mitigation and monitoring of potential adverse
                                                                     environmental and social impacts.

                                                                     The project is proposed as Category A given the overall
                                                                     scope and impacts of the four components project
                                                                     activities. This includes specifically the potential
                                                                     construction and operation of a water reservoir for water
                                                                     supply and fire prevention (in Cau Mau subproject
                                                                     scheduled for second phase) which would be located
                                                                     adjacent to U Minh Ha National Park in Ca Mau province,
                                                                     and thus may have significant impacts on natural habitats
                                                                     and biodiversity of the national park. The complicity of
                                                                     water resources issues and the significant impacts of land
                                                                     acquisition due to project activities are also anticipated, as
                                                                     well as potential future induced impacts when pilots are
                                                                     scaled up.




                                                                       Page 6 of 21
                                                        A Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) and four
                                                        Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
                                                        for the first phase subprojects have been prepared based
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        on the agreed ToR. An ESMF has been prepared and
                                                        disclosed during preparation phase given that the
                                                        subprojects will be identified during project
                                                        implementation. Each subproject will go through
                                                        environmental and social screening. The full scale
                                                        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will
                                                        be carried out for all category 'A' subproject. Category 'B'
                                                        subproject will require limited ESIA or ESMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The project will not impact any protected area nor will it
                         4.04                           affect important/endangered flora or fauna species or
                                                        biodiversity areas of high value. The environmental and
                                                        social screening and the first phase subprojects confirmed
                                                        that natural habitats are present in the project areas.
                                                        However, they would not have impact on any protected
                                                        area nor would they affect important/endangered flora or
                                                        fauna species or biodiversity areas of high value.
                                                        Construction and operation of the sluices gates would
                                                        have the small potential impacts on natural habitats of the
                                                        rivers, canals, and estuaries including loss of small
                                                        benthic habitats and disturbance of benthic organisms,
                                                        temporary blockage of fish passage in the rivers and
                                                        canals due to operation of the sluice gates. Impacts and
                                                        mitigation measures were and will be included in the
                                                        relevant subproject ESIAs to address these impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   There are indigo forests in Ca Mau, Kien Giang, An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Giang, and Dong Thap. The activities to restore coastal
                                                        landscapes to enhance resilience of inland farming
                                                        systems, reduce vulnerability to the impacts of sea-level
                                                        rise and coastal erosion including mangrove reforestation
                                                        in targeted areas may have the potential to have adverse
                                                        impacts on the rights and welfare of local people and their
                                                        level of dependence upon natural and plantation forests.
                                                        No significant impacts on forests were found in the first
                                                        phase subprojects, and associated mitigation measures
                                                        were included. Forest Management Plans will be prepared
                                                        for all mangrove reforestation undertaken as part of the
                                                        Project, and for any subprojects that may affect the indigo
                                                        forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The more reliable irrigation water would induce increased
                                                        irrigated agricultural activities which may involve in the
                                                        use of agricultural chemicals. In order to mitigate these
                                                        environmental impacts, an integrated pest management
                                                        plan (IPM) program will be implemented for each
                                                        applicable subproject as a part of the ESMP. A Pest


                                                         Page 7 of 21
                                                        Management Framework (PMF) was developed and
                                                        included in the ESMF as a guideline for preparation of an
                                                        IPM program. The PMF stipulates prohibition of the use
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        of very toxic chemicals, and provides directions and
                                                        approach for IPM.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   It is not expected that the project will necessitate
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           relocation of PCRs such as monuments, temples,
                                                        churches, religious/spiritual and cultural sites. Should this
                                                        be unavoidable, all effort will be made to limit impacts on
                                                        such PCRs. In such a case, a PCR management Plan will
                                                        be prepared in consultation with local stakeholders and
                                                        religious/cultural authorities. The project will involve
                                                        relocation of graves which are also considered physical
                                                        cultural resources (PCRs). Since the project includes
                                                        dredging and excavation activities, which may result in
                                                        chance finds, a chance finds procedure has been included
                                                        in the ESMF for application in subproject ESMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project entails multiple subprojects in a large
                         BP 4.10                        geographical area of Mekong Delta Region where ethnic
                                                        minority communities (Cham, Chinese and Khmer) are
                                                        likely to be present. Of the 4 sub-projects selected for the
                                                        first year implementation, two (Kien Giang and Tra Vinh/
                                                        Vinh Long) have EM peoples present in the subproject
                                                        areas. Ethnic minorities (mainly Khmer) account for
                                                        23.6% of Cau Khe District (Tra Vinh Province). This
                                                        represents 31,335 households. In the two districts located
                                                        in Vinh Long Province, the number of EM household is
                                                        very little. No EM household is affected by land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        acquisition. These EM households are potentially affected
                                                        by the Subproject due to the proposed livelihood
                                                        improving models.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Project activities will involve some land acquisition
                         OP/BP 4.12                     resulting in physical land take and impacts on livelihoods
                                                        and resources. At this stage, this may occur in
                                                        components 2 3 and 4. For the four first year subprojects,
                                                        total permanent land acquisition is estimated at 1,249,974
                                                        m2 (especially 132,240, 1,100,00, and 17,734 in Kien
                                                        Giang, An Giang and Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-projects).
                                                        Temporary land acquisition, for the purpose of work
                                                        space during construction, is estimated at 274,253 m2. It
                                                        is estimated that the total number of household affected
                                                        by these subprojects is 825 (respectively 58, 752, and 13
                                                        in Kien Giang, An Giang, and Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-
                                                        projects), of which 70 HHs (respectively 58 and 12 in
                                                        Kien Giang and Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-projects) will
                                                        need to be relocated.



                                                         Page 8 of 21
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes           The project may fund the construction of a water reservoir
                            4.37                                      for water supply and fire prevention. No structure will be
                                                                      higher than 10 meters, and the dam and reservoir are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      anticipated to pose any hazards. In line with OP/BP 4.37,
                                                                      the ESMF has provisions for meeting the requirements of
                                                                      the policy, including ensuring the involvement of
                                                                      qualified engineers.
                            Projects on International   Yes           This policy triggers for the project considering the nature
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      of activities to be implemented within broad areas of the
                                                                      Vietnam Mekong Delta and that Vietnam is a riparian on
                                                                      the International Mekong river basin, of which it is a
                                                                      downstream riparian. The proposed investments under the
                                                                      project will involve additions or alterations that will
                                                                      rehabilitate, upgrade, or make changes to existing
                                                                      schemes. No project activities will be implemented on the
                                                                      mainstream of the Mekong, and construction of the sluice
                                                                      gates will be implemented on the primary and secondary
                                                                      infield canals. The four subproject Environmental and
                                                                      Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) prepared for the first
                                                                      year of implementation confirmed that the project would
                                                                      not have appreciable harm to the Mekong flow and water
                                                                      quality. Further, the proposed project area is located in the
                                                                      most downstream of the Mekong, therefore, the
                                                                      investments will not certainly affect the water quality or
                                                                      flow in the upstream riparian countries. Therefore, it is
                                                                      assessed that the project falls within the riparian
                                                                      notification exception under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50,
                                                                      and that no riparian notification is required. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      memorandum for approval of the riparian notification
                                                                      exception was signed by the Regional Vice President in
                                                                      March, 2016.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            None of the proposed project sites are in a Disputed Area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project would mainly involve the following physical investments under Components 2, 3, 4: i)
                              Rehabilitation and reinforcement of low dikes in the floodplain, sea and river dikes to create a
                              sediment area for mangrove/for flood/salt intrusion regulation and control, and embankments to
                              prevent high tides; ii) Construction of infield sluice gates and culverts through the sea dykes to
                              control salinity intrusion/shrimp-rice farming; iii) Construction and rehabilitation of irrigation
                              systems including dredging canals for water regulation and water quality improvement; iv)
                              Construction of two reservoirs for freshwater water supply and a water treatment plant; v)
                              Mangrove planting, restoration, and protection; vi) Sustainable agriculture systems focused on


                                                                       Page 9 of 21
                         land use/zoning and water resources management; vii) Development of livelihoods models that are
                         climate change (CC) resilience in the three zone of the project, including floating rice farming,
                         conversion of rice to other high economic value crops, aquaculture and rice-shrimp and mangrove
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forest-shrimp models; and vii) Capacity building on specific livelihood activities. Civil works
                         under Component 1 will be small including of a small building to house the Mekong Delta Center
                         in Can Tho city and expanding and upgrading MONRE’s monitoring systems in the Mekong Delta
                         for surface water and groundwater, including construction of water resources monitoring stations.

                         The project is expected to bring about significant positive changes to the Mekong Delta region in
                         terms of (i) enhanced capacity of the region to adapt to climate change adaptation due to
                         implementation of sustainable climate resilience livelihoods models; (ii) increase in agricultural
                         productivity and thus contributing to poverty reduction and economic development due to
                         optimum fresh water-salinity intrusion regulation and flood control; (iii) improvement water
                         quality due to reduced use of fertilizers, pesticides, and aquaculture chemicals; and (iv) Increased
                         mangrove cover for enhancing ecological restoration and reducing coastal erosion.

                         Regional level impacts
                         Environmental and social impacts have been identified and assessed in detail –both at the regional
                         level as well at the project-specific levels. Given the types and locations of the proposed
                         subprojects and the nature of social conditions and water resources management in the lower part
                         of Mekong Delta, a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) was conducted. The REA
                         confirmed that rapid population growth and intensive agricultural and aquaculture development
                         over the past decades have significantly reduced the natural values in the delta area and key
                         lessons include (a) highly controlled multi-crop farming systems have depleted soil fertility and
                         cut off agricultural areas from natural fertilization processes of the Mekong River, (b) shrinking
                         Mekong Floodplain area has exacerbated flooding in unprotected areas, (c) draining of wetland
                         depressions in the delta for agricultural expansion; (d) dry season agriculture is shifting the delta’s
                         balance between fresh and marine environments; and (e) centralized water control initiatives such
                         as the saline control structures in the coastal areas of the delta often limit the livelihood and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic opportunities for farmers seeking to take advantage of market driven opportunities.
                         Based on the key basin-wide drivers of change (rainfall and temperature, hydropower
                         development, land use, and sea level rise) it was found that key changes in the Mekong Delta will
                         be an increase in flood magnitude and volume and duration, shortening of transition seasons, and
                         increase dry season water levels.

                         The REA found no major adverse regional negative impacts resulting from the proposed project
                         and that the regional adverse impacts can be mitigated through implementation of the subproject
                         ESMPs. Summary of key regional impacts for Components 2, 3 & 4 include:
                         •        Installing water/flood control structures in the upper delta will change the hydrological
                         flow and is likely to have major positive regional impacts by increasing flood retention and
                         restoring floodplain ecosystems and agriculture. Flooding will provide nutrients and sediment in
                         the wet season reducing the use of fertilizers and pesticides. Under the new livelihood models
                         farmers will be transitioning from triple rice cropping to double rice plus crops and aquaculture.
                         This will be a step-by-step process that includes agricultural extension, access to markets and
                         sustainable agricultural practices.
                         •        Installing water/salinity control structures in the estuary and peninsula will have major
                         positive impacts by increasing protection from coastal erosion, and minor negative regional
                         impacts by blocking the movement and migration of coastal and estuarine fisheries in the in-field
                         rivers of the Delta. The loss in capture fisheries may be offset by increasing the areas mangroves,

                                                                    Page 10 of 21
                         which in combination with improved coastal management should increase biodiversity. Bio-
                         monitoring should be undertaken in the project areas. The combination of mangroves and sea
                         dikes will also provide positive benefits by reducing the damages caused by storm surges and sea
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level rise.
                         •        The operation of the sluice gates will need to be flexible, and incorporate hydrological
                         modeling and surface water monitoring of salinity to determine zones for freshwater, brackish and
                         saline farming. The operations and zones may need to be altered depending on wet, average or dry
                         years. For example, the province of Vinh Long is impacted by salinity in dry years.
                         •        The development of livelihood programs in the Delta Estuary should help farmers to
                         transition to adapt to salinity intrusion and improve climate resilience. Promoting sustainable
                         aquaculture, extensive shrimp and mangrove-shrimp should lead to reduced groundwater
                         abstraction and surface water pollution associated with intensive shrimp. Groundwater use studies
                         and surface water monitoring is required to confirm this during and after the implementation of the
                         project.
                         •        Constructing the reservoir in Ca Mau and improving water and sanitation facilities in the
                         delta peninsula is likely to have major positive regional impacts. Dry season freshwater shortages
                         and access to water and sanitation are critical challenges in coastal areas. The reservoir, if operated
                         effectively, and complemented by climate smart agriculture should reduce the exploitation of
                         groundwater. Dam safety measures and further hydrological and hydraulic modeling is required to
                         enhance the benefits and reduce any negative impacts during construction and operation of the
                         reservoir.

                         The REA, however, confirmed that these impacts are likely to be local or sub-regional and can be
                         managed through subproject safeguard instruments and Environmental and Social Management
                         Plan (ESMP). To enhance government capacity for taking regional impacts into account,
                         Component 1 has specifically included activities to improve monitoring systems, strengthen
                         planning tools for mainstreaming climate resilience, and creating decision support systems and a
                         Mekong Delta Climate Resilience Assessment to feed into provincial and delta-wide plans and
                         investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project-level impacts
                         The main social impacts/risks due to construction of civil works and implementation of livelihoods
                         models would include: (i) loss of crops, trees, livelihoods, and other properties due to permanent
                         and temporary land acquisition and relocation of households; (ii) farmers’ reluctance/resistance to
                         changes in livelihood models; (iii) low preparedness of farmers in implementing the livelihood
                         models; (iv) disproportionate impacts/benefits from project activities on the more vulnerable such
                         as poor, elderly, and ethnic groups; and (v) relocation of graves.

                         Typical and site-specific environmental adverse impacts during pre-construction, construction, and
                         preparation of the water infrastructures (including sluice gates) and implementation of livelihoods
                         models include: (i) safety risk due to UXOs; (ii) increased nuisance from dust and noise; (iii)
                         water and land pollution due to waste generation; (iv) interference with local agricultural and
                         aquaculture activities; (v) sedimentation and water pollution on agricultural land and in
                         aquaculture ponds; (vi) exposure of acid sulfate soil from excavation activities; (vii) interruption in
                         irrigation and/or domestic water supply; (viii) risks to health and safety of local people and
                         construction workers; (ix) disturbance of local road and waterway traffic; (x) temporary blockage
                         of fish passes to the rivers and canals; and (xi) water use conflict among rice farming, aquaculture,
                         and salt production water users.



                                                                    Page 11 of 21
                         The four ESIAs of the first phase subprojects confirmed these impacts to be moderate, short to
                         medium term, unavoidable, and can be mitigated through effective consultation and adequate
                         compensation. The project sites do not include physical cultural resources; however, throughout
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the implementation of subprojects, a relocation of graves would be necessary.

                         The findings of the ESIAs indicate the main adverse impacts during operation to include: i)
                         Impacts of waterway traffic interruption due to operation of the sluice gates; ii) Impacts on water
                         quality and aquatic life as a result of increasing use of agrochemicals due to provision of more
                         freshwater for rice irrigation; iii) Impacts of solid waste and waste water from pilot of aquaculture
                         models; iv) Increase of water use conflict between rice farming and brackish water aquaculture
                         due to unproper sluice gate system management; and v) Potential environmental risks such as
                         epidemic of fish or shirmp desease, structure damage; and vi) Temporary blockage of fish passes
                         to the in-field rivers and canals due to temporaty closure of the sluice gates. However, these
                         adverse impacts were assessed as low to moderate and can be mitigated.

                         Induced impacts: The ESIAs also determined that during project implementation a limited number
                         of sustainalbel livelihood models will be piloted, and no significant negative impacts on the
                         environments would be anticipated. However, in the long term, scaling up of these models,
                         especially intensive aquaculture model, if not properly managed at the planning level may result in
                         changes in land use on a broad scale significantly affecting the envirnment and biodiversity in the
                         region.

                         Indigenous People (OP 4.10). The project will entail multiple subprojects in a large geographical
                         area of Mekong Delta Region where ethnic minority communities are likely to be present. The
                         application of OP 4.10 at the subproject level will be identified on a case by case basis with
                         support from early screening exercises. Of the 4 sub-projects selected for the first year
                         implementation, two (Kien Giang and Tra Vinh/Vinh Long) have EM peoples present in the
                         subproject areas. Most of the EM households are Khmers with small population of Hoa (Chinese)
                         and Cham. Among the three groups, the Khmer is the poorest and most vulnerable group, followed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by the Cham while the Chinese have an equal standing with the Kinh. Khmers make up a large
                         proportion of the poor and landless, and often work as hired laborers on the rice and aquaculture
                         farms as well as collecting natural aquatic resources to sell to aquaculture farmers as feed stock for
                         shrimp.

                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). Project activities are likely to involve some land acquisition
                         resulting in physical land take and impacts on livelihoods and resources. At this stage, this may
                         occur in components 2 3 and 4. It may be necessary to compensate local communities for lost
                         homes, immovable assets, and/or lost revenues/livelihoods as a result of any flood control/ saline
                         intrusion measures or changes in fishing and farming practices and/or changes in cropping.
                         Additional assistance to farmers who may have changes in their current livelihoods may also be
                         needed, and is being identified through a social analysis. Total permanent land acquisition is
                         estimated at 1,249,974 m2 (especially 132,240, 1,100,00, and 17,734 in Kien Giang, An Giang and
                         Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-projects). Temporary land acquisition, for the purpose of work space
                         during construction, is estimated at 274,253 m2. It is estimated that the total number of household
                         affected by these subprojects is 825 (respectively 58, 752, and 13 in Kien Giang, An Giang, and
                         Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-projects), of which 70 HHs (respectively 58 and 12 in Kien Giang and
                         Tra Vinh/Vinh Long sub-projects) will need to be relocated.. Vulnerable groups (poor, women
                         head of households, disabled head of households) are also present and will receive special
                         assistance. Based on the above, social impacts are significant for the An Giang and Kien Giang

                                                                   Page 12 of 21
                           sub-projects and not significant for sub-projects in Tra Vinh/Vinh Long.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The construction of proposed works will have long term impacts on current livelihood models
                           which may have to change to adapt to changing environmental conditions and climate change
                           impacts. The shift to new and more sustainable, climate-resilient livelihoods is expected to help
                           farmers diversify production and increase incomes. All farmers will receive support such as
                           training and transfer of knowledge from pilot livelihood demonstrations models, or by using
                           farmer cooperatives or collective groups to implement livelihood adaptation models in order to
                           reduce the risks for farmers. Some HH may be more reluctant to change (i.e. elderly, ethnic
                           minority households, poor and landless or land poor households) and will need specific support in
                           order for them to adapt their livelihood. Change in the institutional arrangement in agriculture in
                           the Mekong Delta is expected by using farmer cooperatives or collective groups to implement the
                           livelihood adaptations. Forming new cooperatives, or implementing through existing cooperatives,
                           will help to instill farmer confidence through collective risk sharing, particularly with risk-averse
                           farmers that may be unwilling to adopt the new adaptation models.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The alternatives of “without the subproject” and “with the subproject” and technical alternatives
                           have been analyzed for all the four first phase subprojects. The technical, financial, environmental
                           and social aspects, and construction methods have been considered in carrying out the alternative
                           analysis. Every effort has been made to significant impacts on the environment and society and to
                           avoid/minimize the need for land acquisition. The safe approach will apply for the subproject
                           identified during project implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to assess the overall environmental impacts of the proposed investment, including the four
Public Disclosure Copy




                           first phase subprojects and subprojects which may be selected during implementation, the
                           Borrower has prepared a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) and four ESIAs associated
                           with ESMPs for the four first phase subprojects have been prepared. Since not all subproject will
                           be identified during project preparation, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) has also been developed.

                           Regional Environmental Assessment (REA). Given the types and locations of the proposed
                           subprojects and the nature of social conditions and water resources management in the lower part
                           of Mekong Delta, the REA was conducted to provide strategic recommendations to guide the
                           Project design and ways to enhance potential positive impacts and mitigate potential negative
                           impacts. MARD and MONRE will follow recommendations of the REA that the project should
                           implement measures to monitor and manage the potential regional and regional/sub-regional
                           impacts by: (a) enhancing monitoring of surface water, groundwater and fisheries in project areas
                           during construction and operation of water control infrastructure, supported by groundwater use
                           studies; (b) monitoring of riverbank and coastal changes to determine the effectiveness of
                           investments in coastal protection; (c) establishing zones and flexible management for freshwater
                           and brackish aquaculture considering participatory approach for determining operating schedules
                           of water control infrastructure; (d) step-by-step implementation of livelihood models including
                           agricultural extension and market services; (e) involve MONRE and other agencies to use the
                           modeling developed for the project for coastal erosion, salinity intrusion and the transport of


                                                                     Page 13 of 21
                         sediments and nutrients to the upper delta floodplains; (f) incorporating lessons learned from
                         ongoing WB projects in the Mekong Delta; and (g) apply the lessons from the implementation of
                         the three first-year subprojects into the design and operation of subprojects in Phase II. Key
Public Disclosure Copy




                         follow-up activities will be taken by MARD and MONRE will involve project area environmental
                         and social surveys; GIS mapping of any problem areas or hotspots; hydrological modeling to
                         determine changes in flow in the upper delta, estuary, and peninsula; hydraulic modeling to
                         determine effectiveness of sluices, canals and water control infrastructure; reviewing yield (t/ha),
                         price and farm-based income for alternative cropping; and enhance flood and drought early
                         warning systems in relation to agriculture and aquaculture in the three hydro-ecological zones.

                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF has been prepared to
                         ensure that activities to be financed under the Project would not create adverse impacts on the
                         local environment and local communities, and that the residual and/or unavoidable impacts will be
                         adequately mitigated. The framework covers requirements for: (i) adequate safeguard screening
                         including impacts on natural habitats, forests, and physical cultural resources; (ii) impact
                         assessment and development of mitigation measures, including the Environmental Codes of
                         Practice (ECOP) for construction activities and chance finds procedures; (iii) procedures for
                         preparation, review, and clearance of safeguards instruments during implementation; (iv)
                         safeguards implementation, supervision, monitoring, and reporting; (v) institutional strengthening
                         and capacity building programs; and (vi) institutional arrangements and budget. The ESMF also
                         includes a screening checklist to exclude all investment proposals that may cause significant or
                         irreversible social and environmental impacts. A subproject will not be eligible for funding if it
                         would: (i) involve the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats; (ii) involve
                         significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas; (iii) contravene applicable
                         international environmental agreements; and (iv) be located in a physical cultural resources site
                         recognized at the national or provincial level. The ESMF is adopted by MARD.

                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social
                         Management Plans (ESMPs). The objectives of the ESMPs are to: i) ensure compliance with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applicable provincial, national, laws, regulations, standards, and guidelines; ii) ensure that there is
                         sufficient allocation of resources on the project budget for implementation of ESMP-related
                         activities; iii) ensure that environmental risks associated with a project property managed; iv)
                         respond to emerging and unforeseen environmental issues not identified in the subproject ESIA; v)
                         provide feedback for continual improvement in environmental performance. The ESMPs consist
                         of the set of good practice mitigation measures to address common construction related impacts
                         which referred to as Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOP), site-specific environmental and
                         social measures to deal with the impacts specific to the subproject areas and activities. The ESMPs
                         also include monitoring, and institutional measures to be taken during implementation and
                         operation to eliminate adverse environmental and social impacts, offset them, or reduce them to
                         acceptable levels. Each subproject ESMP includes a Compliance Framework which lays out the
                         role and responsibilities of the contractor and a penalty system to address no-compliance cases of
                         the contractor to the environmental management requirements of the subproject. The ESMPs
                         include the budgets for their implementation including for capacity building in project
                         environmental management. Some key mitigations measures at subproject level include:
                         •        Management of dredged materials. A sampling survey suggested that dredged materials
                         from excavation during construction of sluice gates and dredging of canals are mainly silt and clay
                         with high organic content and low levels of heavy metals. Therefore, the materials could be used
                         for dikes, roads, construction of houses. However, other areas may contain acid sulfate soil and /or
                         heavy metals and toxic chemicals and could be an issue. During detailed design PPMU will

                                                                    Page 14 of 21
                         prepare a Dredge Materials Disposal Plan (DMDP) containing: (a) detailed estimate of the nature
                         and quantity of dredged materials; (b) chemical analysis of the dredged materials; (c) indicative
                         lands for disposal; (d) communication plan for local residents informing the quality of the dredges
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and any restriction on the use for housing construction and gardening in case the materials found
                         to be unsuitable; and (e) inventory of planned road and dikes to transport the dredged materials.
                         •        Management of the use of pesticides and agrochemicals. The Government has been
                         promoting a number of integrated pest management (IPM) practices to reduce the use of pesticides
                         and agrochemicals both for rice, fruit, vegetable, and shrimp farming. Promotion of the IPM
                         practices will be continued and the project will support necessary training and scale up of the
                         activities found to be effective in the Mekong Delta. A Pest Management Framework (PMF) has
                         been prepared and included in the ESMF. It will be for preparation of Pest Management Plan for
                         relevant subprojects and/or activities that promote the use of toxic agrochemicals to be
                         implemented under Components 2, 3, and 4.
                         •        Management of water use conflict. To reduce potential water use conflicts, the size of the
                         sluices has been calculated to assure not only effective management of irrigation system but also
                         balance the water need of different water users. Optimum operation and maintenance of sluice
                         gates will be developed taking into account close communication and consultation with upstream
                         and downstream water users to ensure water need both in terms of quantity and quality to the key
                         water users.
                         •        Management of aquaculture wastes and disease. The project will adopt biosafety
                         approaches which do not use pesticides and insecticides nor antibiotics for rice-fish and forest-
                         shrimp models. For addressing environmental impacts of wastes and deasese in extensive and
                         intensive aquacuture models, the project will follow the Vietnam Good Aquaculture Guidelines
                         (VietGAP) and the EHS Industry Specific Guideline on Aquaculture. Capacity building and water
                         quality monitoring will also be a focus.
                         •        Temporary interruption of waterway traffic. Short closure periods of sluice gates will
                         minimise disruptive impacts on waterway transport. Closing of the sluice gates will be made in
                         close consultation with the local community and an annoucement will be made to the public at
                         least 1 month before the closing date.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The subproject owner, which are the provincial Departments of Agriculture and Rural
                         Development, through it Provincial Project Management Unit (PPMU), will include content of the
                         corresponding ESMPs into the standard tender documents to be used as a basis for contractors to
                         implement environmental management during construction phase. The Central Project
                         Management Unit (CPMU) will be responsible for overall supervision and monitoring of the
                         subproject including implementation of the ESMPs and will provide safeguard training to the
                         subproject staff. The CPMU will assign an Environmental Safeguard Coordinator (ESC) and the
                         Social Safeguard Coordinator (SSC) to assist in the coordination, supervision, and monitoring of
                         safeguard implementation activities. Implementation of the ESMPs on the ground will be
                         supervised monitored by Construction Supervision Consultant, Environmental Control Officer of
                         the PPMU, and the Independent Environmental Monitoring Consultant hired by the CPMU.

                         Social
                         Regional Social Assessment (RSA). The RSA focuses on regional analysis at project level with its
                         overall objective to better understand the impacted communities in order to improve community
                         engagement in long-term delta investment planning processes to ensure long-term sustainability
                         and client ownership of the proposed investments. It was done by engaging with subproject
                         communities in order to enhance the understanding of current climate change adaptation practices
                         and social impacts that may result from the proposed World Bank livelihood adaptation models.
                         The findings suggest that the construction of proposed works might cause a long term impacts on

                                                                  Page 15 of 21
                         current livelihood models which may have to change to adapt to the impacts of the proposed
                         investments (dyke reinforcement, sluice gates etc.), to the new environmental situation and to the
                         impacts on climate change. With the shift to new adaptation models it is expected that farmers will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         diversify their production and increase their income. These new livelihoods will also be more
                         sustainable and farmers will reduce their vulnerabilities to climate change and environment. Some
                         HH may be more reluctant to change (i.e. elderly, ethnic minority households, poor and landless or
                         land poor households) and will need specific support in order for them to adapt their livelihood. To
                         address these non-safeguard issues, the report proposes recommendations to address climate,
                         environmental and social vulnerabilities of the Project. At subproject level, SIAs were prepared to
                         include social aspects into the project design.
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF has been prepared in accordance to the Bank’s
                         policies and guidelines governing preparation and implementation of subprojects and/or
                         components. It also lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced
                         persons (DP), modes of compensation and rehabilitation, potential relocation of these persons,
                         approval procedures, participation features and grievance procedures. The RPF also includes
                         guidance on screening, policy application implication for potentially linked activities and for
                         subprojects identified in project implementation.
                         Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF). The EMPF sets out guidelines to: (i) ensure that
                         the EM people receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate; (ii) avoid
                         potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority communities; and (iii) when such adverse
                         impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects. The EMPF also
                         includes guidance on screening, policy application implication for subprojects identified in project
                         implementation.

                         Resettlement Plan (RP) and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMPD). Three RAPs and two
                         EMDPs for year 1 subprojects have been prepared. Each RAP addresses adverse social impacts
                         due to involuntary resettlement and lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of
                         the affected persons (APs), entitlements, legal and institutional framework, modes of
                         compensation and rehabilitation, stakeholders participation, grievance procedures, and monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         RPs include the measures to ensure that displaced people are: (i) informed about the options
                         regarding resettlement; (ii) consulted and offered alternative resettlement choices; and (iii)
                         provided with effective compensation and livelihood restoration. RAPs were prepared in
                         accordance to the guidelines set forth in the project’s RPF. Three full RPs (An Giang, Kien Giang
                         and Tra Vinh-Vinh Long) have been prepared. RAP for Ben Tre subproject is not required as the
                         land acquisition for the 5 proposed sluice gates have been completed in another Bank funded
                         project closed in 2013 (Vietnam Natural Disaster Risk Management Project – P073361). The total
                         estimated cost of RP implementation is 304billion VND equivalent to 13,600,000 USD.

                         The EMDP includes a summary of the SA, consultations, the scope of impacts and mitigation
                         measures, activities for the enhancement of project implementing agencies and estimated costs for
                         the Plan. Each EMDP addresses adverse social impacts on ethnic minorities and proposes
                         measures to mitigate impacts and to maximize benefits. EMDPs have been prepared in accordance
                         to the guideline set forth in the project’s EMPF. In the two subprojects (Tra Vinh – Vinh Long and
                         Kien Giang) with EM present in the project area, no EM household is affected by land acquisition.
                         These EM households are potentially affected by the subproject due to the proposed livelihood
                         adaptation models and may need specific support to change/adapt their livelihood. The free, prior
                         and informed consultation with EM show that there is broad community support from EM peoples
                         for the subproject implementation. Development activities have been proposed to maximize
                         benefits for EM. These EM development activities include: i) Training to raise awareness of the

                                                                  Page 16 of 21
                          community on husbandry and agricultural production; ii) Training to raise awareness of the
                          community on climate change and adaption to changes in water resources, ecological and social.
                          iii) Livelihood Development Training; iv) Develop livelihood models, with the participation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          organizations, social organizations, coordinate the selection of models site, support technical
                          guidance, implementation, monitoring and replicable results. Estimated budget for these
                          development activities are 2,969,250,000 VND (132,000 USD) and 1,413,250,000 VND 62,811
                          USD) for Tra Vinh – Vinh Long and Kien Giang subprojects respectively.

                          Social Safeguard Implementation, Monitoring, and Training. All implementing agencies (IAs),
                          (MARD, CPO, PPMUs), through its dedicated social staff/unit, will be responsible for
                          implementing and monitoring the social safeguard instruments (RPF, EMPF, EMDP, RP). The
                          implementation of social safeguard instruments will be internally monitored by the IAs in close
                          coordination with the respective Peoples' Committees at different administrative levels and
                          externally supervised by independent monitoring consultant. Implementing agencies must to
                          ensure that activities related to social safeguards will be properly tracked, reported and
                          documented. Independent monitoring consultant will be mobilized by MARD around the same
                          time as implementation of project activities and will be retained until the end of the project/sub-
                          project. The performance and compliance to social safeguard instruments will also be subject to
                          regular supervision from the Bank Task Team (at least twice a year). During the project
                          implementation, appropriate trainings will be provided to CPO, PPMUs, consultants and local
                          community representatives on the safeguard instruments to be applied to the Project. This includes
                          a week long hands on training in the project area on Cumulative Impact Assessment and the
                          implementation of ESIAs to be provided to counter-parts and main consultants.

                          Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM): Each subproject safeguard instruments (ESMP, RAP,
                          EMDP) also includes a GRM to provide the framework within which complaints about safeguards
                          compliance can be handled, grievances can be addressed and disputes can be settled quickly. The
                          GRM will be in place before the subproject construction commences.
                          Within the Vietnamese legal framework citizen rights to complain are protected. As part of overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                          implementation of the subproject, the GRM will be established by Environmental and Social Unit
                          of the PPMU. It will be readily accessible, handle grievances and resolve them at the lowest level
                          as quickly as possible. The key process and elements of the GRM include, procedures for
                          submission of complaints and grievance resolution, responsible person, and contact information.

                          The complaints can be received in verbal or writing forms, by telephone, fax, or email. They can
                          be sent to the local authorities, contractor, construction supervision engineer, PPMU, or the
                          independent environmental monitoring consultants and will be logged in the record system and
                          sent to responsible person for taking action. To facilitate complain process, subproject information
                          leaflets will be prepared and distributed at the subproject sites to provide practical information
                          about grievances to local residents including contacts and addresses.

                           The GRM also refers to the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS) and clearly indicates that
                           subproject affected communities and individuals may submit their complaints to the WB’s
                           independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harms occurred, or could occur, as a
                           result of WB non-compliance with its safeguards policies and procedures. The website address to
                           provide information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s GRS is also provided.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                    Page 17 of 21
                           Public Consultation and Information Disclosure. Two rounds of consultations were organized in
                           October 2015 and January 2016. The affected people and communities and other relevant
                           stakeholders have been consulted on the REA, RSA, ESMF, RPF, EMPF, first phase subproject
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESIAs and ESMPs, RPs, and EMDPs. The feedbacks from the consultations have been
                           incorporated into the project design, the final draft REA, RSA, ESMF, RPF, EMPF, subproject
                           ESIAs, ESMPs, RPs, and EMDPs. Draft version of environmental and social safeguards
                           instruments have been disclosed both locally at MARD, the PPMUs, and subproject areas, and
                           through the InfoShop in Washington, DC on January 26 and 27, 2016, respectively. The final
                           environmental and social safeguards instruments will be disclosed locally and at the InfoShop,
                           respectively. The Appraisal Stage Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet of the project will also be
                           disclosed at the InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     27-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  27-Jan-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     17-Mar-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                         26-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     27-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  27-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                         27-Jan-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Intensive consultation of RPF and first year RAPs were carried out in October 2015
                                         and January 2016. In-country disclosure was made on January 27.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     27-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  27-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                         27-Jan-2016
                           Comments: Intensive consultation of EMPF and first year EMDPs were carried out in October
                                         2015 and January 2016. In-country disclosure was made on January 27.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the

                                                                   Page 18 of 21
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?



                                                                     Page 19 of 21
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                          280 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          3012 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                   Page 20 of 21
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anjali Acharya,Binh Thang Cao,Greg J. Browder
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                     Date: 26-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                 Date: 27-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 21 of 21
