                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC17552

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                          Project ID:      P155229
                            Project Name:      Lesotho Transport Infrastructure and Connectivity Project (LTIC) (P155229)
                            Task Team          Sevara Melibaeva
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Mar-2017                      Estimated        11-Jul-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI07                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                     Total Bank Financing:         30.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  30.00
                              Total                                                                        30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective of the Transport Infrastructure and Connectivity Project is to
                           improve access to markets and promote job creation in targeted areas of Lesotho, whilst supporting
                           improvements in road safety. This is to be realized by: (a) improving road access through application
                           of output and performance based contracts (OPRC) and construction of footbridges; (b) improving
                           road safety management capacity and mitigating road safety risks; and (c) building capacity and
                           strengthening institutions in the transport sector.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1: Improving the road infrastructure access. The first component will comprise the
                           physical works for road rehabilitation and maintenance to improve road connections of population to
                         social services and markets and to ensure sustainability of road assets:

                         a)       Component 1(a): The introduction of output and performance based contracts (OPRC) for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation and maintenance on the small network of priority secondary gravel roads in high
                         agricultural production and tourism growth areas. The project envisions supporting the Road
                         Directorate to implement OPRC approach for road maintenance for the first time in the country,
                         taking into account international best practice, as well as regulatory and competitive concerns, and to
                         set the stage for rolling out this approach across the country. This is a new concept for Lesotho,
                         which would make road maintenance a more attractive business for private sector contractors and
                         provide an opportunity for a more cost-efficient use of public spending in road sector by shifting
                         some of the risks and responsibility for the quality of infrastructure provision to the private sector.
                         This sub-component is intended to promote both short-term (during rehabilitation) and longer-term
                         (during maintenance phase) employment opportunities in road construction industry. The bidding
                         documents and contracts will be designed to include specifications for the contractor to employ the
                         local population in the road works, specifically encouraging women to apply, and provide sufficient
                         training to allow those that are unskilled to have an equal chance;

                         b)      Component 1(b): The construction of footbridges to provide the needed all-weather
                         connection over a river or challenging terrain access to education, health services and markets, to the
                         settlements, currently cut off from the nearest road connections, women in particular. The component
                         provisionally proposes to construct 19 footbridges; and

                         c)      Component 1(c): Treatment of accident blackspots on selected priority locations with highest
                         road accident risk. This sub-component will be included if funding permits.

                         This component also includes the cost of the following studies and services:

                         a)       Consulting services for an assessment study for introduction of Output and Performance-
                         based contracting on a selected number of secondary road networks;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b)       Consulting services to prepare design and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of
                         the selected footbridges (including the preparation of Resettlement Action Plan if required);
                         c)       Consulting Services for monitoring/supervision of the OPRC-contracts; and
                         d)       Consulting services to carry out identification and design of accident blackspots.


                         Component 2: Improving road safety. This component will address road safety in a more integrated
                         manner in order to achieve the Government's objective to meet the global decade of road safety aim
                         of halving road deaths between 2010 and 2020. The following activities will be supported under this
                         component:

                         a)       Component 2(a): Support for capacity building and institutional strengthening of the Road
                         Safety Department of MoPWT and operationalization of NRSC. The Road Safety Department is
                         effectively the lead agency for road safety in Lesotho, and provides equipment and support to the
                         traffic police and other government departments. Following the planned launch of the National Road
                         Safety Council (NRSC), establishment of which was recommended under the ITP, this Department
                         will become its secretariat. This sub-component will potentially support the RSD and NRSC,
                         contingent on the full operationalization of the latter and completion of road safety reforms initiated
                         under ITP. It will also support establishment of GIS-enabled system for road accident reporting
                         across the road network;
                         b)       Component 2(b): Establishment of an integrated system for licensing drivers and vehicles,
                         including enforcement records. Whilst principally offeringimprovement to the management and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         revenue collection procedures for these services, there will also be road safety benefits from
                         improved driver licensing and vehicle inspection. This sub-component will include support with the
                         implementation of the new Integrated Vehicle Registration and Drivers' Licensing System together
                         with a Traffic Management Information System entitled the Lesotho Integrated Transport
                         Information System (LITIS), under which vehicle inspections are expected to be contracted out to the
                         private sector. Currently, this responsibility lies with the Ministry of Public Works and Transport
                         through its Department of Traffic and Transport (DTT). Under the ITP, an assessment of vehicle
                         inspection and driver licensing system recommended that the process be privatized (SweRoad, 2014),
                         however, no progress has been made since towards it. The proposed project will address this issue,
                         should the government decide to move forward with this recommendation.

                         This component also includes the cost of the following studies and services:
                         (a) Needs assessment and system specification for establishing LITIS.


                         Component 3: Implementation support and capacity building. This component will include the
                         necessary project implementation support, including implementation of citizen engagement
                         mechanisms, HIV/AIDs and gender targeted activities, and capacity building support to the RD and
                         MoPWT to effectively roll out, administer and monitor OPRC contracts and mitigate road safety
                         risks:

                         a)     Consulting services to prepare the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the project;
                         b)     Consulting services to assist the MoPWT in preparation of the National Transport Master
                         Plan (NTMP);
                         c)     Project implementation support to the MoPWT and Roads Directorate, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of citizen engagement mechanisms and HIV/AIDS and gender targeted activities;
                         d)     Independent technical audits of the civil works implemented under the project; and
                         e)     Capacity building and training to the staff of RD, RF, and MoPWT in OPRC contract
                         management and road safety measures, including accident blackspots.


                         Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (with an initial zero dollar
                         allocation. In case this component is activated, it will be completed financed with IDA funds). This
                         component is being proposed for incorporation into the project with zero allocation, given that
                         Lesotho remains vulnerable to climate change with rising temperatures and rain deficits. Lesotho has
                         declared a National Emergency as a result of prolonged drought experienced during the 2015/2016
                         planting season induced by the impact of El Nino. This component allows for the possibility to
                         access resources for eligible expenditures in cases of emergency.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is likely to be assigned Environmental Assessment (EA) Category B - Partial
                         Assessment; considering the potential environmental and social impacts of project activities, which
                         are, road rehabilitation and maintenance, and construction of foot bridges. Anticipated project
                         investments (road rehabilitation and maintenance) are expected to induce land acquisition and trigger
                           the following polices: i) Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01; ii) Physical Cultural Resources OP/
                           BP 4.11; and iii) Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The civil works to be financed by the project
                           (secondary gravel roads and access roads as well as the footbridges) will be located in areas with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           high agricultural production and tourism potential so as to facilitate access to social services (schools
                           and hospitals) and markets. Currently, the Mokhotlong District located in the mountainous
                           northeastern part of Lesotho is being considered by the Borrower as the potential project area, subject
                           to confirmation. The district boasts the highest terrain in the Maloti Range and forms the source of
                           the Senqu River, Lesotho's largest river and primary watershed. The area is known to be mostly rural
                           with a population of approximately 7,000. With regards to the road sections to be financed through
                           parallel financing by the OPEC International Fund for International Development (OFID), the
                           respective assessment studies and safeguards instruments will be supported under the TICP and
                           therefore the Bank's policies will be followed accordingly.

                           Site-specific safeguard instruments will be prepared once the site locations and detailed designs for
                           the physical works are identified. In the interim period, an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted upon,
                           endorsed by the Ministry of Environment and disclosed prior to appraisal, in line with OP 4.11/BP
                           and OP/BP 4.12. Project road selection process will also include consultations with all stakeholders;
                           at national at local administration level; at local community level, as well as at civil society level.
                           These environmental and social safeguards instruments related to footbridges and the removal of
                           road accident blackspots will be confirmed during the preliminary assessment to be developed in the
                           respective design and feasibility studies.

                           The preparation of the site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), the
                           Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), if
                           required, for the secondary road rehabilitation and maintenance works will be included as part of the
                           OPRC's design/build package. The OPRC contractor will be responsible for the preparation of
                           detailed design and once it is completed, will also carry out the ESIA and RAP (if required). The
                           site-specific safeguard instruments for the construction of footbridges and removal of accident
Public Disclosure Copy




                           blackspots will be prepared after confirmation of exact site locations and completion of respective
                           detailed designs.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Lesotho Roads Directorate (RD) will be responsible for preparing, implementing and monitoring
                           of all the safeguard instruments for the project. The RD has an Environmental Unit comprising of an
                           environment and social development specialist with sufficient capacity to oversee the environmental
                           and social performance of the project. During the preparation of the ESMF and the RPF, a thorough
                           assessment on the capacity of the RD to implement, monitor and report on the prescribed mitigation
                           measures will be carried out and appropriate capacity building plan will be recommended to
                           strengthen further the environmental and social management capacity of the RD.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)
                           Majbritt Fiil-Flynn (GSU07)
                           Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment   Yes        OP 4.01 is triggered as the project under component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                            1 will finance civil works which entail rehabilitation
                                                               and maintenance of approximately 200 km of
                                                               secondary gravel roads, access roads and
                                                               construction of nineteen (19) footbridges. Based on
                                                               the initial screening of the proposed project activities
                                                               and a preliminary assessment of the baseline
                                                               characteristics of potential project sites, the project is
                                                               classified as an Environmental Risk Category B. The
                                                               rehabilitation and maintenance of the roads and the
                                                               construction of the footbridges will likely generate
                                                               construction related adverse environmental and
                                                               social risks that are site-specific, largely reversible,
                                                               can be readily addressed through mitigation
                                                               measures and, therefore, the project would require a
                                                               partial environmental and social assessment.

                                                               The environmental assessment for the project will be
                                                               carried out at four (4) different levels of analysis as
                                                               follows:

                                                               (i) At the overall project level, the Borrower is
                                                               currently preparing an Environmental and Social
                                                               Framework (ESMF) which will, (i) describe the
                                                               physical, biological and social baseline
                                                               characteristics of the Project Area of Influence and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               its surroundings, (ii) define the eligibility criteria for
                                                               the civil works, (iii) describe procedures for
                                                               screening and scoping potential positive and adverse
                                                               impacts for all proposed investments, and where
                                                               appropriate, develop mitigation and monitoring
                                                               measures. An ESMF is also being prepared because
                                                               the specific location of the gravel secondary roads
                                                               and access roads as well as the associated nature and
                                                               scope of the civil works are yet to be confirmed. It is,
                                                               therefore, not possible to ascertain with absolute
                                                               certainty the nature and degree of environmental
                                                               risks at this stage to recommend the appropriate level
                                                               of environmental assessment and its associated
                                                               safeguard instruments for mitigating the site-specific
                                                               risks.

                                                               (ii) The site-specific environmental and social
                                                               assessment for the secondary gravel and access roads
                                                               under the Output- and Performance-based Road
                                                               Contracts (OPRC) will be carried out by the OPRC
                                                             contractor during project implementation as part of
                                                             the detailed design based on the findings from the
                                                             screening described in the overall project ESMF;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             (iii) The project will support the construction of
                                                             nineteen (19) footbridges. Seventeen (17) out of the
                                                             19 will be constructed using standard design
                                                             drawings which were prepared based on the existing
                                                             knowledge of the Lesotho river morphology and
                                                             lessons learned from implementing similar
                                                             footbridges. Once the locations for the footbridges
                                                             are confirmed, the consultant preparing the ESMF
                                                             will screen the footbridges for environmental impacts
                                                             according to the screening procedures described in
                                                             the ESMF and recommend appropriate
                                                             environmental assessment in line with the level of
                                                             risks identified and also recommend the appropriate
                                                             safeguard instruments to be prepared (which could
                                                             either be site-specific ESIA or ESMP depending on
                                                             the level of risks identified); and

                                                             (iv) The two (2) bridges crossing the Hlotse and
                                                             Senqu Rivers will be footbridges: Because of the
                                                             width of the two rivers, the two footbridges will
                                                             require special design that conforms to the river
                                                             morphology and its associated baseline
                                                             characteristics. Currently, the design of the two
                                                             bridges is ongoing and once completed, screening for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental impacts will be carried out and
                                                             appropriate environmental assessment in line with
                                                             the level of risks identified as well as the appropriate
                                                             safeguard instruments to be prepared (either site-
                                                             specific ESIA or ESMP depending on the level of
                                                             risks identified).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Given that the specific geographical location and the
                                                             scope of the roads and footbridges are yet to be
                                                             confirmed, the environmental assessment that is
                                                             currently being carried out in preparation of the
                                                             ESMF, will guide the project activities to ensure that
                                                             they do not alter or cause destruction of any critical
                                                             or sensitive natural habitats especially wetlands. A
                                                             preliminary baseline assessment which was carried
                                                             out during the preparation of the project, confirmed
                                                             that the existing wetlands in Lesotho occupy a
                                                             relatively small footprint and are not classified as
                                                             critical or sensitive ecosystems. The Lesotho Roads
                                                             Directorate confirmed that engineering methods such
                                                              as the use of gabions, etc. are normally applied by
                                                              contractors to mitigate against destruction of
                                                              wetlands during construction of roads and ensure the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              effective functioning of the hydrological system. The
                                                              environmental risk for OP 4.04 is therefore minimal
                                                              and should there be a chance of encountering a
                                                              wetland during the construction of roads and
                                                              footbridges, the risk is manageable through the
                                                              application of known mitigation measures. In
                                                              addition, the sub-project screening process and site-
                                                              specific environmental assessment to be undertaken
                                                              for specific roads and footbridges will provide
                                                              further confirmation. The project team will also
                                                              consider potential opportunities to generate positive
                                                              impacts on natural habitats especially wetlands
                                                              through project activities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The project will not support civil works located
                                                              within forested areas or plantations as defined under
                                                              OP 4.36. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project will not involve procurement of
                                                              pesticides or fertilizers and does not have the
                                                              potential to lead to increased use of pesticides or
                                                              fertilizers. Therefore, OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   OP 4.11 is triggered given the likelihood of chance
                         OP/BP 4.11                           finds in conjunction with earth works and
                                                              excavations, or the encounter of graveyard sites, in
                                                              the right of way, as was the case in the previous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Integrated Transport Project. The ESMF will include
                                                              Chance Find Procedures (CFP) as well as measures
                                                              to screen for and manage potential impacts on
                                                              cultural heritage or property that could be affected by
                                                              neighborhood development plans.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no indigenous
                         4.10                                 people within the project area of influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Component 1 Civil works in road rehabilitation and
                         BP 4.12                              maintenance may induce limited land acquisition in
                                                              the form of strips of land in the right of way, which
                                                              will include rocks, grass, trees and farmland. No
                                                              physical displacement is expected. A RAP, if
                                                              required, will be prepared during project
                                                              implementation by the OPRC contractor responsible
                                                              for design/build, once the road sites are known and
                                                              the detailed design is completed.

                                                              An RPF will be prepared during project preparation
                                                                                                                        as the roads to be rehabilitated and the foot bridges
                                                                                                                        are yet to be confirmed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, nor
                                                                                                                        will it rely on the performance of an existing dam or
                                                                                                                        a dam under construction, as defined in the policy.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not expected to affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project will not finance any activities located in
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                any known areas under territorial dispute as defined
                                                                                                                        in OP 7.60. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Feb-2017
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The procurement for the consultancy services to prepare the Environmental and Social Framework
                                      (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been launched and the reports are
                                      expected to be completed, consulted upon and disclosed before project appraisal. The site-specific
                                      ESIA and RAP (if required) for the road rehabilitation and maintenance sub-component will be
                                      prepared during implementation as part of the design-build contract under OPRC approach. The
                                      site-specific safeguard instruments for the construction of footbridges will be prepared after
                                      completion of respective detailed designs.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sevara Melibaeva
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                                                                               Date: 04-Jun-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 06-Sep-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
