                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16235
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P151416
                            Project Name:      Urban Development Project (P151416)
                            Task Team          Kremena M. Ionkova,Paula Restrepo Cadavid
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Dec-2015                       Estimated   15-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU09                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (20%), Public administration- Other
                                              social services (30%), Solid waste management (20%), Gene ral water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (10%), Urban planning and housing policy
                                              (10%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      14.40           Total Bank Financing:                  12.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          2.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 6.60
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   5.40
                              Total                                                                                      14.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO of the project is to improve the quality of municipal services and pilot energy efficiency


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         and seismic resilience retrofits of urban infrastructure in participating towns.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Proposed project will consist of the following components:

                         Component A: Urban Development. This component will finance activities aimed at improving
                         service provision in participating towns. Participating towns are selected and prioritized based on
                         their (i) municipal service access gaps; (ii) population and population growth; (iii) geographical
                         distribution; (iv) level of poverty; and (v) existing donors’ involvement in the sector. This component
                         is composed of the following sub-components:
                                   Sub-component A1: Municipal Services. This sub-component will finance activities for the
                         upgrading and/or expansion of municipal infrastructure in the areas of water supply, solid waste
                         management, and street lighting. Specific activities identified during preparation include activities
                         aimed at improving water supply (Kerben, Sulukta), switching to more energy-efficient street
                         lighting options (Toktogul and Baluckchy), and improving solid waste collection service in most
                         participating towns. Feasibility Studies for water supply activities in Kerben and Sulukta and street
                         lighting rehabilitation in Toktogul and Baluckchy are underway and detailed designs are expected to
                         be developed prior to project effectiveness.
                                   Sub-component A2: Safe and Energy Efficient Social Infrastructure Pilot. This sub-
                         component will focus on improving the seismic safety and energy efficiency of social infrastructure.
                         Activities will include retrofitting of school buildings to improve their energy performance, increase
                         comfort levels and strengthen their seismic resistance. Since energy efficiency improvements and
                         seismic rehabilitation of social infrastructure have not yet been carried out in the Kyrgyz Republic,
                         this sub-component is designed to demonstrate the benefits associated with energy efficiency
                         improvements (e.g., energy savings, social co-benefits); build market capacity for preparation and
                         implementation of energy efficiency improvements and seismic rehabilitation of public buildings;
                         enhance awareness of such activities; and establish institutional capacity in participating towns to
                         incorporate energy efficiency as part of their investment planning. The pilot buildings have been
                         selected based on agreed criteria. Pre-feasibility studies are being conducted in these buildings to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identify the most viable energy efficiency measures. Economic and financial analysis of identified
                         activities have been conducted to assure that benefits streams outweigh project costs. A feasibility
                         study analyzing options for seismic retrofitting and detailed designs is expected to be completed prior
                         to the project’s effectiveness.

                         Component B: Institutional Strengthening. This component will support the Government’s broad-
                         based urban policy reform agenda at the national level with specific interventions at the local level
                         aimed at strengthening service provision capacity in participating towns. At the national level, the
                         project will support the Government’s broad-based urban policy with a focus on existing urban
                         planning practices and the development of a roadmap to improve urban and spatial development in
                         the Kyrgyz Republic. Institutional strengthening activities at the national level will be complemented
                         by a separate grant-funded activity through GFDRR which aims at strengthening disaster resilience
                         through urban planning and also by a grant-funded program by the Korean Green Growth Trust Fund
                         which provides technical assistance to move towards a greener urban development of cities in the
                         country.
                         At the local level, activities will include: (i) development of Performance Improvement Plans for
                         utilities in participating towns; (ii) targeted technical assistance and training for the institutional
                         strengthening of participating towns to improve the quality and efficiency of services provision and
                         promote satisfactory operation and maintenance of existing assets and project activities (in water
                         supply, solid waste, and energy efficiency of municipal infrastructure) and support participating


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         towns to build municipal dialogues to address local needs; (iii) the procurement and installation of
                         financial management and planning tools (i.e., automated customer registers, billing and collection)
                         to improve the managerial and revenue generation capacity of participating towns; and (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of energy savings action plans in participating towns building upon the urban energy
                         efficiency assessment undertaken with the Tool for Rapid Assessment of City Energy (TRACE)
                         during project preparation. Institutional strengthening activities at the local level will be
                         complemented by a separate grant funded by ESMAP to strengthen the local capacity to plan and
                         implement energy efficiency activities. The latter includes training for local service providers on how
                         to conduct energy audits and for design and construction companies on the design and
                         implementation of energy-efficient retrofits.

                         Note: the Performance Improvement Plans will outline a series of targets in the short and medium
                         term to improve water utilities’ performance and will include specific actions needed to reduce water
                         losses, improve quality of services, increase overall operational efficiency cost-recovery.

                         Component C: Implementation Support (USD 0.9 million). This component will support
                         implementation of the project including: (i) contracting of local experts to assist the implementation
                         unit and participating towns in the implementation of the project activities, (ii) the maintenance of
                         the Monitoring and Evaluation System (M&E), created under the BOUIP project, to continuously
                         monitor and evaluate the performance and results of the project; (iii) the project-related operating
                         costs of the implementing unit including consulting fees and in-country travel expenditures; (iv)
                         project operating costs including contributions towards the cost of backstopping assistance by ARIS
                         staff (the so-called administrative pool of ARIS); and (v) an annual audit of project accounts.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nationwide in scope but the physical investments will be undertaken in four towns –
                         Sulukta, Kerben, Baluckchy, Toktogul. All these will be implemented on public land and within
                         existing rights of way.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed UDP is expected to contribute to Climate Change mitigation through the safe and
                         Energy Efficient Social Infrastructure sub-component A2. This subcomponent is expected to yield
                         energy savings and contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions through the implementation of a
                         pilot to improve the Energy Efficiency of municipal infrastructure. Institutional strengthening
                         activities at the national level will be complemented by a separate grant-funded activity through
                         GFDRR which aims at strengthening disaster resilience through urban planning and also by a grant-
                         funded program by the Korean Green Growth Trust Fund which provides technical assistance to
                         move towards a greener urban development of cities in the country. Finally, when feasible,
                         investment activity will be screened to identify potential climate change and disaster risks and
                         integrate appropriate resilience measures.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
                         Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Effective measures have been put in place under the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     BOUIP to address and closely monitor the safeguards



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                           issues. An Environmental and Social Management
                                                           Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed prior to
                                                           appraisal. Each investment to be financed under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           project will be reviewed for safeguard risks in line with
                                                           the OP4.01. For activities where designs are completed
                                                           prior to appraisal, site-specific Environmental
                                                           Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared by ARIS and
                                                           disclosed also prior to appraisal. In addition, separate
                                                           Social Assessment (SA) will be carried out by ARIS in
                                                           the areas with highest conflict stressors and extensive
                                                           activities under UDP. The Project is expected to have
                                                           limited negative environmental and social impacts, as
                                                           physical works will be undertaken to only construct/
                                                           rehabilitate local facilities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural           No    The environmental screening process will screen for the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11              presence of physical cultural resources. In addition,
                                                           chance find procedures will be included in all works
                                                           contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       Indigenous Peoples' as per OP 4.10 are not present in the
                         BP 4.10                           project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12                        disclosed in the WB InfoShop and in-country prior to
                                                           appraisal. No activity designs, which may result in
                                                           involuntary resettlement, were completed prior to
                                                           appraisal, and consequently, no RAPs were prepared at
                                                           that time. Once activity designs are finalized, and if their
                                                           implementation may lead to involuntary resettlement,
                                                           RAPs will be prepared as needed during the UDP
                                                           implementation
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   Yes   The project will support activities that take place on trans-
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              boundary waterways as defined in OP 7.50. (i.e., the basin
                                                           of the Syr-Darya or other rivers).It is anticipated that
                                                           investments will not (i) cause appreciable harm to the
                                                           other riparian as it will not adversely change the quality or
                                                           quantity of water flows, and (ii) it will not be appreciably
                                                           harmed by the other riparian possible water use. Further,
                                                           the project aims to improve efficiency of water use and to
                                                           substantially reduce municipalities’ high water


                                                            Page 4 of 8
                                                                        consumption rates. Exception to the notification
                                                                        requirements of OP 7.50 has been granted because the
                                                                        proposed activities do not attempt to modify waterways
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        nor significantly increase water abstraction volumes,
                                                                        leaving the water rights of other riparian countries
                                                                        unaffected.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project has no significant and/or irreversible impact. Its only minor impact will be temporary
                              nuisances resulting from construction activities, and may include: (i) increased pollution due to
                              construction waste; (ii) generation of dust, noise, and vibration due to the movement of
                              construction vehicles and machinery; (iii) associated risks due to improper disposal of construction
                              waste and asbestos, or minor operational or accidental spills of fuel and lubricants from the
                              construction machinery; (iv) improper reinstatement of construction sites upon completion of
                              works. All these potential environmental impacts are readily identifiable, small in scale, and
                              minimal in impact and can be effectively prevented, minimized, or mitigated by including into the
                              work contracts specific measures to be taken by contractors under close supervision of compliance
                              by ARIS. Use of construction materials that are hazardous to human health (e.g., asbestos,) will
                              not be permitted. Old mercury bulbs will be collected by a specialized company and recycled/
                              disposed of according to hazardous waste handling standards.
                              Since the project supported activities will take place on transboundary waterways (i.e., the basin of
                              the Syr-Darya or other rivers), OP 7.50, will be triggered. However, project interventions are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                              expected to adversely affect water quality or quantity to downstream riparian states. It is
                              anticipated that activities will not (i) cause appreciable harm to the other riparian states as it will
                              not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows, and (ii) will not be appreciably
                              harmed by other riparian states possible water use. Exception to the notification requirements of
                              OP 7.50 has been granted because the proposed activities do not attempt to modify waterways nor
                              significantly increase water abstraction volumes, leaving the water rights of other riparian
                              countries unaffected. However, ARIS will maintain dialog with the Bank for additional guidance
                              on any actions as per OP 7.50 that would apply to any activity that could potentially raise this
                              issue.
                              The project supports a citizen engagement (CE) framework which establishes citizen engagement
                              processes at three levels and includes the following activities: (i) an “information for citizens”
                              campaign; (ii) public meetings and engagement with municipal councils; (iii) enhancing
                              community voice, and (iv) engagement with the association of municipalities of the Kyrgyz
                              Republic. These activities will foster exchange of knowledge and information among different
                              stakeholders about the project objectives, benefits, processes, results and citizen feedback. The
                              project includes a grievance redress mechanism to facilitate feedback and responsiveness. This
                              active engagement with citizens will help ensure the project responds actively to safeguard risks.
                              A conflict filter will be applied. Specifically, ARIS will explain to beneficiaries and the public the
                              benefits from the project; apply clear criteria for the selection of activities; disseminate grievance
                              redress standards and measures; carry out targeted conflict assessments in some geographic areas.


                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                           In addition, separate Social Assessment (SA) will be carried out by ARIS in the areas with highest
                           conflict stressors and extensive activities under UDP. The SAs will be prepared in addition to EA/
                           EIA. The findings and recommendations of the SAs will be reflected in the site-specific ESMPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project has triggered OP/BP 4.12. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared ,
                           consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N.A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N.A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project consistent with
                           Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements for both the Kyrgyz Republic and the World Bank
                           was prepared by ARIS and reviewed and approved by the Kyrgyz Forestry and Environment
                           Preservation Agency and found satisfactory by the World Bank. The ESMF was disclosed in the
                           country on December 2, 2015, and the English-language version was received by the Bank and
                           sent to the Bank Infoshop on the same day, i.e. December 5, 2015. Similarly, an Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF) that describes the Bank’s resettlement policy, any differences with
                           national laws, the requirements applicable to resettlement, the details valuation procedures,
                           compensation, and a grievance redress mechanism was prepared and disclosed in the country on
                           November 2, 2015, 2015, and on the Bank Infoshop on November 5, 2015. Both, the ESMF and
                           the RPF will be incorporated into the Project Operation Manual.
                           The implementing agency (ARIS) is responsible for project preparation and implementation given
                           its long experience with Bank-financed operations, capacity in following Bank procurement,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financial management and safeguard procedures. ARIS has built a positive track record in
                           safeguards monitoring and compliance throughout the implementation of Bishkek and Osh Urban
                           Infrastructure Project (BOUIP) and the earlier Small Towns Infrastructure and Capacity Building
                           Project. ARIS will carry out project implementation in close cooperation with the participating
                           towns and key counterparts and will be responsible for managing the implementation of the
                           project, including the continuous monitoring and evaluation, the control of safeguards compliance,
                           as well as routine communications with the World Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           ARIS has carried out public consultations for groups that may be impacted by activities before
                           finalization of EMP. These groups are usually represented by those who live near construction
                           site, as well as by representatives of local NGOs, and other stakeholders. ARIS will conduct at
                           least one public consultation with groups affected by the activity prior to completion of the
                           individual, site-specific EMPs. Usually, these groups consist of people living near the activity site,
                           and any local NGOs. Additionally, if needed, broader consultation will be done involving radio or
                           TV stations.
                           ARIS has carried out public consultations on the RPF to inform potential project-affected people
                           and other stakeholders about potential resettlement due to project activities and to obtain their
                           feedback.



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Nov-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  02-Nov-2015
                           Comments: ARIS Website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Nov-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  02-Nov-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kremena M. Ionkova,Paula Restrepo Cadavid
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: David N. Sislen (PMGR)              Date: 03-Dec-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
