                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC16052

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Armenia                         Project ID:       P158359
                            Project Name:   AGRICULTURE POLICY MONITORING AND EVALUATION
                                            CAPACITY BUILDING PROJECT
                            Team Leader(s): Bekzod Shamsiev,Arusyak Alaverdyan
                            Estimated Date 11-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GFA03                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.8                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                1.8
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The broad objective of the PRIME window of the Japanese PHRD technical assistance grants
                           program is to enhance the use evidence-based decision making in government systems, by
                           strengthening the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems of recipient ministries in priority
                           sectors. Agriculture has been selected as a priority area for grant support, along with health, nutrition,
                           population and urban development. Armenia's Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is viewed as a strong
                           candidate for support due to its demonstrated commitment to policy reform, its awareness of the need
                           to improve its capacity for policy analysis and policy formulation, and its recent efforts to strengthen
                           its capacity for monitoring and evaluation.

                           Within this context, the objective of the proposed project is to strengthen M&E capacity and systems
                           as elements of evidence-based agriculture policy analysis and formulation. Strengthened government
                           ownership of the policy process is viewed as an important further outcome of grant support.
                           C. Project Description
                           The MoA in close collaboration with FAO will undertake detailed project design during August-
                           September 2016 in a way that complements and extends the initiatives already taken by FAO in the
                           context of evidence-based decision making. The tentative project design includes: a review of the
                           training needs for MoA staff; the scope for associated capacity building within national universities
                         and think tanks as a means to further strengthen the capacity for independent policy M&E; a review
                         of the existing information and statistical base and recommendations on how best to use this
                         information for evidence-based decision making; and the basis for building effective links with other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministries and relevant public and private agencies as a means to increase understanding and
                         awareness of the impact of evidence-based policy making. Support and training would cover all
                         Ministry units involved in designing, implementing and monitoring policy. This would include the
                         Department of Monitoring and Evaluation and the Department of Agricultural Program
                         Development, but also the line departments and divisions involved with specific policies, e.g. the
                         Department of Plant Growing and Plant Protection, the Department of Land Use and Melioration, the
                         Department of Agro-processing Development and the Department of Veterinary and Livestock
                         Agriculture. This would ensure that all elements of the policy cycle critical to M&E are upgraded,
                         with policies being well documented with clear intervention logic and appropriate monitoring
                         indicators and are well evaluated, and would ensure that no one department was swamped by too
                         much technical assistance and training.

                         The project will run for 2 years, from early 2017-2019, with an estimated total cost of US$ 1.8
                         million and will have two components.

                         Component I: Capacity Building for Evidence Based Policy Making (US$1.625 million)

                         I.1 Staff Training (US$ 350,000). The training needs identified by the International Expert will be
                         followed up with an extended series of short (2-4 day) training programs, to be implemented once
                         every 2 months during the life of the project. In addition to relevant MoA staff, training will also be
                         provided for staff of other ministries and public agencies (e.g. NSSRA), and university staff, as
                         deemed appropriate. Potential areas of training will include building skills in: the selection, design
                         and use of appropriate monitoring indicators; how to review existing and prospective sources of
                         information; the development and management of data bases; the design and commissioning of
                         evaluations to support evidence based policy making; techniques of policy analysis; the design of
                         mechanisms to build citizen engagement into the process of policy evaluation; and the alignment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         M&E outputs with strategy implementation and budget formulation.

                         I.2 Survey Design and Analysis (US$ 200,000). To further build skills in the development of M&E
                         for evidence based policy making, the project will support a small number of surveys and analyses to
                         be commissioned and implemented by staff in the Ministry of Agriculture or other relevant agencies
                         (e.g. NSSRA, Agrarian University etc). Potential activities include: analysis of the recently
                         completed Agricultural Census; the development of templates for farm enterprise analysis (gross
                         margins), that can be updated quickly and easily with secondary data on an annual basis as the basis
                         for monitoring trends in on-farm incomes and profitability; and a joint program with the NSSRA to
                         review and improve the current survey instruments used for agriculture and rural areas, to render
                         them better suited to evidence based policy making.

                         I.3 Specific Evaluations (US$400,000). The proposed project will fund specific, detailed economic
                         evaluations on topics agreed with the MoA's leadership. These evaluations would typically take a
                         few weeks to complete, often involving a small ad hoc working group comprising staff from the
                         relevant departments. These papers can focus on different issues, such as impact analysis of existing
                         policies, including socio-economic impact, environmental impact and regulatory impact assessment.
                         (ii) Each kind of evaluation would have its own issues and approaches, which could be taught by
                         engaging an international expert to guide and support the MoA as they do their first evaluations.
                         Where capacity in the MoA is limited, many of these evaluations can be contracted out to
                         universities and think tanks, but it would be good for the MoA to have their own experience of
                         carrying out such evaluations, to help them prepare good Terms of Reference and better assess the
                         reports that they receive.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         I.4 Computers, Printers and Software for Data Base Management (US$ 60,000). The project will
                         provide limited support for computers and software for data base management.

                         I.5. Technical Assistance (US$615,000). An international advisor with demonstrated experience in
                         capacity building for evidence based policy making will be recruited to guide and support project
                         activities in the Ministry of Agriculture. Potential areas of support (to be agreed during project
                         preparation) include: review of the current institutional base within the Ministry of Agriculture for
                         M&E and evidence-based policy making, including its links to other ministries and public agencies,
                         followed by recommendations and guidance on ways to strengthen this institutional base; an
                         assessment of the human resource base for policy M&E and the design of a training program for
                         building and strengthening relevant skills; a review of the current system of M&E, its capacity to
                         evaluate policy and its links to implementation of agriculture sector strategy and design of the
                         agriculture budget, and support for adoption of the principles and techniques of evidence based
                         policy making -- including statistical analysis, commissioned research, citizen engagement and the
                         use of administrative information; a review of the current evidence base for agricultural policy
                         monitoring produced by the NSSRA and the development of recommendations on ways to strengthen
                         its contribution to evidence based policy making for agriculture; a review of the need to build
                         capacity for independent policy monitoring outside the Ministry (e.g. universities, think tanks) as a
                         further input to evidence based policy making and the design and implementation of appropriate
                         training and support programs; and the development of appropriate forums for sharing the outcomes
                         of evidence based policy making with other government ministries and public agencies. As capacity
                         building of this nature is a gradual process, and needs constant support and reinforcement to be
                         effective, the International Expert will be appointed for the duration of the project.

                         This subcomponent will support implementation of the knowledge transfer strategy to strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ownership while ensuring sustainability. The knowledge transfer strategy will be developed at
                         project appraisal using experience from implementation of similar projects in Bulgaria, Georgia,
                         Macedonia, northern Cyprus, Serbia and Uzbekistan.

                         In line with the requirements of section 3(b) of the Operating Guidelines for the Japan PHRD
                         Technical Assistance Grants Program: "Performance and results with improved monitoring and
                         evaluation" (PRIME) window the project will support an Action Plan which could include the
                         following activities under the Component 1:

                          - Establishing user-friendly databases and regular updating procedures for key sources such as the
                         agricultural census results, annual agricultural statistics, reports from Ministry, systems, and trade
                         data for food and agricultural products.
                          - Creating standard systems for monitoring common elements of Ministry policies (payments,
                         beneficiaries, etc.) so policy analysts have ready access to these data.
                          - Adding modules to monitor individual Ministry policies and programs, adjusted to the specific
                         indicators used in each case.
                          - Providing access to and training in international databases, such as FAOSTAT, Eurostat database,
                         UN Comtrade, World Bank DataBank and World Integrated Trade Solutions software (WITS).
                          - Helping establish an information unit in the Ministry to provide all departments with these data.
                          - Contracting studies and surveys to collect detailed data from farmers and other stakeholders, to
                         support specific policy evaluations.
                          - Training all staff involved in agricultural policy, to raise understanding of the policy cycle, how
                         to set appropriate monitoring indicators, and how to assess the economic impact of proposed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented policies.
                          - Establishing a regular gross margin survey to give the Ministry up-to-date and reliable
                         information on the profitability of different farming activities, and training staff in how to use this for
                         policy evaluation in areas ranging from assessing the impact of recent floods or drought, to
                         calculating how policy changes could affect different types of farm.
                          - Providing the Ministry with regular commodity balances and a practice of monthly commodity
                         briefings, so that policy makers are aware of potential problems before they appear in the
                         newspapers.
                          - Improved procedures for consultation and stakeholder involvement in policy M&E and design.
                          - Developing more advanced tools for specific parts of the policy cycle (e.g. problem analysis and
                         ex ante policy appraisal, regulatory impact assessment, environmental impact assessment, and ex
                         post impact evaluation), with training and support for relevant staff to apply them.
                          - Assessment of gender development of specific mixed-method indicators to track gender (surveys,
                         specific evaluations), gender-specific impact evaluation and use of diagnostics / thematic studies to
                         recognize gender-specific constraints or opportunities to inform design corresponding activities.
                          - Re-establishing a market information system so that policy makers, farmers and traders have good
                         and up-to-date information about developments on the markets.
                          - Creating an annual policy report setting out the objectives, beneficiaries, budget and impact of
                         each policy and programme implemented by the Ministry.
                          - Training selected staff in survey design and analysis, so that they can both implement small
                         surveys themselves and confidently specify and manage contracts for external survey work.
                          - Supporting senior Ministry staff to embed best practice and an evidence-based policy cycle into
                         the routine operations of the Ministry, including strong linkages between strategy development,
                         polices and budget.

                         Component II: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Dissemination (US$ 175,000)

                         This component consists of three subcomponents:

                         II.1 Project Management and Administration (US$124,000). The project will be managed by a
                         national expert with extensive experience in agriculture and the institutional structures of
                         government. He will be assisted by a full-time secretary. The project will be implemented by the
                         existing Agriculture Projects Implementation Unit (APIU) of the Ministry of Agriculture. The project
                         budget provides for incremental project management costs, including additional technical specialists
                         as identified during further project preparation, costs of transport and field visits and audit.

                         II.2 Monitoring and Evaluation (US$25,000). This subcomponent will finance the costs of impact
                         assessments at mid-term and at project completion. The project the M&E framework will be
                         developed during appraisal and its implementation will be reviewed regularly by the Ministry of
                         Agriculture and APIU.

                         III. 3 Knowledge Dissemination (US$24,000). This subcomponent will fund activities related to the
                         project launch, expert round tables and web-based and paper copy dissemination of the project's key
                         reports. The Ministry of Agriculture's and APIU's websites will be used for a virtual discussion of the
                         project's studies. The project will finance printing and distribution by direct mailing 100 of the final
                           project reports in Armenian and English to all key counterparts in the Government of Armenia's key
                           ministries and agencies, think tanks, NGOs active in this sphere, key public libraries and higher
                           educational institutions (faculties of economics and rural development/agriculture).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GEN03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The outcomes of the proposed project may have
                           BP 4.01                                            significant environmental and social
                                                                              implications. Some of the proposed output of
                                                                              the proposed program may contain the analysis
                                                                              of environmental and social impacts and the
                                                                              approach for mitigating these impacts. The
                                                                              choice of safeguard policies to be triggered and
                                                                              the choice of an appropriate safeguards
                                                                              instruments would be considered during
                                                                              program preparation once there is greater clarity
                                                                              of the proposed program subcomponents.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 30-Sep-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Bekzod Shamsiev,Arusyak Alaverdyan
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 27-Jun-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Peter Goodman (PMGR)                                         Date: 28-Jun-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
