INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8634
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Thailand                   Project ID:  P130115
Project Name:   Thailand FCPF Readiness Preparation Project (P130115)
Task Team       Robert Ragland Davis
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Jun-2020
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENO2
Sector(s):      Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      3.60            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                        0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility        3.60
Total                                                           3.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to support the development of the Readiness Preparation
Activities . This will be achieved by supporting the preparation of its REDD+ strategy, the design of
a national MRV system, and by producing technical work and policy advice.
C. Project Description
SUMMARY


﻿The operation would help the Government of Kingdom of Thailand in developing its REDD+
Strategy so that it is technically sound and environmentally and socially sustainable, as well as in
compliance with World Bank safeguards policies. Because the present operation is a planning,
analytical and capacity building exercise to support strategy development and no physical
O
investments for REDD+ are included in the design or financed by the grant, it is classified as
Category B. At the same time, the Safeguards Policies that may be triggered (or TBD) by future
possible REDD+ investments are shown as triggered in the table "Safeguards Policies that May
Apply", so as to provide the necessary background and guidance to the development of an ESMF.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will comply with World Bank safeguard policies regarding
the management of environmental and social impacts. This grant will, in part, support the country's
activities to identify the potential risks associated with REDD+ and mitigation options. In order to do
this, the FCPF will finance implementation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) to integrate key environmental and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by
combining analytical and participatory approaches. In addition, through a process of research, study,
and discussion, appropriate mechanisms for conflict resolution and grievance redress will be
established during the grant's tenure.
FCPF Readiness activities relate to strategic planning and preparation for REDD+. Specifically,
countries prepare for REDD+ by:
i.     assessing the country's situation with respect to deforestation, forest degradation,
conservation and sustainable management of forests and relevant governance issues;
ii.    identifying REDD+ strategy options;
iii.   assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDD+,
and developing a management framework to mitigate these risks and potential impacts;
iv. working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas emissions and
uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDD+ activities, and potentially forward-
looking projections of emissions; and
v.     designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of the REDD+
strategy on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to monitor the drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other variables relevant to the implementation of
REDD+.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant activity (referred to as "Project") will finance some of this
preparatory work; it will not finance any implementation of REDD+ activities on the ground (e.g.,
investments or pilot projects). Based on the activities outlined in the R-PP, it is expected that upon
successfully reaching REDD+ Readiness, the Country would be eligible to participate in REDD+
carbon transactions, including those proposed under the FCPF Carbon Fund.
B.     Key Results
a)     a socially and environmentally sustainable, coherent and cost effective national REDD+
strategy
b)     REDD+ framework designed, including an Environmental and Social Management
Framework
c)     establishing a credible Reference Emission Level against which to measure future emission
reductions
d)     putting in place a comprehensive and credible MRV system for GHG emissions and co-


﻿benefits.
e)     National benefit sharing mechanism/ plan
DESCRIPTION
o
Component 1: Readiness Organization and Consultation (US$ 0.55 million, FCPF)
The activities under this compon ent include: (i) supporting the establishment and operationalization
of the National REDD+ (Bangkok) office and four Regional REDD+ Units, by providing them with
the technical and operational resources required for startup and implementation; (ii) developing
outreach mechanisms through consultation and a robust communications strategy; (iii) developing
and implementing REDD+ outreach programs for CSOs, youth and others and (iv) the formation and
operation of technical, stakeholder and cross-sectorial working groups needed to tackle complex
issues where either technical depth or broad participation is required from multiple sectors to provide
a coordinated approach to REDD+.
L.a National Readiness Management Arrangements (US$ 0.33 million, FCPF)
Context: DNP has established a REDD+ Task Force at the national level that includes representatives
of the relevant sectors in the government, forest dependent communities/ethnic minorities, civil
society organizations, private sector, and academia, among others. DNP acts as secretariat for the
Task Force. The intention is to establish a national REDD+ Office that will take over the function of
secretariat for the TF. The TF will establish six or more Technical Working Groups with members
from the different bodies represented in the TF to deliberate on topics such as benefit sharing
mechanisms, a regulatory framework and carbon registry, and the REDD+ Office will support these
activities and submit the TWG reports and recommendations to the TF for decision. The REDD+
Office will also establish a REDD+ Information Centre to collect and disseminate REDD+ related
information to all stakeholders.
FCPF Grant Support
*      TWGs on REDD+ (for different themes)
*      Technical support
*      Participation in international fora and workshops
 *    Capacity building
a      *      Establish REDD National office for Secretariat (Bangkok)
*      Establish REDD Regional Information Centers/Offices
1.b Participation and Consultation Process (US$ 0.22 million, FCPF)
Context: Key issues unique to REDD+ implementation that must be resolved during the readiness
phase through a highly participatory consultation process include institutional arrangements to plan,
implement and monitor REDD+ activities and a communication strategy and public consultations; to
engage a wide range of stakeholders, especially forest-dependent local communities/ethnic minorities
in the entire REDD+ process. During readiness, the institutional / implementation arrangements will
be adjusted for the effective and inclusive delivery of readiness.
FCPF Grant Support
*      Communication Strategy
*      Consultation with Stakeholders on FCPF and proposed REDD+ activities (includes ESMF)
*      Support to REDD+ CSO/LC/Youth Network and other working groups
*      Public dissemination of the SESA


﻿Component 2: REDD+ Strategy preparation (US$ 1.55 million, FCPF)
This component will support DNP in developing its REDD+ strategy and include: (i) supporting
O
analytical work to prepare a REDD+ strategy; (ii) conducting consultation and studies on key issues
related to REDD+, including drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and degradation, REDD
+ strategy options, forest governance and land tenure, and benefit sharing arrangements, among
others; and (iii) organizing component activities, compiling material inputs and elaborating the
REDD+ strategy document. The inclusive and participatory dialogue supported by this component
and new information and data generated will also further strengthen existing forest policy and
management systems. A highly experienced lead advisor would be recruited to provide the highest
level of guidance to the development of the strategy. From an operational perspective, the three
subcomponents under Component 2 will be developed in concert with one another, possibly under a
single contract. This will ensure that the elements of social and environmental sustainability are
firmly embedded in the technical proposals for proposed REDD+ activities.
2.a Land Use, Drivers of Land Use Change, Forest Law, Policy and Governance (US$ 0.13 million,
FCPF)
Context: The preliminary analysis indicated that the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation
are complex but are not so different in the various agro-ecological regions. The studies revealed that
deforestation is mainly triggered by development policies of the state such as the policy on forest
concessions, mines and dams as well as infrastructure development, which leads to the destruction of
forests and biological resources as a result of road construction and settlement in forests. In addition,
the policy on promotion of capital-intensive monoculture commercial crops results in deforestation
due to agricultural expansion. Forest degradation, where the land remains as forest but the density
and quality of the forest is decreased, is caused mainly by illegal logging and harvesting of non-
timber forest products for commercial purpose, and uncontrolled forest fires.
Some of the underlying factors of deforestation and forest degradation include unclear designation of
legal forest areas and other land use boundaries; increasing population and inequality in income and
livelihoods that may impact the forest. It is recognized that information and data for the analysis
were not always readily available. Such further information and analysis is crucial for the
identification of REDD+ strategic options. Supplemental analysis will be conducted during the
a       Readiness phase to better define and quantify the causes of deforestation and forest degradation in
various ecological zones/regions. Governance studies will focus, inter alia, on the regulatory mandate
of the many agencies potentially involved in REDD+, identify overlaps and gaps, and draft
recommendations for improvements and ways of coordinating. The subcomponent will also include a
review of land tenure and ownership rights, conflicts and potential conflicts with import for REDD+
and draft recommendations for remedial efforts.
FCPF Grant Support
* Update and prioritize deforestation and degradation driver analyses
* Carry out a forest governance assessment, including land tenure review
2.b REDD+ Strategy options (US$ 0.80 million, FCPF)
Context: A number of potential strategic options to address the direct causes of deforestation and
forest degradations were identified through analysis of existing policies, legal framework and plans,
as well as stakeholder consultations. The proposed strategic options include establishment of clear
forest area boundaries and zoning, updating and harmonizing forest and forest-related policies,


﻿improving efficiency of forest law enforcement, building awareness of forest conservation,
development of alternative livelihoods, developing forest certification and chain of custody
standards, enforcing environmental and social impact assessments of any infrastructure projects, and
improving fire detection and control capability. These potential REDD+ Strategies Options will be
O
evaluated further through the REDD+ Readiness phase. Several studies will be undertaken,
including: risk analysis (summarizing major types of risk, and their significance for the major REDD
+ strategy activities); and feasibility assessment (socioeconomic, political and institutional) of the
options. A forest governance assessment framework will be undertaken in the Readiness Phase.
FCPF Grant Support
*      Elaboration of draft REDD+ Strategy (including, among others, institutional, legal, policy,
risk, feasibility, and economic aspects, includes SESA, interacts with TWGs)
*      Workshops on REDD+ strategy and readiness activities
*      Studies to analyze and design benefit sharing arrangements
*      REDD+ Lead Technical Advisor
2.c Social and Environmental Sustainability/ Grievance Mechanism (US$ 0.62 million, FCPF)
Context: The readiness grant will support the integration of social and environmental concerns into
the REDD+ process and develop an approach for the mitigation of negative impacts through the
SESA. Strategic environmental and social issues which must be considered at the REDD+ readiness
stage include biodiversity and ecosystem services; micro-climate; air quality (haze and smog); water
services and quality; soil condition; food security, location of people and fauna, gender, cultural and
social problems resulting from migration and immigration, land ownership, land tenure, land
accessibility, energy supply and gender equity and other benefits to improve education and health of
the people while pursuing growth with low emissions from land use change. The conduct of the
SESA will also include establishment of a SESA working group and capacity building for the SESA
and ESMF, as well as for the management of possible grievances. A state-of-the-art monitoring
system for safeguards would be designed in conjunction with the information systems in Component
3.
FCPF Grant Support
O
.       *      National and subnational workshops for SESA, including for validation
a      *      Carryout SESA and elaborate the ESMF
*      Review options and establish a grievance framework and resolution mechanism
*      Safeguards Monitoring System Design
Component 3: Forest Monitoring and Emissions (US$ 1.10 million, FCPF)
The activities under this component will put in place a robust monitoring system for REDD+
including the design of the approach and development of the REL/RL. Based on the existing
inventory system in DNP, an IPCC compliant MRV system would be developed, as well as a
safeguards information system. The inventory and monitoring system established under this
component will also provide important information and data that can be directly used in the
management and development of the forest sector more broadly. Targeted technical support will be
given for developing allometric equations and biomass expansion factors (BEF) for improvements in
assessing the carbon content of Thailand's trees and forests, required for determining the impact of
REDD+ activities in sequestering carbon and in climate change mitigation. The component would
also help to train personnel and other stakeholders in new techniques for inventories, monitoring and


﻿the application of algorithms for determining carbon uptake and release in the sector.
3.a Reference Emissions Level (US$ 0.69 million, FCPF)
O
Context: Forest carbon stocks in Thailand were estimated in 1989, 1994 and 2006. The results
indicated that annual loss of carbon from natural forests during the period 1994-2006 averaged 33
million tons, which is partly offset by net sequestration in plantations of approximately 17 million
tons. Based on an average carbon density in natural forests the loss of carbon from deforestation of
approximately 180,000 hectares annually accounts for about 16 million tons, suggesting that forest
degradation accounts for the balance of approximately 17 million tons. All these figures need to be
verified by more detailed analyses, which will require good coordination between the many
departments and actors holding the relevant data, including DNP, DMCR and the RFD.
Early in the REDD+ readiness process, the DNP team will establish a technical working group to
focus on RL development. The group will need a variety of technical skills including understanding
of historical forest land cover trends and data; ability to relate socio-economic data and trends to
environmental outcomes; ability to conduct reasonably sophisticated time-series analyses; and
knowledge of the historical drivers of deforestation and forest degradation in Thailand. The
technical working group would include staff from different partner organizations and require two full
time members, who would focus their work on the REL/RL analysis over a period of about two
years. (Technical working groups are financed under Component 1 while the actual REL/RL
activities, including estimates, technique development and training would come under Component 3.)
FCPF Grant Support
*      Design Reference Emissions Level Approach (IPCC Compliant)
*      Develop models for emissions estimations
*      Review, compile, analyze information and develop National REL/RL estimate
*      Training for development of allometric equations, conversion factors
*      Assimilate data for the latest national forest inventory, analyse and disseminate results
3.b Forest Monitoring (US$ 0.41 million)
Context: The Thailand National Forest Inventory program has a strong sample design, data collection
and data entry effort, but should improve the capacity for full and timely data analysis and reporting.
o       There is an opportunity to strengthen the inventory program through the FCPF readiness phase, and
to increase the return on investment by strengthening this capability in the DNP Inventory office
through training and expert assistance inter alia to develop data compilation software. The current
inventory design and data collection is generally consistent with IPCC best practices and guidelines
and has the potential to satisfy the requirements for REDD+ reporting. The DNP approach relies on
stratified systematic sampling using a 10 km x 10 km grid that will provide excellent information at
the national and aggregated subnational levels (i.e. 5 geographic regions within Thailand), and will
be useful for many other kinds of analyses (e.g. by major forest type group or ecological zones) for
the country. The inventory should serve both REDD+ reporting needs as well as many of the
strategic scale information needs for Thailand's forest management and forest protection activities.
In addition to the DNP-led inventory which covers protected and reserved forest, Thailand has a
second inventory program focused exclusively on mangrove conducted by the Department of Marine
and Coastal Resources (DMCR). There are also four separate remote sensing efforts for forests,
including DNPs (two units), the RFD and the DMCR. During the readiness phase, further analyses
will examine the benefits of harmonizing and improving the approaches under the different mapping


﻿and inventory programs.
FCPF Grant Support
 *    Technical Design and Proposal for Enhancing National Forest Inventory and Monitoring
U       System to support REDD+
Software programming
 *    Training and capacity building in Measurement, Reporting and Verification
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (US$ 0.40 million)
This component would cover the project management, financial and procurement monitoring, project
monitoring and coordination of the operation. The project manager and M&E specialist would be
tasked from DNPs staff to work full time on the operation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Thailand is located in the south-eastern part of continental Asia, bordered by Myanmar, Lao PDR,
Cambodia and Malaysia and is one of the strongest economies in the sub-region. It has a land area
of approximately 51.3 million ha. and the central part of the country contains the major rice growing
area formed by the basin of the Chao Phaya River. Climate change must be viewed as a central issue
related to Thailand's development. The country is 24th among the world's largest GHG emitters, and
is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. Direct impacts result not only from gradual changes
in temperature and sea level, but also from increased climate variability and extremes, including
more intense floods, droughts, and storms.
Northwestern Thailand is mainly mountainous with a sub-tropical climate and the northeastern part is
mainly comprised of a semi-arid plateau with generally poor soils. The southern part is a long,
generally mountainous peninsula that separates the Gulf of Thailand from the Indian Ocean and has a
tropical climate. Thailand's landscape and forest resources reflect its topographic, agro-ecological
zones and cultural diversity which results in a complex mosaic of agriculture and forests. The
predominant forest types are mainly evergreen forest in the south and mixed deciduous forest in the
west and northwest, while the northeastern part of the country is predominantly a dry dipterocarp
forest. Each of these forest types contains many valuable timber species such as teak and rosewood.
Similar to other developing countries in the region, the forest areas in Thailand have been under
serious threat.
Up-to-date statistics on deforestation and forest cover are not available and robust methods for
determining these parameters will need to be addressed during pre-investment and readiness.
However, there are a number of studies that are useful to approximate these variables. For example,
historical studies show that forest cover has declined from 53.3 % in 1961 to 33.1% in 2000. Since
2000, the annual deforestation rate was estimated at 100,000 ha or in excess of 0.6% per year, which
is considered very high. Thailand had approximately 19.6 million ha of forest land in 2006, based on
ground sampling. About 1.45 million ha are in plantations with another 13 million ha in evergreen
forest. The balance is made up of various drier forest types, including mixed deciduous, dry
dipterocarp and pine as well as mangroves and small areas of swamp forest.
Deforestation is strongly linked to population growth with an increased demand for forest products
and land for agricultural expansion as well as development of infrastructure facilities (e.g. roads,


﻿electricity, water reservoirs for hydro-power and irrigation and mining), and despite improvements in
forest management. Forest degradation, where the land remains as forest but the density and quality
of the forest is decreased, is caused mainly by illegal logging and harvesting of non-timber forest
product for commercial purpose, and uncontrolled forest fires. No estimates are available for
O
U       degradation but it is expected to be several times the rate of deforestation. Today people cook on
natural gas rather than firewood and charcoal, and wood substitutes are increasingly replacing wood
in house construction as it is more affordable than timber. Forest management has slightly improved
due to both the direction of government policy and pressure from society. Government policies have
emphasized conservation and sustainable use of forest resources since a national logging ban was
imposed inl989. The government has also recognized and supported people's participation and
private investment in forestry activities. Nevertheless, despite these policies the improvement in
forest management would not have succeeded without considerable public pressure and support for
stronger conservation and protection.
The need for a multi-sectoral approach to REDD+ is recognized by Thailand's Government. The
government has put in place an institutional arrangement/management structure that reflects the
relevant sectors engaged in land use as well as other stakeholders with an interest and stake in REDD
+. The REDD+ institutional/implementation framework is to provide the scheme for the design and
implementation of the appropriate institutional, financial, legal and governance arrangements to
successfully implement REDD+ in Thailand in accordance with international guidance for future
REDD+ efforts. This institutional arrangement consists of a two-tiered institutional mechanism for
implementing REDD+. At the national level, a National REDD+ task force was established to
facilitate, coordinate and spearhead the REDD+ activities and it will be supported by a REDD+
Office to be established early in the readiness phase. At the sub-national level, REDD+ offices will
also be established throughout the regions to coordinate and facilitate REDD+ pilot activities at sub-
national level and establish capacity building and stakeholder consultation for local communities.
Local NGOs, and local forest-dependent communities that are playing an important role in forest
conservation and provision of extension services would be part of REDD+ implementation at local
levels.
The principles behind this two tiered approach is for REDD+ to ensure credibility and to provide for
transparent, efficient and effective decision making, implementation and monitoring of REDD+
efforts.
o       Since implementation of REDD+ is a multi-sector and multi- stakeholder endeavor and comprises
actions at the national and sub-national levels, Thailand will use the three main instruments for
REDD+ implementation: institutions, financial measures and regulatory framework. This will enable
Thailand to operationalize and implement its provisional REDD+ strategy options to minimize the
conversion of forest land into other uses, hence reducing emissions, and equally to introduce actions
that will enhance the sequestration capacity according to the national REDD+ strategies.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation (DNP) under the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) is an implementing agency for REDD+ Readiness
Preparation. In 2010, Thailand decided to participate in the REDD+ partnership and followed up with
the establishment of REDD+ Taskforce (TF) in 2011 as an inter-ministerial and multi-sectoral
committee. The REDD+ TF in Thailand is currently chaired by DG of the DNP and includes
representatives from key government agencies contributed to the drivers for deforestation and forest
degradation. In the implementation and readiness preparation coordination phase, the Office of
REDD+ Task Force Secretariat (TFS) will be established and serve as the national coordination unit


﻿located within DNP to coordinate with implementing agencies within the TF and Technical Working
Groups (TWGs). The REDD+ TFS will act as the secretariat of the REDD+ TF to strengthen the
coordination between these two instrument bodies. An additional full-time staff will be recruited if
required.
0
The REDD+ Office, a standing office, will be established to serve as the national implementing
agency and located at the DNP to coordinate, facilitate and promote all REDD+ activities. The
DNP's Director of the Forest and Plant Conservation Research Office will lead the REDD+ Office
and draw the membership from DNP, Royal Forestry Department (RFD), Department of Marine and
Coastal Resources (DMCR) and Forest Industry Organization (FIO). An additional full-time staff
will also be recruited as required.
The national institution capacity for implementing environmental and social safeguards is strong.
Thailand has robust environmental and social policies laws and regulations to include policies on
gender. The Enhancement and Conservation of National Environmental Quality Act 1975 (Amended
in 1992) (NEQA) , the nation key environmental law, and its subordinate laws cover most of
environmental aspects including environmental impact assessment, environmental quality standards,
pollution controls, promotion measures and civil and penal liability, establishment of
Environmentally Protected Areas (EPA) and Pollution Control Areas (PCA). With regards to public
participation, Thailand's Constitution and the NEQA recognizes environmental rights and duties of
Thai citizens to participate in government efforts to protect the environment and promotes public
participation.
Furthermore there are existing legal and regulatory frameworks relating to forest and other sectors
that provide good bases for the governance in relation to REDD+. This include Wild Animal
Reservation and Protection Act 1992, National Park Act 1961, Forest Act 1989, National Forest
Reserve Act 1964, Plant Protection Act 1999, Reforestation Act 1992, Communal Land Titling Order
2009, Timber Farming Act 1992 and various Cabinet Resolutions regarding forest and natural
resources management. Some of these laws aim to reduce land tenure conflict issue and promote
participation of local community in forest/ natural resources management. However, effective
coordination between relevant institutions across sectors and institutional capacity to implement
decisions will need to be investigated and strengthen during the SESA process. It is worth noting that
the Thailand plans to set up the SESA working group under the REDD+ Secretariat. It is expected to
a      work closely with the National REDD+ Technical Working Groups (TWGs) in mainstreaming SESA
in all the analytical work, combined with consultations required for the various activities funded
under the readiness. The SESA working group would help REDD+ Secretariat to mainstream gender
issues in REDD+ readiness.
However, DNP has limited experience with WB safeguards. The capacity of DNP and the proposed
REDD+ office will need to be strengthened to carry out the operation according to WB environment
and social safeguard Policies. In order to improve institutional capacity, the DNP agreed to assign
specific staff responsible for environmental management and social safeguards, and engage
experienced environment and social consultants to carry out the Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) and the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The Bank
has experienced social and environmental staff located in Bangkok that will be able to help provide
the needed guidance and backstopping to DNPs efforts.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Haddy Jatou Sey (GCCFL)


﻿Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GENDR)
Wasittee Udchachone (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         An environmental assessment (EA) is required for
OP/BP 4.01                              the operation as the REDD+ strategy will identify
measures and propose activities to be implemented
downstream in possible subsequent operations in the
terrestrial landscape, largely in forest areas.
Therefore, thepolicy is triggered both for REDD+
strategy and proposed policy reforms developed
during the readiness phase (the Grant) and for
possible future REDD+ investments. The Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be used as EA instruments to ensure the
REDD+ activities are environmentally sound and
sustainable, and thus to improve decision making.
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) being carried out under the present operation
is in compliance with OP/BP 4.01 and will serve to
identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative
environmental and social impacts associated with
future activities to be supported by the final REDD+
strategy by providing guidance and key elements for
the preparation of an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) under the present
operation. The ESMF will establish the modalities
and procedures to address potential negative
environmental and social impacts from the
implementation of a national REDD+ framework as
well as associated mitigation measures, and also
ways to support good practices. Since the present
operation is a planning, analytical and capacity
building exercise to support REDD+ strategy
development and no physical investments for REDD
+ are included in the design or financed by the grant,
the project is classified as Category B. During the
preparation of the R-PP extensive consultations were
held throughout the country, with 1,692 participants
from 180 stakeholder groups. Under the present
operation, (Readiness Phase) Thailand will undergo
extensive consultations with relevant stakeholders
according to a detailed and robust "Consultation and
Participation Plan" included in the SESA annex to


﻿the Assessment Note. Free, prior and informed
consultation will also be carried out in compliance
with OP 4.10.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The operation will assist in the development of
REDD+ strategies and approaches to promote
conservation and the sustainable use of natural
habitats, especially forests. The SESA will evaluate
the possible risks associated with the strategic
options and their potential impact on natural habitats,
in both production and protection forests. Other
proposed REDD+ activities such as new plantations
would also be assessed in respect to possible impacts
on non-forest habitats and ecosystems. The ESMF
would include provisions to assess, avoid or mitigate
potential impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         REDD+ activities in forest lands aim to reduce
deforestation, enhance the environmental services
contribution of forested areas, promote reforestation,
reduce poverty, and encourage economic
development. Overall, the REDD+ activities are
expected to have significant positive impacts on
forest, in that the main goal of the program is to
reduce deforestation, while contributing to the well-
being of forest dependent communities who will be
consulted during the course of the project. Critical
issues related to forest governance and resources and
potential impacts from the national REDD+
framework will be assessed through SESA and
potential negative impact addressed in the ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         While the scope of REDD+ strategies will be
identified during implementation of the Grant, it is
possible that future REDD+ investments may involve
the use of pesticides or other pest management, for
instance in relation to reforestation activities or the
intensification of agricultural activities on degraded
lands, and this policy is triggered. The SESA will
further assess the application of this policy and
appropriate mitigation plans including an Integrated
Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be developed
and included in the ESMF."


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          Future REDD+ activities will not be known in detail
OP/BP 4.11                                while preparing the ESMF. However, since such
activities will operate in forest areas where local
communities commonly assign particular cultural
values to certain locations and habitats a Physical
Cultural Resources Management Framework will be
included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The R-PP uses the term "local forest dependent
4.10                                      communities" to represent highland ethnic groups,
forest dwelling, forest dependent, hill tribes, fisheries
communities (the Chao Ley) and local communities.
After the readiness phase and outside the present
operation, many of the activities which will be
proposed to be implemented as part of a national
REDD+ program are likely to take place in areas
inhabited by "local forest dependent communities".
OP 4.10 is mainly triggered for hill tribes, as well as
other ethnic minorities for both the readiness and in
possible subsequent phases. However, relevant
safeguard measures of OP 4.10 will also address
impacts and risks for other "local forest dependent
communities". The Government (DNP) will consult
with the local forest dependent communities
identified by the ethnic screening to be present in or
have collective attachment to project areas, ensure
that they participate in, and benefit from REDD+
activities in a culturally appropriate way and that
adverse impacts on them are avoided, or where not
feasible, minimized or mitigated. As a key process to
ensure this policy requirement, Free, Prior and
Informed Consultation will be conducted with
affected local forest dependent communities, and
their broad community support to the project would
be ascertained. Issues of ensuring that livelihoods of
local forest dependent communities are duly
safeguarded through a review of existing policy and
regulatory framework, by design of specific
interventions in selected areas, and by recognition of
both livelihoods and cultural practices, which will be
integrated into the strategy. In addition, the Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will
identify ways to strengthen traditional / customary
land tenure and secure access to natural resources by
local forest dependent communities. The SESA will
assess potential impacts, both positive and negative,
on local forest dependent communities. The
Environmental and Social Management Framework


﻿(ESMF) to be developed based on the SESA will
include a "Ethnic Groups Planning Framework
(EGPF) that describes the processes and procedures
to be followed to ensure free, prior and informed
consultation by affected ethnic groups leading to
their broad community support of REDD+ activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes           While no land acquisition will be carried out under
a        BP 4.12                                      the operation nor is it expected as part of future
REDD+ activities, it is conceivable that local
population's access to forests, forest products, forest
reserves, forest management areas or protected areas
could be restricted and, although unlikely, the
possibility of land acquisition cannot be completely
discounted at this time. Such impacts would be
avoided to the extent feasible, or minimized and
mitigated if they are unavoidable. The SESA would
assess and identify all potential issues related to
involuntary resettlement and access restriction, and
the ESMF will include a Process Framework (PF)
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            The project will not support construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
investments that rely on the services of existing
dams.
Projects on International      No            The project is for terrestrial (mainly forest)
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         ecosystems, and does not involve international
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No            No project activities are involved in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Sep-2018
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The SESA process was initiated during the proposal stage and is already considered to be
underway, and will continue through the grant's tenure of about 3 years. The SESA allows (i)
social and environmental considerations to be integrated into the REDD+ Readiness process, in
particular the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and prioritizing key
issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these priorities and
recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country's progress reports on
O
Readiness preparation; and (iii) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
be put in place to manage environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts.
*          The SESA guidelines have been integrated into the R-PP template. The safeguards policies noted
in the REDD+ Readiness process are triggered since the REDD+ strategy and possible policy
reforms have implications for these safeguard policies, and all the safeguard policies listed as
triggered (or TBD) may apply to future REDD+ investments. The SESA will assess impacts of
both proposed policy reforms and strategy options as well as impacts of future REDD+
investments, while the ESMF will include provisions and requirements concerning all the
safeguard policies triggered.
The proposed timeline for SESA implementation is outlined in the SESA Terms of Reference in
the Staff Assessment Note. Final delivery of the SESA and ESMF is expected by the end of the
grant's tenure. As noted above the main safeguard instrument to be developed during grant
implementation is the SESA. The SESA includes the preparation of an ESMF. The ESMF may
evolve and be updated over time when new REDD + strategy options and projects or activities
(including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation of REDD+.
The SESA addresses the key environmental and social issues associated with the analysis and
preparation of REDD+ strategy options as well as REDD+ projects, activities (including
investments), policies and regulations. In this manner SESA can ensure compliance with World
Bank's environmental and social safeguards.
The SESA process requires that the selection of REDD+ strategy options should take into account
the country's institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks
and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any
identified gaps to manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant World Bank's
safeguard policies should be identified along with the strategy options to feed into the preparation
of the ESMF. The ESMF should provide a framework to manage and mitigate the potential
environmental and social impacts related to specific projects and activities (including investments
and carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future implementation of REDD+.
The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant
requirements of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not
necessarily limited to stand alone documentation including a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF); Process Framework (PF); and an Ethnic Groups Planning Framework (EGPF).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Robert Ragland Davis
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                      Date: 03-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)                Date: 03-Sep-2015
Manager:


