INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8374
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gabon                      Project ID:   P132824
Project Name:   eGabon (P132824)
Task Team       Michel Rogy,Dominic S. Haazen
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jan-2016               Estimated     31-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIl 1                      Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Information and communications (20%), Information
technology (24%), Telecommunications (40%), General information and
communications sector (4%), Health (12%)
Theme(s):       e-Government (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
(20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Regional
integration (5%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      76.00            Total Bank Financing:   56.00
Financing Gap:           20.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           56.00
Total                                                           56.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to transform public health services delivery
and foster digital job creation by expanding access to connectivity, promoting innovation and
leveraging information and communications technologies (ICT).


﻿Direct beneficiaries of the proposed project will be both agents and patients of the National Health
System and private sector actors/entrepreneurs conducting business in the digital economy, with a
specific focus on women and youth. Indirect beneficiaries potentially include all of the country's
U       population, benefitting from increased availability of Health services at affordable rates, increased
access to connectivity from extension of broadband networks, and increased job opportunities in or
supporting the digital economy.
C. Project Description
In order to achieve the Project Development Objectives, the proposed project follows an integrated
transformational solutions approach with four components: (1) strengthening of the National Health
Information System to achieve "more health for money spent", and thereby improving the efficiency
of health spending, quality of care and ease of access including for women, youth and other
vulnerable populations; (2) stimulating the development of the digital economy and improving
service delivery by encouraging development of local content, applications and services with an
emphasis on eHealth through the creation of business incubators in Libreville, Port-Gentil and
Franceville; (3) implementing selected missing links of the regional and national fiber optic
backbone to connect areas of high relevance for the National Health Information System and enable
greater connectivity for private citizens and businesses; and (4) Effective project implementation,
monitoring and evaluation, and communication.
Component 1: Strengthening of the National Health Information System (approximately US$ 34.5
million). The aim of this component is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of health service
delivery which will be critical to improving Gabon's human development outcomes. It will also be
leveraged to drive development of the digital innovation ecosystem in Gabon by incentivizing
applications and local content development centered on health services and information. Specifically,
this component will support ANINF and MoH in the development and the roll-out of the National
Health Information System (NHIS), pursuant to the concept note prepared in July 2013. The NHIS
will support informed strategic decision-making by providing access to high quality data which can
help managers and health workers at all levels of the health system in planning and managing the
health services; to monitor disease trends and control epidemics; and to provide periodic evaluation
towards agreed targets. This component would include: (i) devising detailed feasibility studies for the
NHIS; (ii) rolling out the NHIS; (iii) creating a detailed change management strategy for the MoH in
the broader context of an articulated e-health strategy; (iv) providing study tours of Gabonese
counterparts in selected lead practice countries; and (v) strengthening information system capabilities
within the MoH and related agencies. This component will be implemented with support from the
Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice.
Component 2: Stimulating the development of local content, applications and services with an
emphasis on eHealth through the creation of business incubators in Libreville, Port-Gentil, and
Franceville (approximately US$ 11.0 million). The aim of this component is to promote economic
diversification by encouraging the emergence of a digital innovation ecosystem in Gabon with the
side benefit of improving both private and public e-service delivery. This component will support the
Ministry of Digital Economy, ANINF and Agence Nationale pour la Promotion des Investissements
(ANPI) in: (i) setting up business incubators in Libreville, Port-Gentil, and Franceville (where the
International Center for Medical Research (CIRMF) is located); (ii) promoting digital
entrepreneurship and growth of the ICT sector; and (iii) support development of innovative
applications, with an emphasis on mobile-phone based health applications, to create opportunities for
digital entrepreneurship, in particular for women. Specifically, this component would include: (i)


﻿devising detailed design and feasibility studies for business incubators; (ii) providing a study tour of
Gabonese counterparts in selected lead practice countries; (iii) building and/or renting and setting up
three business incubators, and providing implementation support for the management of incubators
through the most appropriate governance structure - including the private and the public sectors; (iv)
U       strengthening the capacity of business incubators and beneficiaries through the provision of selected
services; (v) developing a strategy to promote the development of local digital content, applications
and services with a focus on health, including organizing hackathons and business plan competitions
and setting up the appropriate legal and regulatory enabling environment; and (vi) strengthening the
capacity of the ANINF and the Ministry in charge of the Digital Economy to drive and implement
the e-applications agenda. This component will be implemented with support from the Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice.
Component 3: Implementing selected missing links of the regional and national fiber optic backbone
(approximately US$ 26.0 million, US$ 6.0 million from IBRD and US$ 20 million from other
donors). The aim of this component is to improve access to connectivity, both to government
institutions (particularly health facilities of high relevance for the National Health Information
System) as well as private consumers and businesses. Increasing access is essential to ensuring
greater access to new e-health and other electronic services as well as the wider social and economic
opportunities enabled through voice and broadband connectivity - especially for the most vulnerable
and price sensitive consumers. This component, building upon the Public Private Partnership (PPP)
with Open Access to the backbone set up under CAB4, will support the Ministry of the Digital
Economy and ANINF in improving the regional and national coverage of the fiber optic
infrastructure. It will be implemented with co-financing with other donors - such as the Islamic
Development Bank and the African Development Bank - which have expressed interest in supporting
the Second Phase of the broadband infrastructure objectives of "Digital Gabon". This component
would include: (i) Northern Route: national and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching out"
from Ndjolk to connect Oyem and the borders with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) Southern Route: national capacity via terrestrial fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6;
and (iii) consultancy services to conduct feasibility studies for the missing links and to support the
associated transactions for inclusion in the existing PPP. Oyem and Lamberene are both home to
important health facilities and research centers, and extending the network would enable to operators
to extend high quality, low cost services to a large number of consumers in these areas by leveraging
the backbone for backhaul. In addition, connecting Gabon to Cameroon through the new operation
o      (in addition to the connection to Congo under the CAB4 operation) will contribute to broadening the
opportunities for regional connectivity and eHealth cooperation.
Component 4: Effective project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and communication
(approximately US$ 4.5 million). This Component will support the setting up of a dedicated small
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and will also cover training, office equipment, operating costs,
audits and communications as well as M&E, environmental and social studies, their implementation
and/or the monitoring of their implementation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed cities for the business incubators are already connected via the national fiber optic
backbone and are the three most populated cities in the country: Libreville (estimated 41% of the
Gabon's population), Port-Gentil (8%) and Franceville (3%). Project preparation will assess the exact
locations (existing building or newly built building) to ensure the best access and through flow of
entrepreneurs and developers, the opportunities to leverage industry clusters, as well as the need for


﻿different strategies in the three locations. For example, while a full-fledged business incubator may
be viable in Libreville, a different approach such as virtual incubation may work better in
Franceville.
O
U       Selected missing links of the regional and national backbone would include: (i) north national and
regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea (KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The country has moderate capacity for safeguards. Given that the main beneficiaries (Ministry in
charge of ICT, ANINF) as well as the CN-TIPPEE (in which the EGabon Project Implementation
Unit will be implemented) have experienced with safeguards under the CAB Project (P122776),
some technical support will be provided by Bank safeguards specialists during preparation to ensure
compliance with all World Bank safeguards policies but also national ones. Government team will
also benefit from continuous advice and guidance from Bank safeguards specialists in the project
team during implementation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The sites of the business incubators will be in
OP/BP 4.01                              Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include : (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the
exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known.
Because the exact nature and location of investments
may not be determined up front, the Borrower will
prepare an Environment and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and/or Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) as needed pursuant to the
ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         The sites of the business incubators will be in


﻿Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville.
The sites of the business incubators will be in
Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include : (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the
exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD          The sites of the business incubators will be in
Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include : (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the
exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           The sites of the business incubators will be in
Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          The sites of the business incubators will be in
OP/BP 4.11                                Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
a                                                 preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include : (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the
exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known. The
proposed operation is not expected to pose risks of
damaging on the existing community cultural
property. Nevertheless, proposed subprojects will be
screened for their potential impacts on cultural


﻿property and chance fmd procedures will be applied
and appropriate mitigation measures for both the
identification and protection (from theft,
mistreatment of discovered artifacts) of cultural
property. While not damaging cultural property,
subproject preparation may later identify and include
assistance for preservation of historical or
archeological sites. If these opportunities occur,
cultural property management plans would be
prepared for those subprojects. ESIA(s) to be
prepared pursuant to the ESMF will analyze the
potential project zones and measures to be followed
should these properties be discovered during project
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          The sites of the business incubators will be in
4.10                                       Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include: (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. Given that
Indigenous Peoples are likely to be living in the areas
where the missing links are expected to be built but
the exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location
of associated technical sites are not yet known, the
Borrower will prepare an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) and subsequent
Indigenous peoples Plans (IPPs) as needed.
o       Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The sites of the business incubators will be in
BP 4.12                                    Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville. Project
preparation will assess the exact locations and if
existing buildings or newly built buildings will be
used. Selected missing links of the regional and
national backbone would include : (i) north national
and regional capacity via terrestrial fiber "branching
out" from Ndjol6 to connect Oyem and the borders
with Cameroon (Eboro) and Equatorial Guinea
(KyeOssi); (ii) south national capacity via terrestrial
fiber from Libreville to Lambar6n6. However the
exact path of the terrestrial fiber and the location of
associated technical sites are not yet known. Because
the exact nature and location of investments may not
be determined up front, the Borrower will prepare a


﻿Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
subsequent Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as
needed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project will not construct or rely on dams.
Projects on International     No           The project will not affect international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project is not located in a disputed area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared: December 14, 2015.
Because the final sites for the business incubators in Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville and
the type of works (build or rehabilitate) as well as the exact path of the selected missing links have
not been defined yet, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, if
needed, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as well as an Indigenous People Planning
Framework (IPPF) will be prepared and consulted upon prior to Project appraisal. These
documents will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank and publicly in the country as well as
in the Bank InfoShop. It is expected that by July 2015 studies for the ESMF and RPF will have
been launched.
Once the final sites for the business incubators in Libreville, Port-Gentil and Franceville are
O
chosen and the type of works (build or rehabilitate) identified as well as the exact paths for the
selected missing links, an Environmental and Social Assessment, including an ESMP, as well as a
resettlement action plan (RAP) and an Indigenous People Plan if needed will also be prepared. If
sites and type of works are known soon (because feasibility studies have been completed), this
could even be done before Project Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michel Rogy,Dominic S. Haazen
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 03-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Boutheina Guermazi (PMGR)                 Date: 04-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


