                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC17448

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Sao Tome and Principe           Project ID:       P159667
                            Project Name:        Sao Tome and Principe Household Budget Survey
                            Team Leader(s):      Alvin Etang Ndip
                            Estimated Date       31-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV01                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.6                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                  0.6
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall development objective of this project is to support the Government of STP in improving
                           the availability and quality of poverty and other socio-economic data to inform policy monitoring
                           and planning through the implementation of a new consumption-basedhousehold survey in 2017, and
                           associated capacity building activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project includes the following activities, all of which will be conducted by INE as part of the
                           survey implementation.

                           Questionnaire Revision - Analysis of the 2010 HBS showed some short-comings in the survey
                           design. For example, the consumption module was not comparable to the previous survey (2000) - a
                           15-day recall method was used in 2000 and a 15-day diary method used in 2010 to collect
                           information on household food consumption. The list of food items was by far larger in 2010
                           compared to 2000. These issues will be addressed by moving to the best practice methodology
                           (especially those developed as part of the WAEMU project). For example, for the 2017 survey,
                           information on food consumption will be collected using a 7-day recall method rather than 15-day
                           diary as was done in 2010. As this will represent a substantial departure from the previous HBS
                           methodology, either a bridge survey of a small nationally representative sample, survey-to-survey
                         imputation, or other similar econometric technique will be necessary to have a comparable national
                         poverty series, while the 2017 survey will become the benchmark going forward.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Also, a community questionnaire will be prepared and implemented in 2017 in addition to the
                         household questionnaire. This questionnaire will include questions that are common to households in
                         the same community (for example, infrastructure, village/town characteristics, and access to
                         services). Further, a Food Price questionnaire will be prepared and implemented at the community
                         level. Data on the prices and weights of food items will allow to update INE's Conversion Factor
                         database for better quality calculations of food consumption and CPI. Currently price data has been
                         collected on a limited list of food items in Sao Tome, but the new survey is aimed at covering the
                         entire country.

                         The 2017 questionnaires will be adapted primarily from the WAEMU questionnaires. The
                         questionnaires will be piloted and adjusted accordingly. Draft questionnaires will be shared with
                         major government stakeholders for review and feedback prior to finalizing the instruments.
                         Supplementary topics that have been proposed include time use and short agriculture and fisheries
                         modules. Training manuals for enumerators and supervisors will also be prepared.

                         Sample Selection - Sample design will be similar to HBS 2010, but the sampling frames for the new
                         survey will be the 2012 census data. It was agreed to maintain a sample size of approximately 4,000
                         households that would allow for representative estimates at the national level, as well as at the
                         regional (four regions) and district (seven districts) levels. The actual households to be surveyed will
                         be randomly selected using data from a listing exercise of selected (randomly) enumeration areas.

                         Weight Calculations - The weights will be calculated using the probabilities generated by the sample
                         design, cluster-level non-response, and post-stratification using the current estimated population
                         totals based on the 2012 census.

                         Fieldwork - Fieldwork will be conducted over approximately a 2-month period. This is a shorter
Public Disclosure Copy




                         period than the previous HBS, which collected data in about 3 months, using large numbers of
                         enumerators and supervisors because households were visited several times, particularly to complete
                         the 15-day diary. The proposed fieldwork calendar and smaller field team size will allow for high
                         standards in hiring and training of enumerators and supervisors. Subject to finalization of survey
                         preparations, the start date planned for the survey is February 2017.

                         Data Capture - Questionnaire administration and data capture will be done simultaneously using
                         Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI), for example, Survey Solutions software. CAPI
                         questionnaire administration integrates data checking into the interview process, allowing outlier
                         values to be confirmed while the interviewer is still within the household. This reduces the amount of
                         cleaning that will be done and speeds the pace at which results can be made available. In other
                         words, CAPI technology can significantly reduce the time lag between data collection and data
                         analysis, dramatically improve data quality, reduce survey costs, and facilitates integration of
                         household survey data with GPS coordinates. However, the process of moving INE to this new
                         technology, and ensuring sustainability at the level of INE requires significant capacity building. The
                         Bank will support INE through identifying experts to: (a) give CAPI training to INE staff; (b) work
                         with the IT staff from INE on setting up the survey system infrastructure; (c) help in the design and
                         testing of the CAPI household survey instruments - including real-time consistency checks,
                         supervisor and enumerator supervision, and new ways to deal with measures and standards; (d)
                         supervise pilot surveys; (e) give CAPI training of enumerators and supervisors: and (f) provide
                           general software support and customization for the needs of STP.

                           Production of a Statistical Abstract - The project, along with the companion World Bank technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assistance project, will ensure the timely production of updated poverty numbers, and tables of major
                           correlates of poverty.

                           Dissemination - In addition to printed copies of the statistical abstract, the data will be properly
                           archived and anonymized datasets will be released publicly within 12 months of the completion of
                           data collection through the INE website or other appropriate data sharing platform.

                           Capacity building of INE - This is an integral part of the project and cuts across all stages of the
                           survey, from survey design, through implementation (data collection), to data analysis and
                           dissemination.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a statistical project coordinated by the INE. It concerns improvements in the household
                           survey to be carried out in 2017 (including methodology, survey implementation methods, data
                           capture and analysis, core statistics) and data collection methods (CAPI). Methods for improving
                           surveys, including in the field, will be supported. The activities to be funded by the project are
                           limited to capacity building and data production and dissemination and use. It will not fund any civil
                           works that could have adverse environmental or social impacts. The social impact is expected to be
                           positive because by making quality data publicly available it will nurture public debate on matters of
                           economic, financial, and social concern, facilitate public accountability and a better targeting of
                           public policies and use of public resources.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Erik Reed (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No               There is no need for an environmental
                           BP 4.01                                                assessment: the work entails desk work (to
                                                                                  design new survey; data collection
                                                                                  methodologies and analysis) and data collection
                                                                                  using field enumerators
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
                                                                                  of this project on natural habitats: the work
                                                                                  entails desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                  collection methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                  collection using field enumerators
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
                                                                                  of this project on forests: the work entails desk
                                                                                  work (to design new survey; data collection
                                                                                methodologies and analysis) and data collection
                                                                                using field enumerators
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                of this project on pest management: the work
                                                                                entails desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                collection methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                collection using field enumerators
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
                           BP 4.11                                              of this project on physical cultural resources: the
                                                                                work entails desk work (to design new survey;
                                                                                data collection methodologies and analysis) and
                                                                                data collection using field enumerators
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
                                                                                of this project on indigenous people: the work
                                                                                entails desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                collection methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                collection using field enumerators
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               There is no need for an assessment of
                           4.12                                                 involuntatry resettlment: the work entails desk
                                                                                work (to design new survey; data collection
                                                                                methodologies and analysis) and data collection
                                                                                using field enumerators
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               There is no need for an assessment of the effect
                                                                                of this project on teh safety of dams: the work
                                                                                entails desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                collection methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                collection using field enumerators
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International           No               There is no need for an assessment of projects
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 on international waterways: the work entails
                                                                                desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                collection methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                collection using field enumerators
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  There is no need for an assessment of projects in
                           7.60                                                 disputed areas: the work entails desk work (to
                                                                                design new survey; data collection
                                                                                methodologies and analysis) and data collection
                                                                                using field enumerators

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Alvin Etang Ndip
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                           Date: 22-Sep-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Andrew L. Dabalen (PMGR)                                     Date: 22-Sep-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
