INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13388
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Nepal                      Project ID:   P154323
Project Name:    Strategic Roads Development Project (P154323)
Task Team        A.K. Farhad Ahmed,Dominic Pasquale Patella
Leader(s):
Estimated        20-Jan-2016                Estimated     30-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO6                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Transportation (30%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (70%)
Theme(s):        Decentralization (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (20%), Rural
policies and institutions (30%), Rural services and infras tructure (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     296.50             Total Bank Financing:   150.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              146.50
o          International Development Association (IDA)                     150.00
Total                                                           296.50
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
10.    The project development objective for this operation is to improve connectivity along
selected sections of Nepal's Strategic Roads Network and to strengthen GON's capacity for
preparing major projects in the transport sector.
C. Project Description


﻿14.    The proposed operation will consist of three active components that focus on: (i) road
rehabilitation and periodic maintenance; (ii) bridge demolition and replacement; and (iii) institutional
development, major project preparation and the development of a comprehensive quality assurance
and testing mechanism. In addition, there will be a fourth contingent project component on standby
for emergency reconstruction. All project components will be open to channel funds from the NTDP
or other donor sources.
o
15.    Delivering the proposed project will entail two Project Implementation Units under DOR's
Bridge Branch (PIU-BB) and Foreign Cooperation Branch (PIU-FCB) to manage bridge and road
investments respectively. A deputy director general will head each PIU and will report to a Project
Coordination Office (PCO) managed by DOR's director general. The PCO will coordinate each
PIU's activities and will manage the project's technical assistance component (Component C) and
contingent component (Component D). A Senior Divisional Engineer (SDE) will manage the PCO's
activities on a day-to-day basis.
Component A - road rehabilitation and enhancement measures (US$ 191 million):
16.    Component A of the project will fund: (i) periodic maintenance, rehabilitation and widening
of selected road sections along the Pathlaiya-Dhakebar-Kakarbhitta (PDK) corridor of the East West
highway; (ii) road safety works and pedestrian facilities along the PDK corridor; and (iii)
environmental and social enhancement measures along the selected sections of the main road
corridor. Examples of environmental and social enhancement measures include new 'green spaces'
and/ or community assets in / around settlements in the vicinity of the road right of way, sites for
roadside facilities such as shops or rest areas, wildlife underpasses, treating borrow-pits, properly
closing old quarry sites, bio-engineering & slope protection works, conservation of water sources/
wet-lands, improving/maintaining biological connectivity and natural habitats in the vicinity of road
etc.
17.    IDA and the Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF) are supporting Nepal's Road Safety Action
Plan under the Road Safety Support Project (RS SP P149606). This operation includes investments in
O
Q)      crash barriers along selected sections of RSDP roads as well as technical assistance to draft new road
safety legislation and subsidiary regulations. In addition, RSSP will help to mobilize the Nepal Road
Safety Council & Secretariat that will eventually lead national road safety initiatives. The proposed
project would complement RSSP's intervention by implementing further road safety interventions
along the Pathlaiya-Dhalkebar corridor.
Component B - bridge development and replacement (US$ 85 million):
18.    Component B of the project will support the demolition and replacement of 65 bridges
(3,939 meters) along the Pathlaiya-Dhalkebar section of the PDK corridor.
19.    DOR's Bridge Branch examined bridges along the Pathlaiya-Dhalkebar section as candidates
for maintenance under the IDA-supported Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Project (BIMP
P125495). However, this assessment concluded that replacement would be a more technically
suitable and cost effective option given that these bridges are currently only single lane and well
beyond their intended design lives. Bridge Branch will seek to use the proposed operation as an
opportunity to let larger contract bundles that can incentivize contractors to invest in the skills and
equipment needed for implementing technologies that are less common or entirely new in Nepal (e.g.
segmental arch bridges, precast construction).


﻿20.    The approach to replacing bridges along the Pathlaiya-Dhalkebar section will generally
entail constructing new four- lane bridges adjacent to or in place existing bridges and undertaking
minor road realignments, if necessary, to provide access to the new structures.. Most current bridges
on the Pathlaiya-Dhalkebar section are narrow enough to facilitate replacement bridge construction
O
largely within the 25 meter existing road right of way.
Component C - strategic roads & bridges project prep., planning, and TA (US$ 20.5 million):
21.    Component C of the proposed operation will fund: (i) development and deployment of a
department-wide quality assurance policy and strategy for DOR; (ii) feasibility studies,
environmental and social assessments, and engineering work as necessary to prepare major projects
that fall under MoPIT's remit; (iii) technical assistance for MoPIT and its respective departments;
(iv) technical auditing of project works by the National Vigilance Center; (v) a project impact study;
(vi) beneficiary outreach and monitoring of project works; and (vii) initial capitalization of the Nepal
Transport Development Partnership (NTDP) trust fund.
22.    Technical assistance to MoPIT and its departments will include (i) training; (ii) technical
studies, environmental and social assessments, and engineering investigations for preparing future
projects; (iii) support for policy development and implementation (especially that linked to quality
assurance); and (iv) consultancy services to support project implementation. A central theme of the
project's proposed technical assistance component will be the preparation of major projects. This is
an area where MoPIT can develop considerably. Historically, major project investments in Nepal do
not benefit from technically sound preparations. In many respects the institutional mechanisms for
taking major project decisions are weak or non-existent. Internationally, there is clear evidence that
major projects challenge developed and developing countries alike. The proposed operation will
seek to replicate some of the better international practices for managing the unique considerations
that major projects entail. These include measures such as developing specialized units, skills,
policies, processes, and possibly even special legislation specifically that codifies a national approach
to major projects.
23.    Nepal's National Vigilance Center will manage technical auditing under the proposed
project. This will include: (i) technical audits of completed works; and (ii) annually conducted
Integrated Technical Audits (ITA) of overall processes that relate to the planning and execution of
SRN works within the Department of Roads. Technical audits of completed works are ex-post
o       engineering assessments that summarize as-built condition relative to original specifications and
standards. This generally entails visual inspections, non-destructive / destructive testing, and
auditing of the management procedures that applied to a specific contract. Integrated Technical
Audits are broader strategic-level examinations of processes that affect the outcome of civil works
programs.
24.    IDA has been supporting enhancements to the NVC's technical auditing capabilities for
transport sector works under the Project for Strengthening the National Rural Transport Program
(SNRTP P132750). In addition, a complementary technical assistance activity funded by the Global
Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) is currently under preparation. The IDA-supported
Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program (BIMP P125495) has pioneered the use of
Integrated Technical Auditing for DOR's SRN bridges program. The proposed project would
expand upon this initial use of ITAs by including additional programs within DOR. IDA and the
CPO will agree the scope each year's ITA annually.
Component D - contingent component for emergency response (US$0 million)


﻿25.    Component D will stand available as a contingency component to facilitate emergency
reconstruction of physical infrastructure along SRN roads and, if need be, institutional reconstruction
of MoPIT and its departments. In the event of a natural disaster or other emergency, investments
under this component would proceed according to OP/BP 8.0 which governs Rapid Response to
O
U       Crises and Emergencies.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
Proposed road and bridge upgrading activities under the project are located in the south-eastern part
of Nepal. Geographically the area is known as Tarai, a plain area which is continuation of the
Gangetic plain, inner Tarai, and Churia hills. The climate is sub-tropical with hot and humid weather
during May-August, during which time about 80% rainfall occurs.
The proposed KDP Road corridor of the East West Highway as well as locations of proposed bridge
construction and replacement traverse through forests, settlements, commercial and cultivating areas.
This includes sections of important habitat for important wildlife species, as well as geologically and
hydrologically fragile zones, and areas under human pressures. There is good sal forest between
Pathalaiya-Nijgadh. Wild animals such as elephants, leopards, monkeys, and different deer species
have been documented in this forest. Government has proposed extension of the Parsa Wildlife
Reserve, located west of Pathaliya, to include part of this forest. Not far from the corridor, there are
other areas of bio-diversity value e.g. Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve (a Ramsar Wetland) in Sunsari
district, forest between Belbari- Pathari in Morang district etc. This corridor crosses a number of
streams and rivers many of which are characterized by significant flash floods during the Monsoon
rainy season (June-August). These floods inflict significant damages each year, bring huge amount of
debris/ sand/ gravel, cause erosion of river banks & inundation of settlements/ agricultural lands etc.
During monsoon rainy season, the Tarai area including the East-West highway corridor and its
vicinity also faces water drainage problems, causing water-logging & ponding (which also creates
breeding places for water borne disease vectors such as mosquitoes, increasing risks of diseases such
as malaria, encephalitis, dengue, kala-azar/black fever etc).
0
The presence of the highway has also attracted land-clearing and settlements along its right of way
(RoW). Over the past few decades, several settlements have developed and grown rapidly all along
the highway corridor, on both sides. The RoW itself is commonly used by the settlers for various
purposes, e.g. trading, storing goods, tea-shops, etc.
Although existing highway corridors to be improved and bridges to be replaced are known, in most
cases the details of proposed improvements, such as specific stretches to be 4-laned vs upgraded
within a 2 lane ROW, locations of by-passes, exact locations and details of the proposed bridges and
other activities are not-known at this stage. Only some of the bridges on the Pathalaiya-Dhalkebar
(PD) stretch are currently identified. For the rest of the project investments, the project will use a
programmatic approach, in which activity wise DPR (detailed project report) for all activities except
for select bridges will be prepared in stages during implementation of the project, based on a
feasibility study also to be completed during the implementation stage.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented by the Department of Roads (DOR). The Bank has been working
with this agency in implementing transport projects for the last three decades. During this time, DOR
has established itself as a reliable agency in the implementation of Bank financed projects. The
World Bank, ADB, GIZ, DflD, UNDP, JICA and the Government of India have previously invested


﻿in DOR's capacity development. IDA, through RSDP and BIMP, has supported the strengthening of
DOR's systems for environmental and social impact management. Various development partners and
DOR has worked together in the previous years to develop and use harmonized procedures. One of
the outcomes of such long-term collaboration and support is that there is already substantial
O
U       agreement on the approach to addressing the main fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project.
The DOR is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements from previous and ongoing
projects and has established a Geo-Environmental and Social Unit (GESU) The creation of GESU
has played an important role in mainstreaming environmental and social considerations into road and
bridge planning and development. DOR has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) in 2007, and updated it recently. The ESMF conforms to Bank safeguard policy
requirements, and is being applied to the ongoing RSDP as well as in BIMP. Social and
environmental issues under the proposed project will broadly be governed by the already agreed road
sector ESMF, which will also be updated for this project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The construction and improvement activities of roads
OP/BP 4.01                              and bridges in the proposed section of the East West
Highway are likely to trigger diverse direct, indirect,
induced and cumulative environmental and social
concerns/impacts. Given that the details of project
investments are largely unknown at this stage, the
Q)                                              safeguards planning work will follow a
programmatic / phased approach. An Environmental
and Social Assessment (ESA) will be carried out
during project preparation including: (a) baseline
assessment for the full known project area of
influence; (b) detailed screening/assessment of
already-identified and fully designed bridges on
Pathalaiya-Dhalkebar (PD) section; (c) scenario-
based impact assessment (including cumulative and
induced impacts) and preliminary identification of
mitigation measures for all proposed investments;
and (d) requirements, responsibilities and budget for
updating and finalizing the assessment process as
activity details become available during
implementation stage. This will also include an
updating of DOR's existing ESMF as needed to
cover all proposed activities under the project. More
detail on the contents of the ESA is specified under
Section III: Safeguard Preparation Plan below.


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The proposed corridor passes through or close to
wildlife habitats and movement routes (see Section
D); this policy is therefore triggered. The ESA will
identify natural and critical habitats within the
project area of influence and will specify measures to
ensure that this policy is complied with.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          There are forest areas in a few places along the
proposed corridor (See Section D). Direct and
indirect impact on these forests is likely. The ESA
will include a baseline assessment of forests in the
project area and will specify measures for managing
impacts toforests in accordance with this policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD          If road rehabilitation and maintenance activities use
any herbicides or pesticides for control of right-of-
way undergrowth, this policy could be triggered.
Already identified bridges will be screened during
preparation to verify the applicability of this policy
and to specify compliance requirements on the
handling, storage and use of any pesticides or
herbicides in accordance with the policy. For
subsequent investment activities, the ESA will
include a preliminary assessment of potential pest
management issues associated with the project and
will specify appropriate management and mitigation
measures, if required. The ESMF would also be
updated accordingly.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          No nationally known or highly significant PCR has
OP/BP 4.11                                been reported along the corridor. However, there is
possibility of existence of cultural sites of local
significance within or close to the right of way. The
ESA will verify whether this policy is triggered, and
appropriate management measures will be specified
as required. In addition, the ESMF outlines
procedures for handling any chance-finds of cultural
resources during construction activities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          There are various indigenous communities residing
4.10                                      in the project area. They are intended beneficiaries of
the project. Therefore, the policy is triggered. Given
that the details of project investments are largely
unknown at this stage, the safeguards planning work
will follow a programmatic / phased approach. An
Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) will be
carried out during project preparation which may
include IPDP when needed. This will also include an
updating of DOR's existing ESMF (an IPPF was
included) as needed to cover all proposed activities


﻿under the project. More detail on the contents of the
ESA is specified under Section III: Safeguard
Preparation Plan below.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Land taking is expected due to the nature of the
BP 4.12                                   project. Therefore, the policy is triggered. Given that
the details of project investments are largely
unknown at this stage, the safeguards planning work
will follow a programmatic / phased approach. An
Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) will be
carried out during project preparation which may
include RAP when needed. This will also include an
updating of DOR's existing ESMF (an RPF was
included) as needed to cover all proposed activities
under the project. More detail on the contents of the
ESA is specified under Section III: Safeguard
Preparation Plan below.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           No dams will be constructed or upgraded for the
project, and no project investments depend on
existing dams.
Projects on International    No           The project does not include any activities on
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project does not include any activities in
BP 7.60                                   disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
O
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report, including Executive Summary in English
O
and Nepali, will be prepared for the project prior to appraisal. This shall include, inter alia:
(a)    screening and scoping of all proposed project activities, delineation of the area of
influence, and baseline conditions within the area of influence;
(b)    scenario-based analysis of potential environmental and social impacts, taking into account
the above indicated issues, and corresponding with the level of project details known at the time of
this assessment;
(c)    detailed impact assessment and preparation of full or site-specific EMPs together with
pragmatic social plans/safeguard measures (RAPs and IPDPs as needed) to mitigate the ROW
issues based on available information for activities that are fully defined and designed during the
project preparation phase (or the activities for which DPR is ready);
(d)    outlining of additional work to be required to update the assessment as detailed design
decisions are made for various project activities during implementation of the project (including
detailed TORs / outline of activity specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
to be carried out during project implementation, and corresponding necessary updates to DoR's
existing ESMF for road and bridge works);
(e)    separating out and updating of IPPF and RPF from the existing ESMF, as stand-alone
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿documents; and
(f)    arrangements and budget for implementation, monitoring and reporting on environmental
and social mitigation and management measures, including capacity assessment, human resources
and training needs, and capacity building measures, for the proposed project.
8 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: A.K. Farhad Ahmed,Dominic Pasquale Patella
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                      Date: 11-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)          Date: 12-Nov-2015
Manager:


