INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12370
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Brazil                      Project ID:   P149496
Project Name:    Brazil -Salvador Social Project (P149496)
Task Team        Gaston Mariano Blanco
Leader(s):
Estimated        20-Jul-2015                 Estimated     08-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Sub-national government administration (20%), General education sector (25%),
Health (25%), Other social services (25%), Urban Trans port (5%)
Theme(s):        Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Social Safety Nets/Social
Assistance & Social Care Services (25%), Education for all (25%), Health
system performance (25%), Urban planning and housing policy (5%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     400.00             Total Bank Financing:   400.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                           0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            400.00
Total                                                            400.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
25.    The objectives of the proposed Project are to: (i) increase the access of families living in the
Municipality of Salvador to education, health, and social assistance services; (ii) support the
implementation of actions and systems to improve the quality of municipal services in the areas of


﻿education, health, and social assistance; and (iii) modernize the municipality's public sector
management
C. Project Description
The proposed Project would be a US$400 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) and would
have two components. The first Component would provide support for the implementation of the
Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEP), and the second Component would provide technical assistance
to support activities financed in Component 1, including those involving design, implementation,
a      monitoring and evaluation of results, urban mobility studies, and public sector evaluations. To this
end, the proposed Project would follow: (a) a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) under Component 1;
and (b) a traditional investment approach under Component 2.
Component 1 - Support the implementation of Sector Strategies. This Component with a preliminary
total of US$370 million will provide support for the implementation of Eligible Expenditures
Programs (EEPs) in selected sectors. The EEPs are a sub-set of existing budget programs in the
education, health and social assistance sectors, which will be selected as priority programs. As with
other SWAp projects in Brazil, the proposed Project would take a results-based financing approach
for the implementation of agreed programs. Under Component 1, Municipal Secretariats of
Education, Health and Social Assistance are expected to achieve specific results, which would then
trigger disbursements. Thus, this Component will partially reimburse government expenditures in
EEPs conditional on the achievement of disbursement linked indicators (DLIs). The preliminary
Project design of Component 1 is organized around three Sub-components:
Sub-component 1.1: Education. This Sub-component would provide support for the implementation
of EEPs in the following areas: (i) expansion of municipal ECE coverage and upgrading of facilities;
(ii) strengthening students' assessment, monitoring and evaluation; (iii) improving teacher practice to
guarantee literacy at the right age; and (iv) holding schools accountable for results.
Sub-component 1.2: Health. Focusing on diabetes and hypertension, this Sub-component would
provide support to the implementation of EEPs in the following areas: (i) prevention of NCDs, and
promotion of healthy life styles; (ii) detection and treatment of NCDs; and (iii) improved
management of the local health system to address NCDs.
Sub-component 1.3. Social Assistance. This Sub-component would provide support for the
implementation of EEPs in the following areas: (i) improving access to and quality of services of the
Municipal Social Assistance network; and (ii) strengthening the monitoring of co-responsibilities of
BF and the management model of BSM.
Component 2 - Technical Assistance and Investment support. This Component would provide
technical assistance to support activities financed in Component 1, including those involving design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of results, the urban mobility studies, and the public
sector evaluations. The preliminary design of Component 2 is organized around five Sub-
components: (i) Education, (ii) Health, (iii) Social Assistance, (iv) Urban Mobility, and (v) Public
Management. This Component will finance Consultant Services, Non Consultant services, Training,
Goods and Operating Costs.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be located in Salvador, capital of the state of Bahia. Salvador is the third largest city


﻿in the country with a population of almost 2.9 million people (IBGE, 2014) and is the twelfth largest
municipal economy in the country (R$38.8 billion in 2011, IBGE). Salvador concentrates
approximately 19.2 percent of the State's population and 74 percent of the metropolitan region of
Salvador, which comprises 13 municipalities. It has the second largest municipal GDP of the
O
U       Northeast region after the Municipality of Fortaleza.
Salvador is characterized by relatively high levels of inequality compared with other state capitals of
Brazil. In the last 50 years, the share of people living in cities doubled. The country's rapid
urbanization and decades of poor urban planning have led to high concentrations of poverty in urban
areas, enduring inequality, insufficient access to basic services and public transportation, and
settlement of poor populations in high risk areas. Moderate and extreme poverty rates in Salvador
have declined by 71 percent and 66 percent, respectively, well above Brazil's national pace of 52
percent, leaving Salvador with 3.3 percent of extreme poverty and 7.2 percent of moderate poverty,
slightly lower than other large cities in the Northeast (Recife and Fortaleza). However, Salvador is
still the second most unequal city in the country, just behind Brasilia, with a Gini coefficient of 0.57
in 2012.
The city's population is mostly comprised of Afro-Descendants, and self-ascribed skin-color has a
strong correlation with educational attainments and income. Race and gender continue to determine
individuals' abilities to climb the social ladder. Poverty among afro-descendants is 35 percent higher
than among whites. The incidence of moderate and extreme poverty in households led by women is
10 percent higher than those led by men.
Among the total population, 37 percent has not completed fundamental school. This rate increases to
43 percent among those who declared to be "black," 39 percent among those who declared to be
"pardos" (mixed race Brazilians) and 41 percent among the indigenous peoples, and drops to 25
percent among those who declared to be white among the population of Salvador. With regard to
income, 60.8 percent of the population has average monthly incomes up to one minimum wage; this
average equals 71.1 percent among the self-declared "blacks" and 63.3 percent among the "pardos."
0
Rapid, unplanned urban development has led to the occupation of areas at risk of landslides and
flooding by low income families. Thus, a large part of the city s population live in households
located in slums (32 percent) and poverty rates are higher among them (72 percent have an average
a      monthly per capita income up to one minimum wage). These areas also tend to be underprovided by
public services.
Environmentally, Salvador, like other Brazilian cities, faces a number of problems and challenges
related either to urban planning, natural resources management and environmental enforcement, or to
a weak municipal legal framework. The environmental quality of Salvador is depreciating gradually,
since the urban rivers are degraded and polluted by sewage, the dunes and mangroves are impacted
by the expansion of urban dwellings, the loss of vegetation cover interferes with the temperature and
air humidity, and there is no systematic monitoring of air quality. Moreover, protected areas in the
city are not well managed and no ecological corridors exist between them. Only recently has a
municipal environmental policy been discussed and a municipal register of potentially degrading
activities and activities that use natural resources been considered.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Municipality of Salvador (MOS) has no previous experience with the World Bank's Operational


﻿Policies. The Client's institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be further assessed by the
World Bank Team during preparation and the need for capacity enhancement will be determined.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (GENDR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
afeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The proposed Project foresees the construction,
OP/BP 4.01                              rehabilitation, expansion or repair of small buildings
(Early Childhood Education Centers - CMEls, health
units, and Social Assistance Centers - CRAS, etc.),
which may cause negative environmental impacts.
Although these impacts are expected to be minor,
and mostly related to civil works' execution, the
Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy (OP/BP
4.01) is triggered and the Borrower will conduct an
environmental assessment process. Therefore, a
Category B is proposed for this Project.
The Project also proposes technical assistance on
Urban Mobility as part of Component 2, for which
environmental and social implications may be
significant. Although the nature of such implications
will be better understood only when the TA itself is
carried out, it is possible to process some level of
analysis of the related environmental and social
issues.
As the exact circumstances related to the proposed
works are not yet detailed, the Borrower would
prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), which would identify the main
environmental and social impacts and risks of the
proposed Project and suggest mitigating measures. It
would also assess the institutional capacity to
manage and mitigate social and environmental risks
and define a capacity building strategy - as needed.
A draft Terms of Reference (ToR) of this study was
shared with the Borrower and the final version will
be submitted to the Bank for approval before the
hiring process begins. The ESMF will be reviewed
by the Bank and publicly disseminated in the
Infoshop prior to Appraisal and in the external
website of the MOS.


﻿As an integral part of the ESMF, the Borrower will
carry out a social assessment. The social assessment
would be gender and ethnic sensitive and would
consider the distributional impact of the
interventions. The social assessment will incorporate
broader issues related to non-discrimination,
particularly as it relates to the LGBTI and Afro-
descendant communities as well as issues related to
persons with disabilities. Finally, the social
assessment would evaluate the Client's systems for
citizen participation in the Municipality of Salvador
(users' feedback, grievance redress, ombudsmen,
etc.), and would propose measures to be adopted as
the Project's Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          Locations and field conditions of new buildings for
Education, Health, and Social Assistance are not yet
completely known. If new constructions occur in
areas with presence of Natural Habitats (OP/BP
4.04), the policy should be triggered. Different ways
of dealing with this issue can be considered: (i) the
Project would not support new constructions located
in areas with the presence of natural habitats, which
excludes triggering the Policy; (ii) the Project would
support all activities and, then specific procedures
would be required to ensure compliance with the
policy. During Project preparation, the team will
confirm with the MOS the most appropriate way to
handle this issue in Salvador. If the second option is
confirmed, the policy would be triggered and the
ESMF would include screening criteria to identify
the presence of natural habitats, assess potential
impacts, and determine appropriate measures to
avoid, mitigate, or compensate for any possible
direct or indirect impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The Project would be executed in the urban area of
Salvador. Therefore, no impacts on forests are
expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes          Although the Project will not finance the use or
disposal of pest control products, the appearance of
urban pests during rehabilitation, repairs,
maintenance and expansion works is not unusual and
always requires the use of such chemicals. Therefore,
the OP 4.09 is triggered in a precautionary basis. The
ESMF would evaluate the Project interventions in
the context of this policy, the potential for future use
of pesticides/ herbicides outside of the proposed
Project timeline including the need for the future


﻿adoption of an economically and environmentally
sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM) in
relation to the facilities associated with the Project.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Locations and field conditions of new buildings for
OP/BP 4.11                               Education, Health and Social Assistance are not yet
completely known. Negative impacts on physical
cultural resources are not expected during project
implementation. However this policy will be
triggered given the richness of historical sites in
Salvador and because the construction, rehabilitation,
repairs, maintenance and expansion works planned
for Component 1 may affect physical and cultural
resources - PCR (historical and archeological).
Chance find procedures will be included as part of
the ESMF and moving forward the team will
determine whether there is a need to prepare specific
plans dependent upon the sites selected. If during
works, physical cultural resources are found,
procedures and provision for proper handling -
following the Federal legislative and normative
framework developed by the National Institute for
Protection of Historical and Archaeological Sites
(IPHAN) - will be followed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         The likelihood of triggering OP 4.10 Indigenous
4.10                                     Peoples is small given the location of the Project.
Nonetheless, it will only be defined after the
screening for the presence of Indigenous Peoples is
conducted. The 2010 Census conducted by IBGE
recognizes the presence of 7,563 indigenous peoples
in Salvador, but the screening will confirm or not
whether indigenous peoples in Salvador fulfill the
four characteristics of the policy and in particular the
requirement of collective attachment.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        This policy would be triggered because result-
BP 4.12                                  activities envisaged under Component 1 may require
land acquisition and lead to adverse impacts related
to involuntary resettlement as well as because some
Technical Assistance activities under Component 2
may have downstream resettlement-related impacts.
Component 1: Considering the characteristics of the
constructions of new facilities for children's
education and provision of health and social
assistance services to be supported under this
Component, the scope and magnitude of expected
adverse impacts related to physical and economic
displacement due to land acquisition, are expected to


﻿be limited to a small number of families in each
intervention.
Two different approaches are being considered with
regards to these activities.
a.     The Project would not support specific
activities that require land acquisition. The Project
would consider providing support only to the
construction of new Education, Health and Social
Assistance facilities that would be located in lands
that: (i) are already owned by the Municipality of
Salvador; and (ii) are free of squatters. In this case,
no instrument related to involuntary resettlement
would have to be prepared by the Client and the
Project's Manual of Operations would establish as a
"rule of thumb" that no land acquisition would be
allowed for activities supported by the Project. This
alternative may not be feasible because the
Municipality of Salvador may not have a sufficient
stock of owned lands available on the areas in which
the new facilities are mostly needed. The Client
would carry out a stocktaking exercise of the areas
owned by the Municipality of Salvador in the
neighborhoods targeted for the construction of these
new facilities to assess the feasibility of this
approach.
b.     The Project would support all activities
regardless if they require land acquisition. In this
case, different procedures would be required to
ensure compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement
Policy.
i.        Where the Project considers providing
retroactive financing for facilities already built by the
Client, the Client would carry out a stocktaking
exercise of the land tenure situation of the areas used
for these constructions as well as provide evidences
on how they have been acquired and how these early
procedures complied with the principles and
guidelines of OP 4.12. On the basis of this
stocktaking exercise, the Bank would identify the
activities that could be considered for retroactive
financing. The most precautionary procedure may be
considering for retroactive financing only the
facilities that have been built in areas previously
owned by the Municipality of Salvador and free of


﻿occupants.
ii. Where the Project considers providing
support to the construction of new facilities that
would have their location already chosen, the Client
would carry out a screening exercise of the land
tenure situation of the areas required for these new
constructions and would prepare and submit to the
Bank evaluation and no objection the proper
Involuntary Resettlement Plans (IRP) whenever
these areas: (i) are privately owned and need to be
acquired by the municipality; or (ii) are owned by the
Municipality of Salvador but remain occupied by
squatters. These IRPs would be submitted to the
Bank, consulted with the affected population and
publically disclosed before Appraisal.
iii.   Finally, where the Project considers
providing support to the construction of new
facilities that would not have their location chosen
before Project's Appraisal, the Client would prepare
and submit to the Bank a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), describing the principles,
guidelines and procedures that would be followed
when activities supported by the Project need land
acquisition and may have adverse impacts related to
involuntary resettlement. The RPF would be
submitted to the Bank, publically consulted and
disclosed before Appraisal.
These alternative approaches would be discussed
with the Client and they would be chosen on the
basis of the stocktaking land tenure exercise that
would be carried out by the Client.
Component 2: Some activities envisaged under Sub-
Component 2.4 and related to Urban Mobility -
namely: developing mid-term planning processes for
urban mobility, in particular updating Salvador's
public transport plan Rede Integrada de Transportes
(RIT) de Salvador and supporting Bus Rapid Transit
functional design in selected corridors - could have
downstream resettlement-related impacts. The team
would ensure that these Technical Assistance
activities would follow the guiding principles set at
the World Bank's "Interim Guidelines on the
Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical


﻿Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed
Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank"
and "Interim Guidance Note on Land Use Planning."
The Terms of Reference for the preparation of these
activities would be submitted to the Bank for review
and no objection before the hiring process. The Plans
and designs resulting from these activities would also
be submitted to the Bank. The Bank would ensure
that these Terms of Reference, Plans, and Designs
include all guidelines needed to ensure that the
implementation of Technical Assistance activities
and the treatment they propose for dealing with
downstream resettlement-related impacts would be
consistent with the World Bank's Involuntary
Resettlement Policy. The principles and guidelines to
be applied to deal with downstream resettlement-
related impacts from Technical Assistance activities
would be incorporated on the RPF to be prepared by
the Client, submitted to the Bank, publically
consulted and disclosed before Appraisal.
The proper documents related to involuntary
resettlement would be disclosed prior to appraisal at
the World Bank's external website and locally, at
publicly accessible locations and in a form and
language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Not applicable. The Project would not finance the
construction or any other intervention related to a
dam nor will rely on the operations of existing dams.
Projects on International    No           Not applicable. None of the Project activities are
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      expected to have any impacts on international
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable, because the activities financed by the
BP 7.60                                   Project are not located in disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
May 30, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gaston Mariano Blanco
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                      Date: 04-May-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager/     Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (PMGR)           Date: 07-May-2015
Manager:
O


