                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA16550
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 12-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               15-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Philippines                  Project ID:              P153814
    Project Name:                     Metro Manila Flood Management Project (P153814)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Joop Stoutjesdijk
    Estimated Appraisal               01-Jun-2017                  Estimated Board          05-Jul-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GWA02                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                   Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           500.00                        Total Bank Financing: 207.63
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                     84.74
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                      207.63
    Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                                                                       207.63
    Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00
    Total                                                                                                      500.00
    Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to improve flood management in selected areas of Metro Manila.
    3. Project Description
    Component 1: Modernization of Drainage Areas (US$375.20 million). The Project will construct an estimated
    20 new and modernize an estimated 36 existing pumping stations and appurtenant infrastructure and improve
    their associated waterways and draining channels and develop new channels when needed. Modern, efficient,
    and high capacity pumping units will be used. The design discharge determination will be underpinned by
    hydrological studies of the drainage areas and the best type of pump will be selected for each given site.
    Improvements to appurtenant infrastructure such as flood gates and trash racks will be carried out as necessary.

                                                    Page 1 of 21
The energy source will, where needed and possible, be changed from diesel to electricity. The component will
also finance dredging, including accumulated sediments and solid waste, and improvements to waterways and
drainage channels. Five existing pumping stations (a sub-project) have been selected and designed, with
implementation to start during project year 1 (PY1). The component will develop asset management plans, as a
minimum for the larger PSs, and operational manuals will be prepared or updated for all PSs and associated
waterways to guide MMDA towards proper operation and maintenance of the pumping stations and other
drainage infrastructure and to determine the budget required for this. The component will provide specialized
modern waterways maintenance equipment, such as floating dozers, couple pontoons, and remote controlled
cleaners for closed drains and interceptors, not only to enable DPWH and MMDA to carry out emergency
cleaning operations, but also to test and show private contractors what equipment is available for efficient
waterways cleaning. Modern equipment for removal of water hyacinth will be introduced as well, as well as
programs that encourage processing for reuse of products as community livelihood activities, which are
especially practiced by women, and production of biogas on a pilot basis. A program of increasing the water
retention capacity within the project drainage areas will be developed and implemented, where suitable. This
can include green and other infrastructure such as rooftop rainwater collection, green roofs, permeable
pavements, and temporary retention of drainage water in public areas such as basketball courts and parking
garages.

Component 2: Minimizing Solid Waste in Waterways (US$48.0 million). Solid wastes that accumulate in
waterways significantly reduce the water carrying and retention capacities as well as pumping station
efficiencies. Activities under this component will be organized by spatial scales of intervention, but mainly
focusing on the area where the pumping station is located and neighborhood-level activities, and to a lesser
extent on metropolitan-wide activities. The component will build on the existing systems implemented by
LGUs, barangays, and households. The rationale of this approach is to ensure a comprehensive and effective set
of interventions to address the challenges of solid waste in waterways, while also enabling specific activities to
be customized and focused at the appropriate locations and scales, and avoiding a “one-size fits all” approach.
At the neighborhood level, in particular, the proposed activities are intended to complement and reinforce one
another, with activities selected for relevance in each location. In particular the component will: (a) carry out
neighborhood- level activities, in the vicinity of the pumping stations and waterways and drainage channels
targeted under Component 1 of the Project, through improved solid waste collection services, community
mobilization, incentives based improved waste collection with independently verified results, and neighborhood
upgrading. LGUs within the designated project areas along waterways may choose a combination of some or all
of these four options, based on their local needs. Improved solid waste collection services will involve the
provision of equipment such as bins, push cards, and larger storage containers, appropriate for local-level waste
collection, according to the preferred collection system in a given barangay or municipality. Community
mobilization will involve a combination of local-level information, education and communication (IEC)
campaigns, with the involvement of local level block leaders, to raise awareness and encourage behavior change
for improved solid waste management at the individual and household level. Financial incentives to barangays
will encourage behavior change by basing incentive payments on independently verified results of improved
waste collection and reduced waste quantities at pumping stations. Investments in neighborhood upgrading will
beautify selected waterways and easements where feasible, reinforcing the incentive not to indiscriminately
dispose of waste into the waterways; and (b) carry out metropolitan-wide activities for improved solid waste
management, including a large scale metro-wide information, education and communication campaign; the
development and installation of an integrated management information system (MIS); and a solid waste master
plan for Metro Manila. A large-scale metro-wide IEC campaign will complement the local-level IEC and will
focus on reducing solid waste, recycling, proper disposal of solid waste, and the impact on landfills. An
integrated MIS is crucial for improved operation and performance of Metro Manila's overall solid waste
management system. The MIS will help track the implementation of other activities under this component, as
well as enable MMDA to better monitor waste collection activities and track performance, and thus deploy
needed resources to critical sites in a more strategic, dynamic and efficient manner. The solid waste master plan


                                                Page 2 of 21
will provide the overall framework for a strategic and coordinated vision for all of Metro Manila, including
assessment of waste to energy opportunities and development of new landfills. In the context of existing
national frameworks and guidelines, the master plan will provide specific guidance for LGUs, while
strengthening the role of MMDA in managing inter-jurisdictional activities.

Component 3: Participatory Housing and Resettlement (US$55.76 million). Component 3 aims to ensure proper
resettlement of people from areas where they will pose a constraint on construction and/or proper O&M of
pumping stations and waterways to ensure optimum water flow in waterways leading to such stations. The
component also aims to strengthen the affected people’s resilience to external risks by providing access to better
housing on safer grounds, basic public services, more stable income sources, and stronger community
organizations. The magnitude of project affected persons (PAP) to be resettled, mostly ISFs, is expected to be
around 11,500 (equivalent to about 2,500 households). The actual number of ISFs may change based on the
pumping stations that will ultimately be targeted under the project. Component 3 will provide US$15.34 million
loan funds in addition to US$40.42 million government counterpart funds (for land acquisition and site and
housing development)to finance the following: (a) carry out a program of activities to resettle people away from
the Technical Footprint (see below for explanation) of the Project by providing access to better housing and
basic services and building stronger community organizations, including land acquisition, site development,
housing construction, rental support for transition period as needed, livelihood assistance programs, and
technical assistance and capacity building activities to strengthen the communities, LGUs, and implementing
and housing agencies. Viable relocation options will be offered to PAPs, with priority being in-city resettlement
in vertical housing. Other possible options include near-city resettlement defined as areas that will result in
minimal economic dislocation and with secure access to basic services in adjacent local government units,
where people can ideally physically and financially commute to their livelihoods of origin and one-off lump-
sum cash compensation. Other options expressed as preference during consultations with PAPs (e.g. off-city
resettlement) will be considered as well; and (b) assess the needs for, through due diligence, and implement
either individual assistance activities to PAPs and/or community development activities in selected sites where
people have been resettled by government resettlement programs from the Technical Footprint of the Project for
the purpose of carrying out the Project activities. Community development activities can include community
based infrastructure, community livelihood programs, and local economic development.

Component 4: Project Management and Coordination (US$20.0 million). The component will provide support
for the operation of the Project Management Offices (PMO) in DPWH and MMDA with respect to the
management and coordination of their respective parts of the Project, including in each case: (i) payment of
incremental operating costs; (ii) provision of office equipment and materials; (iii) provision of training and
carrying out of knowledge sharing and peer-to-peer learning activities; (iv) provision of technical assistance in
engineering, monitoring and evaluation for the Project, and design of activities for the implementation of the
Program; and (v) establishment and operation of a grievance redress mechanism.

Gender-related activities will be addressed under components 2 and 3. Under component 2, among informal
waste pickers, many are women (and their children) because they lack alternative livelihood options and may
face specific hardships (e.g. as single parents and female heads of household). On the other hand, other jobs in
the solid waste sector are typically the domain of men (e.g. more formal jobs as waste collectors, whether
through handcarts or municipal garbage trucks). Government has certain programs in place to train and support
resettled women with alternative livelihood activities at their new locations, which will also be included under
component 3. The project will take, as needed and feasible, gender dimensions into consideration when
designing specific actions. Gender impacts will be specifically monitored.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project sites cover the Greater Metro Manila Area. Environmentally, Metro Manila is a very challenged


                                                Page 3 of 21
area considering that it is located in a low-lying delta, surrounded by Manila Bay to the west with its storm
surge risks, Laguna de Bay to the south-east with annual flooding issues, and closed in to the north and north-
east by mountain ranges that drain flash floods into the Pasig-Marikina River System during typhoon events.
Many areas in the Greater Metro Manila Area are flood prone, with insufficient protection against frequent
inundation as natural drainage is restricted. Intensive rainfall in the Philippines is especially severe during the
typhoon season from June through October when typically around 80 percent of the annual rainfall falls, which
for the Metro Manila Area is about 1,700 mm out of the approximate 2,100 mm average annual rainfall. As a
result, flooding of urban areas is a recurrent problem affecting a large proportion of the residents in the Greater
Metro Manila either directly (living in flood prone areas) or indirectly (e.g. traffic restrictions when roads are
flooded). With floods occurring annually, Metro Manila suffers chronic economic, social, and financial losses
dampening its development potentials.

There is an inventory of 139 existing and proposed pumping stations and associated drainage areas, but the
specific interventions to be financed by the project in each drainage area (except for five PY1 areas) are not yet
known and will need to be investigated, surveyed, assessed, and designed during project implementation. An
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared which gives an inventory of the
pumping stations in Metro Manila. A Social Impact Assessment (SIA) is included as part of the ESIA,
providing details on the social and economic impact of flooding and the potential impact of the proposed
project. At the core of the Social Impact Assessment is the situation of ISFs living along many of the
waterways. A number of them have been the subject of a government relocation program that aims to move
them to safer areas away from the danger of being washed away by flooding. The aim of this government
program that started in 2011 was to relocate ISFs in Metro Manila out of danger areas during a five year period.
Prominent danger areas considered under the program included flood prone areas adjacent to and over
waterways where ISFs are affected on a regular basis by flooding. Although Oplan Likas and the proposed
Project have different objectives, there are certain areas where they overlap. That overlap is determined by the
Project area of influence for resettlement, also referred to as the ‘technical footprint’. Resettlement under the
Project will be unavoidable where dwellings and structures established by informal settlers impede the flow or
inhibit access for effective maintenance and operation of the facilities. The technical footprint covers the
pumping station and its related facilities as well as sections of waterways serving the pumping stations. The
physical limits of technical footprints for waterways are established on the basis of hydrological and engineering
criteria for each drainage area. Waterway sections within the technical footprint are typically in relatively close
proximity to the pumping facility. People who live or have properties within the Project’s technical footprint or
those who were resettled from the technical footprint under Oplan Likas are considered project-affected persons
(PAP) under the Project.

Five pumping stations (a sub-project) were selected and prepared for project year 1 (PY1) implementation.
Three pumping stations (Vitas, Balut, and Paco) are located in Manila, Tripa de Galina is located in Pasya, and
Labasan in Taguig. The ESIA describes the location and interventions for each of the first five pumping stations
and a RAP for one of them (Vitas) and due diligence reports for the other four have been prepared. For the
other pumping stations to be implemented during later project years, interventions will vary from drainage area
to drainage area. Similarly, a number of potential areas have been identified for new pumping stations proposed
for financing under the project.

The project area of influence (referred to as the 'project footprint) of each sub-project is different from the
technical footprint for resettlement purposes as described above. The technical footprint overlaps with the
project footprint, but is typically much smaller. The project area of influence can comprise the pump station and
yard, drainage areas, waterways and drainage channels, and ancillary facilities such as access roads, disposal
sites for dredged materials and solid wastes from pumping stations, resettlement sites, as well as temporary sites
needed for equipment parks and materials stockpiles. The exact area of influence for a sub-project will be
determined based on the specific interventions that will be determined during project implementation when each


                                                 Page 4 of 21
drainage area will be investigated and studied in detail to first of all determine whether inclusion of a proposed
site in the project is required, feasible, and viable, and if yes, what is required to fulfill the objective of the
project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                     Team
 Frederick Edmund Brusberg( GSU03 )
 Gerardo Pio Francisco Parco( GEN2B )
 Roberto B. Tordecilla( GSU02 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes            OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is
                                                               triggered as environmental and social impacts will
                                                               occur in modernizing existing pump stations,
                                                               constructing new pumping stations, the cleaning of
                                                               waterways and drainage channels related to pump
                                                               stations, and expanded solid waste management
                                                               activities. This also includes impacts from ancillary
                                                               facilities (off sites), resettlement programs, as well
                                                               as social impacts.

                                                               Anticipated environmental (and social) impacts
                                                               include relocation of informal settlers within the
                                                               technical footprint, impacts from dredging
                                                               activities, collection and disposal of solid waste and
                                                               construction debris, dredged silt and spoils, worker
                                                               health and safety, disruptions to local traffic,
                                                               disposal of worn-out pumps and equipment, spent
                                                               fuel, oil and lubricants from the pumping stations,
                                                               dust and noise during construction works, run-off,
                                                               loss of vegetation, cut and fill of undeveloped
                                                               terrain, loose soil and debris during site
                                                               development and construction, siltation of
                                                               waterways, and poor aesthetic quality. The ESIA
                                                               has validated that these impacts may potentially
                                                               occur.

                                                               An ESIA has been prepared to assess the impacts of
                                                               the project. This includes the assessment of impacts
                                                               of ancillary facilities such as disposal sites of solid
                                                               wastes and dredged materials/sludge, including an
                                                               environmentally-sound scheme for the final
                                                               disposal of dredged materials/sludge based upon the
                                                               thorough analysis and characteristics of the sludge,
                                                               resettlement site development and social impacts
                                                               beyond those related to resettlement (e.g., impacts
                                                               of riparians during dredging, impacts on livelihoods
                                                               of waste pickers in waterways, impacts on health,
                                                               odor, nuisance, etc.). An Environmental Code of

                                                 Page 5 of 21
           Practice (ECOP) has been prepared to cover the
           typical and common impacts of pumping station
           rehabilitation. Site specific Environmental and
           Social Management Plans (ESMP) have been
           prepared for the five pumping station rehabilitation
           activities to be carried out in Year 1 of the project.
           Specific activities/interventions in each drainage
           area of the remaining pumping stations will only be
           determined during project implementation when
           each area will be investigated and studied in detail.
           In addition, Site-Specific ESMP will be required
           from each contractor prior to commencing any
           works in each of the pumping stations. The Site-
           Specific ESMPs will include a detailed Dredged
           Materials Management Plan and Solid Waste
           Management Plan.

           An Environment and Social Management
           Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to define the
           process for addressing all safeguards concerns
           during project implementation. The ESMF is
           intended to screen existing and new pumping
           stations and drainage areas that will be identified
           during implementation and to guide the preparation
           of specific instruments/plans during
           implementation. The ESMF describes the process
           for the environment and social assessment of the
           potential impacts of all activities taking place
           within the drainage areas for all project components
           combined. It contains information, resources,
           institutional responsibilities, and technical
           assistance on how to implement it. It is noted that a
           separate Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
           been prepared and disclosed before appraisal. The
           ESMF will include a summary of the content and
           requirements of the RPF. The ESMF will also
           provide information how alternatives, if any, will be
           assessed and how induced and cumulative impacts,
           when relevant, will be assessed during project
           implementation.

           The ESMF includes an approach to the conduct of a
           cumulative impact assessment (CIA). The CIA will
           be conducted during the second half of project
           implementation after all drainage areas to be
           improved under the project have been identified.
           An initial inventory of projects and assessment of
           proposed valued environmental components (VEC)
           is included in the ESMF. A ToR with cost
           estimates has also been prepared and is included in


Page 6 of 21
                                                     the ESMF.

                                                     A Grievance Redress Mechanism will incorporate
                                                     existing channels used by the implementing
                                                     agencies, DPWH and MMDA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes         Interventions on existing pumping stations,
                                                     associated drainage areas and waterways, and
                                                     related activities will take place in original locations
                                                     and will not affect natural habitats. Activities
                                                     related to new pump stations and associated
                                                     waterways will take place in built-up areas in urban
                                                     settings, which are unlikely to be considered as
                                                     natural habitats. There is a remote possibility that
                                                     new pumping stations sites may be proposed near
                                                     the Laguna Lake area, although the long-list of
                                                     potential new pumping stations does not include a
                                                     site near Laguna Lake. Where relevant, screening
                                                     for impacts to natural habitats will be conducted.
                                                     Possible impacts will be due to temporary increased
                                                     turbidity due to construction, change in water flow
                                                     which may impact habitats or direct destruction of
                                                     habitats due to pumping station construction.

                                                     The policy is also triggered as the project area may
                                                     potentially impact natural habitats outside the city
                                                     at resettlement sites, although the project will not
                                                     support activities that would significantly convert
                                                     or degrade natural or critical natural habitats. The
                                                     screening criteria in the ESMF will determine the
                                                     potential impacts on existing and new pumping
                                                     stations, their drainage areas, ancillary facilities and
                                                     related activities such as disposal sites and
                                                     resettlement sites. Screening will also be conducted
                                                     for potential impacts on natural habitats for
                                                     candidate relocation sites for the project affected
                                                     people. No settlements will be allowed in critical
                                                     natural habitats as prescribed in this OP and in
                                                     accordance with the national regulations.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          This policy is not triggered. The project and its
                                                     activities take place in urban areas where there are
                                                     no forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No          This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                     use pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         This policy is triggered as a number of new
                                                     pumping stations and resettlement sites will be
                                                     developed. The ESMF includes the screening for
                                                     the presence of physical cultural resources and
                                                     specify chance finds procedures. The first five
                                                     (PY1) pumping station sites were screened for PCR

                                          Page 7 of 21
                                                  and were found to have no PCR in the primary nor
                                                  secondary area of influence. In the remaining
                                                  pumping station sites, the screening matrix in the
                                                  ESMF will determine any possible cause of
                                                  disturbance and negative impacts to PCR such as
                                                  historical areas, architectural land marks and other
                                                  cultural property, which may need to be mitigated.
                                                  During construction, the landscape of the existing
                                                  and new sites and off-site facilities may also be
                                                  affected and structural damage to old structures
                                                  may occur due to vibrations and excavation of
                                                  adjacent areas. The ESMF will confirm impacts of
                                                  project activities on PCRs, and where needed, a
                                                  PCR management plan will be formulated as part of
                                                  the ESMP, including chance find procedures that
                                                  will be followed during construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No          There are no indigenous communities in the project
                                                  areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes         Works to be undertaken within existing pump
                                                  stations will not need land acquisition or
                                                  resettlement of ISFs as they are well fenced and
                                                  contained. However, the technical footprint in a
                                                  number of drainage areas linked to existing
                                                  pumping stations have ISFs that need to be
                                                  resettled, like the ISFs in Vitas PS.

                                                  Most of the new pump station sites are expected to
                                                  be in densely populated urban areas. For a number
                                                  of these new sites, land acquisition of limited areas
                                                  will be needed, some through acquiring private lots.
                                                  Other new pumping stations may be located along
                                                  public roads or waterway easements, thus
                                                  minimizing displacement of people.

                                                  Despite avoidance and minimizing resettlement, an
                                                  estimated 2,500 ISFs now living along waterways
                                                  and on potential pump station sites for new
                                                  pumping stations will need to be resettled or were
                                                  resettled after the project’s identification date from
                                                  around 15 sites by the project as their presence in
                                                  the technical footprint along and over waterways
                                                  would affect the O&M of drainage systems,
                                                  including pumps.

                                                  MMDA and DPWH have prepared three site-
                                                  specific social safeguards instruments for the five
                                                  PY1 drainage areas, namely a RAP for Vitas, a
                                                  DDR for Paco, and a combined DDR for Balut,
                                                  Tripa de Galina, and Labasan pumping stations and


                                       Page 8 of 21
           drainage areas. The RAP for Vitas was prepared
           for the 165 ISFs living within the technical
           footprint based on a validation census conducted by
           the MMDA in November 2015. The PAPs have
           already decided that they will move to two
           resettlement sites, expected before the end of 2017.
           A group of 88 PAPs will move to a newly
           developed site about 30 km from Vitas (Benjamin
           Village 8 BV8), while a group of 77 PAPs will
           move to a NHA site about the same distance from
           Vitas (Pandi). In-city choices for resettlement
           discussed with the ISFs were said to be unsafe as
           they are proposed at sites characterized by
           criminality and related social problems. Off-city
           choices were thus seen as preferable.

           The BV8 relocation site is within a developed
           community of several villages/subdivisions
           developed by private sectors providing supply of
           affordable housing for low income earners. Social
           services infrastructure such are or will be made
           available within Barangay Muzon of the City of
           San Jose Del Monte. The LGU will construct a day
           care center with personnel to manage the services
           near the resettlement site. Access to municipal
           health services, schools elementary and high school
           is in the barangay center accessible by a 5-minute
           tricycle ride. An open space of more than 2,000
           square meters is allotted for playground and space
           for BV8’s livelihood training center. Pandi is one
           of the 18 resettlement sites that have been allotted
           funds from the Ps 1.8 billion social infrastructure
           budget allotted from the General Appropriations
           Act of 2017 to be used to improve the basic
           services and livelihood conditions. These include
           ensuring the provision of water facilities, additional
           classroom, day care centers, and health and
           livelihood multi-purpose facilities. These measures
           have been incorporated in the RAP. DPWH will
           work with concerned agencies to ensure that the
           resettlement of these 165 ISFs is compliant with the
           requirements of OP 4.12.

           A total of 74 PAPs were resettled from Paco’s
           technical footprint in 2011 to Towerville 6
           Resettlement Site. Due diligence of the site showed
           that In general, access of the ISFs to basic services
           is acceptable. The remaining challenge faced by
           the relocates is finding adequate sources of income
           or jobs within and around the vicinity of the


Page 9 of 21
           relocation site and part of the PhP 1.8 billion will be
           used to implement a comprehensive livelihood
           program in Towerville 6. The DDR describes the
           proposed program and contains some additional
           remedial measures to fill in any gaps in the
           programs currently being carried out, including
           improvement in the grievance redress system.

           The DDR for Balut, Tripa de Galina, and Labasan
           found that the sites are free of settlers and no land
           acquisition or resettlement took place after
           December 8, 2014. The latest resettlement was
           recorded in 1996 to give way to the construction of
           the Balut PS.

           Many ISFs are occupying land along and over
           easements for drains and associated waterways.
           Since 2011, they have been resettled and continue
           to be resettled to physically safe locations under an
           on-going government program (Oplan Likas) that is
           to be completed around the time the project is
           expected to become effective. Oplan Likas focuses
           on removing ISFs from danger zones. The
           MMFMP is not linked with Oplan Likas as it does
           not meet the three criteria of OP 4.12 para 4,
           namely (a) directly and significantly related to the
           Bank-assisted project, (b) necessary to achieve its
           objectives as set forth in the project documents; and
           (c) carried out, or planned to be carried out,
           contemporaneously with the project. However,
           some activities financed by the project overlap
           spatially with Oplan Likas as they are located
           within the technical foot print of the project.
           Moreover, the Bank has provided TA in support of
           Oplan Likas as explained in the Annex of the PAD.

           Therefore, resettlement activities that took place
           prior to Bank engagement in the project (December
           8, 2014 - the date of project identification mission)
           within the footprint of the project is considered a
           legacy issue. Resettlement before that date has to be
           in accordance with country legislation and
           consistent with objectives of OP 4.12. Should this
           past resettlement not have been consistent with the
           national legislation and the objectives of OP 4.12,
           remedial measures will have to be provided. This
           will be done at the community level for equity
           purposes and to avoid conflicts with persons
           relocated to the same resettlement sites from other
           areas not related to the Project. The safeguard


Page 10 of 21
           instrument to be prepared is a Due Diligence Report
           that will describe the remedial measures to be
           provided and an action plan if and as needed to
           ensure the consistency of past
           rehousing/resettlement with the objectives of OP
           4.12.

           After the date of project identification, resettlement
           has to be compliant with OP 4.12, including
           compensation at full replacement cost for loss of
           assets and other resettlement assistance. Two
           groups of PAPs have been identified: (i) people
           who were resettled from the technical footprint after
           the project identification date (December 8, 2014),
           but prior to the date a census is initiated in all sub-
           project sites during the early stage of project
           implementation (cut-off date); and (ii) people who
           will be resettled from the technical footprint after
           the cut-off date during project implementation. For
           the first group due diligence will have to be
           conducted and the individual PAPs that were
           resettled from the technical footprint will have to be
           traced to the extent possible. Should their current
           resettlement conditions not be in compliance with
           OP 4.12, the project will have to provide remedial
           measures to address the gaps, described in a RAP
           and measures will have to be applied retroactively
           to ensure compliance with OP 4.12. Remedial
           measures will include compensation to individual
           PAPs, or through community level interventions for
           equity purpose if this is acceptable to the PAPs.

           When the project starts working on a particular
           drainage area during project implementation, a
           systematic due diligence on the past resettlement, if
           any, from waterways in a drainage area will be
           carried out. It is likely that the due diligence in a
           number of areas will reveal that ISFs have been
           resettled out of the city, far from livelihood sources
           and employment and removed from pre-existing
           social networks.

           The project proponent will provide before sub-
           project appraisal data that show the potential
           overlaying between the (i) pumping station’s
           technical footprint; (ii) the areas that have been
           cleared (or are planned to be cleared) by the GoP-
           funded Oplan Likas Program; and (c) a matrix
           setting out details of the entitlements that the ISFs
           resettled under the GoP Oplan Likas Program have


Page 11 of 21
                                       received. This information is important to the
                                       understanding of the scope of the potential legacy
                                       and land issues of the project. The risks related to
                                       the Bank's involvement in Metro Manila Flood
                                       Management Master Plan as a whole and this
                                       project in particular need to be articulated in project
                                       documents. Specifically, the PAD includes an
                                       annex that provides: (i) a thorough explanation of
                                       the Bank's involvement in the Master Plan and
                                       Oplan Likas and an explanation of the relationship
                                       between the Project and the Oplan Likas program;
                                       and (ii) a table with all the identified TAs that were
                                       supported by the Bank for the preparation of the
                                       Master Plan and the conceptualization and
                                       implementation of Oplan Likas.

                                       Displaced people will be consulted - using a
                                       participatory approach - and offered different
                                       options that will include among them in-city
                                       resettlement, near-city resettlement, and cash
                                       compensation. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                       has been prepared to guide all actions related to
                                       involuntary resettlement.

                                       Any land acquisition needed for Component 2
                                       (Minimizing Solid Waste in Waterways) will also
                                       be covered by the RPF. Further, it will also contain
                                       a Social Management Framework for policies and
                                       procedures in livelihood restoration of those whose
                                       loss of income is not due to land acquisition, e.g.
                                       informal waste pickers.

                                       The ESMF and the RPF will be monitored to
                                       determine issues met in implementation so that it
                                       may contribute to future resettlement required by
                                       the implementation of the Master Plan for Flood
                                       Management in Metro Manila and Surrounding
                                       Areas.

                                       A RAP has been prepared for Vitas, and due
                                       diligence reports have been prepared for Paco, and
                                       Tripa de Gallina, Balut and Labasan (a combined
                                       report for the last three areas).

                                       All future RAPs will be reviewed and cleared by
                                       RSA.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No         This policy is not triggered since it will not require
                                       the construction of dams nor will any project
                                       structure rely on dams.


                            Page 12 of 21
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered as the project is not
    7.50                                                          located in international waters.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             This policy is not triggered as the project is not
                                                                  located in disputed areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Benefits of the Project.

    Flood Reduction. The main benefit of the project is the reduction in human risks to life and property arising
    from flood protection. People currently residing in flood-prone areas will directly benefit from the project.
    Considering that the water bodies that will receive water from the pumping stations are typically affected by
    tidal flows, the pumping stations are particularly important in periods of high tide when their water levels are
    higher than the level of the flood control channels.

    Improvement of Quality of Life. With reduced flood incidence in the project drainage areas, there is anticipated
    improvement in the quality of life, health, and sanitation of the people affected by flooding. Project benefits
    include the reduction of damage to properties and infrastructure, income loss (livelihood and business), and loss
    of lives and injuries brought about by the operation of the flood control facilities. Diseases that occur from
    exposure to flood waters such as skin rashes, gastrointestinal infection, leptospirosis, and other water-borne
    diseases will also be reduced. There is also a lesser need for evacuation of people to safe areas during periods of
    intense rainfall and typhoons and resulting floods.

    Impacts during Construction Works.

    Construction Wastes. Demolition and removal of equipment and facilities at the pumping stations will result in
    the generation of wastes consisting of old equipment, scrap metal, wires, lighting fixtures, and other
    construction spoils. Most of the wastes are considered as recyclable, but the project will produce residual waste
    materials that require appropriate disposal to prevent adverse environmental impacts. Solid waste will also be
    generated from the installation of equipment and facilities. These wastes generally consist of scrap metal,
    aggregates, empty cement bags, and other construction spoils. These materials will also be disposed properly to
    avoid negative impacts to land and waterways.

    Solid Wastes. The presence of construction workers at the site will generate solid wastes that consist of
    biodegradable wastes (food wastes, paper) and non-biodegradable wastes such as plastics, food containers, glass,
    bottles, and aluminum cans. These wastes will have a negative effect on the environment when improperly
    disposed on land and in waterways.

    Oily Wastes. Waste oil and lubricants from the dismantling of motors, pumps, and other auxiliary equipment
    may result in negative impacts to land and waterways when disposed inadvertently. There are no anticipated
    PCB-containing transformers that will be decommissioned during project implementation. The impact of waste
    oil will be confined to the working area and will occur during the extent of the construction activity only. In
    addition, the generation of waste oil and lubricants is limited in volume since most of these will be contained in
    dismantled motors and pumps. Adverse effects of waste oil may come from accidental spill or leaks from the
    dismantled equipment, but these will be cleaned up immediately and will result in a limited effect on the
    environment.


                                                    Page 13 of 21
Occupational Safety. Construction activities may result in negative impact to workers due to accidents and
mechanical, electrical, tripping, and fall hazards at the workplace. The impact of occupational hazards is not
significant because occupational health and safety measures will be implemented as part of ECOP for
construction.

Community health and safety. Construction activities, including dredging, could be an issue for community
health and safety given the highly congested conditions of most of the pumping stations and drainage systems
and difficult accessibility. There will be clauses for the contractor to follow in order to minimize possible
impact on community health and safety. Measures to ensure the safety of residents living along access roads to
the construction activities have been identified in the ESIA and will be included in ESMPs, as required.

Impacts of Dredging Activities.

Resuspension of Sediments. The dredging of sediments from the waterways can result in resuspension of
sediments which can cause a negative impact on the water quality and aquatic life remaining in the rivers. Based
on the results of secondary data review and actual sampling indicating the current poor water quality conditions
in the esteros, resuspension of sediments will have a limited effect and change to water quality.

Generation and Disposal of Dredged Materials. The disposal of dredged materials removed from waterways can
cause a negative impact on the environment since these contain organic materials and contaminants such as
heavy metals. Dredged materials possibly contain contaminants and heavy metals such as chromium (Cr+6),
copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), lead (Pb), and nickel (Ni) as experienced during previous sediment sampling conducted
at Manila Bay. Considering that the sediments in Manila Bay are eroded materials that were deposited from the
estuaries and tributaries in Metro Manila, the dredged materials from the pumping station channels are likely
contaminated with these heavy metals as well. However, based on the toxicity analysis conducted for the five
PY1 pumping stations, the sediments were found not to be hazardous using the TCLP criteria.

Removal of Water Hyacinths. The waterway clearing operations will involve the removal of water hyacinth
which proliferate in some waterways in Metro Manila. Limited impacts will occur on fisheries and other aquatic
resources because of the deterioration of habitat of fish. The removal of water hyacinth will occur intermittently
and sporadically over the life of the project. The extent of water hyacinth is expected to persist due to the
presence of high nutrient conditions. This impact is not applicable to all pumping station sites but rather in
selected areas near the Laguna Lake and at Pasig River tributaries.

Odor. Foul odor may be emitted during dredging because of the decomposition of organic materials that occurs
in the river water and bottom sediments. When anaerobic conditions worsen, pollutants such as ammonium
ions, nitrogen, phosphate, and hydrogen sulphide are released.

Impacts During Operations.

Disposal of Solid Wastes. The solid waste management practices of the communities, particularly the improper
disposal of garbage in waterways has an impact on the long-term sustainability of a flood control project. A
major operational concern of the existing pumping stations is the accumulation and disposal of solid wastes
trapped at the flood control gates. The accumulation of solid wastes at the pumping station will have a negative
impact to the environment without regular collection and appropriate disposal methods. This waste will be
removed by licensed contractors and disposed of in an appropriate location. The component on solid waste
management will result in a reduction in solid waste being disposed of in waterways and drainage channels.

Health and Safety Issues for Workers. The operation of pumps, motors, generator sets, conveyors, trash racks,


                                               Page 14 of 21
and other equipment at pumping stations are potential sources of mechanical hazards due to the presence of
dangerous moving parts. Mechanical accidents may also be caused by unsafe methods and the lack of safety
guards that are fitted to the machine and pumping station facilities. There are open channels at the pumping
stations which require adequate guard rails and fences to avoid accidents and fall hazards. Workers will be
properly trained in hazards and provided appropriate personal protective equipment.

Specific Social Impacts.

Relocation of Informal Settlers. As certain areas (technical footprint) need to be cleared to ensure optimum
water flow in waterways leading to pumping stations, some people who are mostly ISFs, will have to be
relocated. For poor households, the destruction of their houses and possessions makes them more fragile as it
could take quite a while for them to rebuild their asset base. Lack of safe drinking water, no electricity, and
being cut off from markets and public services can make communities feel helpless and isolated. Poor
conditions in staging sites aggravate the disruption in people’s lives. Other potential negative impacts of
relocation include loss of economic networks, loss of social networks, and loss of access to social services. The
resettlement processes and measures provided in this RPF are designed to avoid or mitigate these losses/impacts.

Those who will be found living within the Project’s technical footprint at the time of census will be resettled.
ISFs along waterways leading to the pumping stations are aware that their houses and structures and the waste
they contribute obstruct the flow of water and affect the efficiency of the pumping stations. ISFs in Vitas are
willing to move out of danger zones provided that they are relocated in livable areas where they can earn a
living and their children can go to school. In Tripa de Gallina where some ISFs in Maricaban Creek have
already been relocated from areas outside the technical footprint of the drainage area, residents who used to be
neighbors with the relocated families said that they missed their neighbors, but recognized that fewer ISFs led to
easier water flow and lower floodwaters in the community.

Loss of livelihood or access to livelihood. The governments’ approach of successive off-city resettlement has
been mired with resistance and criticisms in the past, owing to the lack of consideration for the socio-economic
impacts (e.g., loss of livelihood and disruption of social networks) on the affected households. Absence of
livelihood and/or mismatch between skills and job opportunities is often present during resettlement, resulting in
a sharp decline in incomes after resettlement. Many decide to migrate back into the informal settlements in
Metro Manila. It should be noted that under Oplan Likas, 76% of the targeted ISFs were relocated off-city away
from their sources of livelihood and moved them to areas with limited opportunities for employment and
income-generating activities.

In the survey for the Due Diligence Report for the resettled families within the Paco Pumping Station technical
footprint, 60% of the respondents claimed they are still working in or near Paco, Manila. Of these, 59% travel to
Manila on a weekly basis, 26% travel daily and remaining 15% travel once or twice a month. Apart from
increased transportation costs, one can also imagine the difficult life of daily commuting in a 40 kilometer
distance characterized by poor public transportation and massive traffic gridlock. On the other hand, people who
travel weekly or monthly have to bear the impact of temporary separation from their loved ones in order to save
money.

A World Bank commissioned study found that 72% of the surveyed households resettled off-city reported
decreased income up to as much as a 43%. They also reported increased expenditure driven by higher costs of
transportation to schools, work, and health services. Thirty-five percent of those resettled off-city also reported
difficulties in finding assistance for their daily needs due to disruption in their social support network. From its
study of 10 resettlement sites, the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor (PCUP) reported that 40% of the
households lost jobs after the transfer and decrease in income ranges from 5%-57%. The same study called the
attention of the National Housing Authority and other concerned agencies for t he “serious issues on social


                                                Page 15 of 21
services, power and water.” The IPC 2011 study found that a significant proportion of households in the two
study sites were considering leaving their current place of residence (26% in Southville 5A and 39% in Eusébio
Bliss). For those resettled off-city the main reason was the limited access to employment.

Under Components 1 and 2, the proposed project could potentially lead to economic displacement of water
hyacinth pickers and weavers and waste pickers and in the process impoverish them further. Waste pickers
constitute a subgroup of ISFs relying on garbage picking as their main source of livelihood. However, almost
all the recyclable garbage picked by them is done outside the waterways, so the impact of reduced garbage in the
waterways on the waste pickers’ livelihood would be small. Harvesters of water hyacinths comprise a very
small fragment of Metro Manila’s poor who supply dried water hyacinth stalks to local and international buyers
at low prices. Water hyacinths will be removed from critical locations only where they affect the performance
of the drainage systems, and the impact on hyacinth pickers will be very small. Livelihood restoration
opportunities will also be offered to affected vulnerable groups, including provision of alternative job
opportunities for affected waste pickers or formalize their employment to collect solid waste (eco-aides) and
support the processing of hyacinth stalks for example for production of biogas and fuel briquettes.

Compensation and resettlement assistance discrepancies. In the context of the wider resettlement program of the
government, host communities can be existing communities or new communities of resettlers within or outside
Metro Manila that will live together with project-displaced ISFs in the same neighborhood. Resettlement to
nearby in-city resettlement sites will be least disruptive and there would normally be few compensation and
resettlement assistance discrepancies. The case is different for off-city host communities where support to PAPs
may be much higher than received by already resettled people. The project will support remedial measures at
the community level for equity purposes and to avoid confl icts with other persons at resettlement sites.
Measures could include development of infrastructure, e.g. a training hall, or provision of skill training
programs.

Community health and safety issues. Community hazards and accidents from the movement of vehicles along
narrow roads leading to the pumping stations may compromise people’s safety. Other related issues include
nuisance and problems caused by noise, odor, and dust. These risks will be minimized through the
implementation of traffic control and safety measures, signage, and educational campaigns that are specifically
provided in the Environment and Social Management Plan of each PS.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Induced Impacts. Floods disturb the normal course of life and pose a real threat to human life and property. As a
result of flood mitigation measures there will be positive effects to the communities because of reduced
incidence and impact of annual flooding. Positive impacts to the community that are anticipated because of
flood control and improvement measures include possible changes in land use, increase in land values, and
development of more business opportunities.

Cumulative Impacts. Aside from the Metro Manila Flood Management Project, there are other related projects
and activities that are ongoing or proposed which when considered together could result in cumulative impacts.
The scope of the ESIA involves the assessment of the potential environmental effects of Phase 1 at a project
level assessment. A cumulative impact assessment (CIA) will be done in later phases of the project to consider
the impacts of pumping stations in relation to other projects and activities in a defined spatial and temporal
framework. The CIA will assess these impacts on key valued components and identify management measures to
be undertaken by the Government and other project proponents to provide collaborative solutions to minimizing
cumulative impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
1. Upgrading and Modernization of Pumping Stations.

                                               Page 16 of 21
Metro Manila has 57 pumping stations scattered throughout the city which are operated by the MMDA. Many
of these pumping stations were constructed 20 to 40 years ago and are no longer performing well. The main
function of the pumping stations is to pump out water from the estero side of the pumping stations into the Pasig
River, Paranaque River, Laguna de Bay, and Manila Bay. As it is not possible to have natural drainage from the
areas served by pumping stations, pumps are essential for drainage management and there are no alternatives.

2. Replacement of Diesel Engines with Electrical Motors

Many existing pumps are diesel engine driven. The pumps are either of the horizontal axial type or of the
vertical wet pit axial type. Axial flow pumps are less resilient in the case of clogged inlets. The performance
drops quickly if certain head is exceeded due to recirculation in the impeller. Also the shaft torque increases
sharply and loads the motors or engines excessively. The operating cost is high. An option that was considered
is the replacement of the diesel engines by electrical motors with standby generator sets to reduce the running
costs and increase the reliability of the function during brownouts. Mixed flow pumps are better alternative to
overcome torque problems. This implies that the pumping stations will have to be coupled to the 3-phase
electrical network of MERALCO. There is also a need to apply diesel engine generator sets with large diesel
tanks (one per pump) to accommodate for power interruption. This will guarantee that there will always be
enough diesel fuel in the stations since the tanks will remain full during the normal electrical operation.

3. Dredging

Dredging is an activity that is considered by DPWH and MMDA under the project to increase the flow capacity
and also as part of the maintenance of the esteros. Options evaluated include the deepening of the esteros or
channels, or enlargement of the width of the esteros. The main effect of deepening of the estero will be the
lowering of the flow velocity at a certain discharge, thereby, lowering the needed hydraulic gradient. Widening
of the estero also lowers the flow velocity and has an advantageous effect on the storage capacity of the drainage
area, thereby lowering the flood levels. However, considering that most of the esteros have already defined
drainage channels with revetments, and that there are settlements on both sides of the esteros, widening will
require resettlement of affected households and was not considered as an alternative.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a complementary Social Impact Assessment (SIA)
of the project were carried out, the results and findings of which were used to draft and Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Public consultations,
carried out as part of project preparation contributed to the finalization of these documents.

The ESMF and RPF serve to guide development, implementation, and operation of the project in compliance
with the requirements of the World Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies and applicable
Government of the Philippines (GOP) laws and regulations. Sub-projects will be undertaken in a variety of
ecological and social contexts in a number of LGUs, which are the political and quasi-autonomous
administrative units which make up Metro Manila. The ESMF and RPF present social and environmental
safeguards screening procedures, specific arrangements for management of environmental and social impacts
(both negative and positive), including monitoring and reporting for the project as a whole and for each pumping
station sub-project to be undertaken. More specifically, the ESMF and RPF serve as guidance instruments to
ensure that environmental and social impacts are identified and assessed, and that appropriate mitigation,
management, and monitoring measures are incorporated and applied in implementation. They set out the
institutional and organizational arrangements, procedures, and implementation arrangements for identification,
management and monitoring of environmental and social impacts, mitigation and management. They address


                                               Page 17 of 21
mechanisms for public consultation, participation, and disclosure of project documents as well as for redress of
possible grievances and management of project-related issues which may arise during implementation. The
conduct of a Cumulative Impact Assessment is also described and will be done during the second half of project
implementation.

The MMFMP has selected five pumping station sub-projects to be initiated in the first year of implementation.
An ESIA was prepared for these five pumping stations and one RAP and four Due Diligence Reviews (DDR)
(described in two DDR reports) have been prepared as well. A RAP was prepared for the Vitas PS at which 165
informal settler families (ISF) will be resettled from the technical footprint area to ensure unobstructed water
flow to the pumping station. A retrospective due diligence was undertaken for the Paco PS by means of a tracer
study to ascertain to what degree the current resettlement conditions of people who resided within the technical
footprint and resettled in 2011/12 by a government program correspond with government policies and the
objectives of OP 4.12. Additional due diligence carried out for the three other Year-1 sites (at the Tripa de
Gallina, Balut, and Labasan PSs) confirmed previous scoping findings by the project preparation team which
indicated that there was no past resettlement from the technical footprint of these sub-projects.

Both the DPWH and the MMDA have a team assigned to implement safeguards requirements of the project.
There are separate teams working on the social safeguards aspects and another team managing the
implementation of the environmental safeguards arrangements. Extensive meetings and discussions have been
undertaken during project preparation to explain the project's safeguards requirements and arrangements.
Preparation of the safeguards instruments (ESIA, SIA, ESMF, RPF, RAP, DDR) have also made MMDA and
DPWH teams get familiar with the agreed safeguards requirements. The agencies’ staff have also attended
training on safeguards in the UP Learning Resource Center on Environmental and Social Sustainability. In
addition, safeguards specialists will be mobilized as needed to augment current staffing in the agencies. Prior to
implementation of the project, extensive capacity building/training exercises will be conducted by the WB
safeguards specialist to ensure proper implementation of the agreed instruments. During implementation, a joint
WB-PMO team will conduct capacity-building activities for partner LGUs. LGUs will have limited impact for
component 1, as the pumping stations and drainage systems are managed by MMDA, but will be involved in
components 2 and 3. LGUs are responsible for solid waste management and will be involved in managing
training and awareness programs. Under component 3 the LGUs will be involved in land acquisition and
monitoring of site and housing developments, while t hey will also be involved in provision of basic services,
including schools and health clinics.

Specifically for Component 3, DPWH and MMDA have conducted a series of consultations with shelter
agencies (HUDCC, NHA, SHFC) and secured their commitments for the implementation of Component 3.

After about one year of project implementation, a review of the practices and experiences with the
implementation of the safeguards instruments will take place with participation of all relevant government
agencies and the Bank’s task team and safeguards specialists, and necessary changes and updates to the
safeguards documents can then be made, as needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In compliance with the requirements of Philippine EIA law and OP 4.12 and part of the development of
Safeguards documents, DPWH and MMDA conducted public consultations where the following documents
were shared and discussed: (a) project background (including objectives, components, benefits, etc.); (b) ESIA;
(c) ESMF; (4) RPF; and (5) the three PY1 safeguards documents. Project briefs and flyers highlighting the key
sections of the safeguards documents written in Filipino were provided to the five communities prior to the
consultation. English versions of the documents were also provided to the five barangays to ensure that
interested individuals could easily have access to the full versions of the documents.


                                               Page 18 of 21
   The draft ESIA, covering the rehabilitation and modernization of the first five pumping stations and drainage
   areas, and the Executive Summary of the ESIA, ESMF, and RPF were disclosed on February 8, 2016.
   Consultations on the ESMF, RPF and other safeguards instruments were conducted on August 17-18, 2015,
   November 9, 2015, and February 24, 2016.

   Additional consultation was carried out on September 9, 2016 to discuss the project, the ESMF and the results of
   the ESIA. The copies of these documents were made available at the DPWH-Unified Project Management
   Office (UPMO), DPWH-Environmental and Social Safeguards Division (ESSD), DPWH-Unified Project
   Management Office (UPMO), and at the MMDA-Planning Office. The consultation meeting was attended by
   representatives from the local government units, Social Housing Finance Corporation, Pasig River
   Rehabilitation Commission, Presidential Commission for Urban Poor, MMDA, and district engineering offices
   of DPWH.

   Another set of consultation meetings was held September 23, 2016 for the PAPs in Vitas pumping station.
   Stakeholders that participated included the City of Manila through the Urban Settlements Office, Barangays 150
   and 93, NHA, PCUP, SHFC, and AGOM and Share Foundation, which are local NGOs and community-based
   organizations in the area, as well as PAPs. Similar community consultations were organized by DPWH, with
   support from other agencies, for the other four PY1 drainage areas from October 10 to 13, 2016, along with a
   stage two consultation for the PAPs in Vitas pumping station on October 10, 2016 to further discuss the details
   of the RPF and RAP. A separate consultation activity was held at Towerville 6 Resettlement Site in San Jose
   del Monte, Bulacan to discuss the resettlement legacy issues and to learn lessons from past Government
   resettlement activities that will help improve project implementation. Prior to these public consultations, all the
   safeguards instruments including a Project Information Booklet in Tagalog containing the pertinent details of the
   project and executive summary of the RAP and ESIA were widely distributed in advance to the stakeholders and
   PAPs. The consultations were generally well attended, with more than 100 participants at the Paco and Vitas
   consultations. The RPF as well as the other safeguards instruments were revised based on the feedbacks
   generated from the consultations.

   Important stakeholders of the project include project affected communities, informal settlers along waterways,
   MMDA, DPWH, housing agencies, solid waste collectors, pumping station staff, CSOs, and communities in the
   relocation sites. Consultations in each of the PY1 drainage areas to discuss the relevant safeguard instruments
   took place in October 2016. The minutes of each of the consultations are annexed to the ESIA. Local
   disclosure of the approved safeguards documents will be done through the websites of DPWH and MMDA.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             05-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          08-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive             16-May-2017
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Philippines                                                                     08-Feb-2016
   Comments:
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-Feb-2016
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                       08-Feb-2016
   "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




                                                   Page 19 of 21
 Philippines                                                                08-Feb-2016
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)                Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice               Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                        Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or                Yes []    No [X]   NA     []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or                 Yes []    No [X]   NA     []
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural                Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the              Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                          Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards            Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                            Yes [X]   No []    TBD    []

          11,500 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []    No []    TBD    [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]   No []    NA     []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?

                                                        Page 20 of 21
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Joop Stoutjesdijk
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Peter Leonard (SA)            Date: 02-May-2017
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name: Sudipto Sarkar (PMGR)         Date: 15-May-2017




                                             Page 21 of 21
