INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO69
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Burkina Faso               Project ID:   P149827
Project Name: BF REDD+ Readiness Preparation (P149827)
Task Team       Loic Jean Charles Braune
Leader(s):
Estimated
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR
Sector(s):      Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Public
administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20 %)
Theme(s):       Climate change (20%), Land administration and management (20%),
Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Other environment and natural
resources management (20%), Rural policies and institutions (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       3.80            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility         3.80
Total                                                            3.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective is to reinforce Burkina Faso's capacity to coordinate
the REDD+ readiness process including a socially and environmentally sound national strategy and
other key governance systems for REDD+ implementation.
C. Project Description


﻿This project builds on Burkina Faso' R-PP and the FIP Investment Plan that serves as the framework
for the process known as REDD+ Readiness. The R-PP approved by the FPCF in December 2013 is
organized in six sections: 1) Organization and Consultation; 2) Development of the national REDD+
strategy; 3) Development of a baseline scenario; 4) Measurement, Reporting, and Verification
Systems; 5) Budget and Timeline and; 6) Monitoring Plan and Productive Measurement Framework.
Most of the activities outlined in sections 3, baseline/reference scenario, and 4, monitoring, reporting
and verification, of the R-PP will be addressed through interventions funded by the FIP and
channeled through the African Development Bank, while some of the activities outlined in sections
1, organization and consultation, 2, national REDD+ strategy, and 6, monitoring framework, of the
R-PP will be addressed through interventions funded by the FIP and channeled through the World
Bank. However, a financing gap was identified and this project seeks to fill will finance activities
needs that are still not addressed by the two FIP projects.
There is a strong need for coordination among the various initiatives, and the REDD+ program
provides an overarching framework that will ensure complementarity among different initiatives. The
breakdown of funding for REDD+ Readiness activities can be found in Annex II.
FCPF Readiness funding will be used to strengthen organizational arrangements for REDD+, to carry
out studies that will deepen the understanding of the strategic options for REDD+, to strengthen the
REDD+ implementation framework, to strengthen the social and environmental safeguard
assessment process, to the development of national monitoring, reporting and verification system that
includes the monitoring of co-benefits.
Component 1: Strengthening REDD+ and forest governance (US$1.6 million).
The costs of the institutional arrangements described above (creating the various bodies as well as
the operating costs for the meetings) will largely be supported by other programs (such as the FIP).
However, this FCPF financing will support the efficient governance of the REDD+ process and
facilitate the technical coordination of the team working on the REDD+ agenda. In addition, it will
O
set up the tools that will facilitate the planning and monitoring of REDD+ related activities.
Activity 1.a: Building REDD+ technical capacities (about $US550.000). This activity will include
the renewal for 2 years of the Lead Technical Assistant ("Conseiller Technique Principal"), local
Technical Assistance (full time and/or part time) and support to communication and knowledge
management tools and products at national and international levels.
Activity 1.b: Development of a Grievance and Redress Mechanism (about $US300.000). A study
will be carried out to determine the most appropriate Grievance and Redress Mechanism for the
context of Burkina Faso (based on the existing national mediation system) as well as
recommendations for implementation. The project will then support the setting up of the grievance
and redress mechanism.
Activity 1.c: Setting up partnerships with the Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Interior for Forest
Law promotion and enforcement (about $US350.000). The technical Ministries operating in rural
areas have been closely associated with the REDD+ approach for land use planning, however formal
law enforcement will require complementary actions in partnership with the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Interior and Customs.
Activity 1.d: Development of a Monitoring System for Co-Benefits (about $US400.000). The
purpose of this monitoring is, in part, to assess the non-monetary and long-term effects of the
implementation of a REDD+ strategy such as the positive effects of REDD+ on biodiversity, soils,


﻿water resources, the fight against desertification, poverty reduction, development, gender equity,
governance, food security, culture, etc. and therefore to point the complementarity with the approach
adopted in the SCADD.
Component 2: Development of National REDD+ Strategy (US $1.5 million).
Burkina Faso will develop a National REDD+ Strategy that will seek to address the complex
dynamics that lead to deforestation and forest degradation and will drive subsequent investments in
the country. The REDD+ strategy will be drawn on the initial work executed during the preparation
of the R-PP and for the FIP Forest Investment Plan. To prepare the strategy, the project will finance
various studies to address gaps in data regarding the impact and quantification of some direct and
indirect drivers of deforestation.
Activity 2.a: Design and elaboration of the strategy (US$750.000). The elaboration of the strategy
will be supervised by the REDD+ Focal Point with the close support of the REDD+ Lead Technical
Assistant, under guidance and control of the REDD+ National Committee. The consulting firm will
provide a pool of experts (that would include at least a REDD+ expert, a forestry expert and a social
specialist for the participatory consultations - plus extra relevant experts) and make sure they will be
available on demand up to a certain amount of days thorough the strategy preparation process.
Activity 2.b: Enhancing the Informational Base related to REDD+ (US$650.000). This activity will
finance in part or in whole studies that analyze different threats and causes of deforestation and forest
degradation in Burkina Faso as part of the effort to develop a detailed understanding of the threats as
well as the impacts of different activities, in collaboration with the studies implemented to design the
reference scenario. Those studies will put a special focus on social aspects (migration, poverty and
land ownership change trends).
Activity 2.c: Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) (about US$100.000). This
activity will support a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) that will inform the
national REDD+ strategy. The SESA will contribute to the REDD+ readiness process in Burkina
Faso by assessing how REDD+ strategy options address environmental and social priorities
associated with current patterns of land use and forest management. Gaps identified through this
assessment would lead to adjustments in the REDD+ strategy options to close the gaps. Also, the
SESA will provide an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will outline
the procedures to be followed for managing potential environmental and social impacts of specific
*      policies, actions and projects during the implementation of the REDD+ strategy.
Component 3: Readiness Monitoring, Coordination and Communication (US$0.7 million).
Activities will be carried to allow the REDD+ National Committee, the FIP Coordination Unit and
the REDD+ Focal Point to implement and supervise REDD+ Readiness preparation and to report to
the FCPF Participant Committee about the progress toward Readiness.
Activity 3.a: Operational Support for project implementation (about US$200.000). This activity will
cover supervision, evaluation and external control. It will finance additional project management
costs for the FIP Coordination Unit, such as additional support staff (in particular for fiduciary
management), additional equipment purchase for REDD+ team and other various incremental
operational costs (missions, training...).
Activity 3.b: REDD+ Readiness compliance, control and monitoring (about US$500.000). In
compliance with the guidelines and the monitoring framework developed by the FCPF, this
component will support the development of effective Monitoring and Reporting systems that can


﻿feed into eventual verification, in line with component 6 Monitoring Plan and Framework for
Productivity Measurement of Burkina Faso's R-PP. This would include (i) the definition of the
relevant indicators to follow progress toward Readiness chosen among the 34 criteria set out in the
Readiness Package Assessment Framework developed by the FCPF, (ii) the external review (audit)
O
U       of the country baseline and MRV system to ensure they are reliable and compliant with international
standards and requirements, and can be used for carbon finance purposes; (iii) reporting to FCPF
Participant Committee and (iv) independent reviews and audits to update the readiness assess
The ultimate goal of the subcomponent is to develop the "R -Package " and REDD+ documents that
would eventually facilitate the set-up of REDD+ or Carbon financing, such as the Carbon Fund.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This project does not entail activities on the ground. Rather, it is focused on providing technical
assistance to the government for the development of technical and institutional capacities to
participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Government of Burkina Faso has gained significant experience in implementing projects that are
similar to this project and using, in a satisfactory manner, the World Bank safeguards instruments.
Since the thematic areas under the new proposed project are relatively similar to past projects, the
team is confident that the Government has the appropriate capacities to properly prepare and enforce
Safeguards Policies. In addition, the project will be implemented by the Coordination team set-up for
the FIP Project (Decentralized Forest and Woodland Management - DFWM) that is already in
charge of implementing and monitoring the Safeguards for the FIP project in partnership with SP-
CONEDD and with the support from the BUNEE..
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national REDD+ Readiness
process carried out through inclusive consultations, as part of the more general thorough consultation
scheme financed by the DFWM.
0
The SESA exercise itself will assess the national capacity needs required for the country to be
capable of monitoring and implementing the safeguards related to a national REDD+ mechanism and
O
will make recommendations for institutional strengthening.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The FCPF readiness preparation grant must comply
OP/BP 4.01                              with World Bank safeguard policies regarding the
management of environmental and social impacts.
The readiness preparation phase is meant primarily
for technical assistance and capacity building
activities. The grant will not finance any
implementation of REDD+ activities on the ground


﻿(investments, pilot activities). In order to identify the
potential negative consequences from the
implementation of the National REDD+ Strategy, the
country will carry out a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment, which should ensure: i) the
integration of social and environmental
considerations into the final REDD+ Strategy; ii) a
participatory process for the preparation of the
national REDD+ strategy; and iii) the establishment
of an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to support the country in
managing and mitigating potential future negative
consequences from the implementation of the REDD
+ strategy.
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) to be carried out under the project will serve
to identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative
environmental and social impacts associated with
future activities to be supported by the final REDD+
strategy by providing guidance and key elements for
the preparation of an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). The SESA will
also influence the final national REDD+ strategy, by
ensuring that social and environmental risks are
factors in the preparation of the strategy.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
well as the numerous environmental services and
products that natural habitats provide to human
society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
as the country puts in place an effective strategy to
reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will address
issues related to natural habitats and potential
impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will
later be included in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         Overall, future REDD+ activities are expected to
have significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
and forest degradation, while contributing to the
well-being of forest-dependent communities.
Potential impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on
natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank's
Operational Policy regarding forest management, in


﻿particular as these relate to the establishment of
plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No            No Agricultural intensification and reforestation
activities, are likely to require pest management in
the course of project implementation.
P hysical Cultural Resources  Yes           Future REDD+ activities are likely to be
OP/BP 4.11                                  implemented in areas containing sites deemed
physical cultural resources by rural communities
living there (e.g. holy/secret sites such as sacred
groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is not
anticipated that the project will have negative
impacts on any such sites, the SESA will address
issues related to physical cultural resources and
potential impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy,
which will later be included in the ESMF and a
specific dedicated framework.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           Future REDD+ activities mayl trigger Involuntary
BP 4.12                                     Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
restrictions of access to legally designated parks,
protected areas, or forest management / reforestation
areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary
resettlement to the extent feasible, or to minimize
and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts
in cases where resettlement or other involuntary
restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA
process, any issues related to land acquisition or
involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. In
case of restriction to natural resources, a Process
Framework will be prepared as well.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            The project activities do not involve dams.
Projects on International     No            N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2017
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The main safeguard instrument to be launched is the Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA). The SESA procurement process may start 3 months after grant signature,
once the REDD+ team is settled. The SESA process is expected to last about 2 years to capture the
feedback from the pilot activities developed by the FIP Program.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and four related frameworks
O
(Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); Process Framework; Cultural Heritage Framework) will
complement the set of safeguards instruments.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Loic Jean Charles Braune
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)             Date: 15-May-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                   Date: 23-May-2015
Manager:


