                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC19689

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Azerbaijan                      Project ID:      P161307
                            Project Name:   Republic of Azerbaijan: NSDS, Including Detailed Institution, Human and
                                            ICT Capacity Building Plans for 2017-2022
                            Team Leader(s): Gregory Kisunko
                            Estimated Date 10-Jan-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO15                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.2499                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Program to Support Statistical Capacity Building in ECA                                     0.2499
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the grant is to support the State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan
                           in preparing: (i) a new long-term National Strategy for the Development of Statistics for 2017-2027
                           (NSDS); (ii) supplemental mid-term (2017-2022) action plans; and (iii) capacity building of the SSC
                           staff in order to make them ready for implementation of these action plans. Action plans will be
                           prepared with costing and timetables.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will cost approximately 304,900, of which $249,900 will be funded by a TFSCB grant
                           and approximately $55,000 will be in-kind contribution from the Implementing Agency.

                           The project will consist of four main components as follows:

                           Component 1: Development of the new NSDS covering 2017-2027 with detailed elaboration of
                           actions for 2017-2022.
                           i.        Key activities: Consulting services.
                           ii.       Description and expected outputs: This component will finance a review of the status of the
                           statistical system, including assessment of the SSC long-term needs with a special attention to the
                           first five years. Expected outputs are a draft NSDS and five-year institutional development, ICT
                           (including hard- and software, analytical tools and information security needs), and human resource
                           capacity building activity plans, cost estimates, and timetables.
                           Component 2. A review and discussion of the NSDS and action plans with all stakeholders (within
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and outside of the SSC and GoAz).
                           i.       Key activities: National consultations, workshops and consulting services
                           ii.      Description and expected outputs: This component will finance national consultation and
                           dissemination workshop to solicit feedback on whether priorities outlined in the NSDS and action
                           plans reflect needs of the GoAz and civil society and on comprehensiveness and feasibility of the
                           proposed action plans. The consultations and workshops will cement the ownership of the NSDS and
                           action plans by stakeholders, data producers and users (including line ministries and civil society)
                           and, therefore, help its successful implementation.
                           Component 3. Capacity building and training for the relevant SSC staff in implementation of action
                           plans (projects).
                           i.       Key activities: Statistical project implementation trainings conducted by international
                           experts, seminars, study tours (2) and consulting services.
                           ii.      Description and expected outputs: This component will finance experts and study tours
                           aimed at preparing relevant SSC staff (mostly managers) to performing tasks related to
                           implementation of three medium-term action plans prepared under this grant. The GoAz intends to
                           improve performance of all aspects of the SSC performance and therefore, it is important to furnish
                           the SSC staff with skill necessary to implement complex action plans for improvement of statistics.
                           Study tours to countries implementing similar action plans will cement skills obtained through in-
                           class trainings.
                           Component 4. Project implementation support.
                           i.       Key activities: Consulting services, goods and services.
                           ii.      Description and expected outputs: This component will finance national consultants
                           supporting project implementation with logistical and other necessary goods and services (including
                           office equipment, printing of materials and translation/i
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           none

                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           n/a

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                                                               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Gregory Kisunko
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 02-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                                        Date: 02-Aug-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
