                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR1074
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                                            P102398
                                                                             Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Road Sector Project (P102398)
                            Task Team       Sombath Southivong
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       17-Dec-2009                                     Estimated   25-Mar-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTIDR                                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (5%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (34%), Regional
                                               integration (34%), Natural disaster management (32%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        43.18           Total Bank Financing:                                       27.80
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   14.38
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          27.80
                              JAPAN Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                                                               1.00
                              Total                                                                                                43.18
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                Page 1 of 12
                         The project development objectives are to improve the effectiveness of the MPWT➢❨ s
                         infrastructure service delivery through(i) improved formulation of sector stra
                         tegies and prioritization of expenditure programs; and (ii) harmonized donor act
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ivities and use of country systems.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objectives are to improve the effectiveness of the MPWT➢❨ s
                         infrastructure service delivery through(i) improved formulation of sector stra
                         tegies and prioritization of expenditure programs; and (ii) harmonized donor act
                         ivities and use of country systems.
                         3. Project Description
                         At the time of their preparation, both the original project and the Additional Financing (AF) were
                         considered environmental assessment Category B as the scope of activities including road
                         improvement works of two national roads and maintenance works of provincial roads was not
                         expected to have potential large scale, significant, and/or irreversible environmental or social
                         impacts. The original project and AF triggered the OP/BP 4.00 Pilot Use of Country Systems as well
                         as the OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. A
                         Safeguards Diagnostic Review (SDR) conducted during project appraisal in 2008-2009 in line with
                         the OP/BP 4.00 requirements determined that MPWT’s Environmental and Social Operation Manual
                         (ESOM) was equivalent and acceptable to OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, 4.04 Natural
                         Habitats, and 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). The project is in full compliance with
                         applicable safeguard policies provisions, and no outstanding safeguard issues exist.

                         During AF preparation it was decided that a feasibility study (FS) for a Public-Private Partnership
                         (PPP) road pilot would be financed under the AF. At that stage the overall potential of PPP road
                         construction was uncertain in Lao PDR given the very low traffic volume, and specific location and
                         various technical parameters under which PPP would be viable need to be first assessed and clarified.
                         To determine PPP viability, location, and scope, funding was initially mobilized from the Public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) for a preliminary Feasibility Study (pre-FS).

                         The pre-FS was duly conducted during the AF implementation, between February and May 2013.
                         The pre-FS identified sections of National Road 13 (NR13) where PPP is potentially viable and
                         recommended that a full FS be carried out to identify specific sections of the NR13 where PPP is
                         viable and the specific technical parameters under which PPP is viable. The pre-FS results also
                         concluded that widening the road from two to four lanes on sections with the highest traffic is
                         potentially viable and recommended that the FS identify the sections where such widening would be
                         feasible and economically, financially, environmentally and socially optimal.

                         The full FS commenced on November 25, 2013, with the funding of the AF under the Component 2.
                         The FS findings indicated that the PPP is viable for sections from Km 12 to Km 70 of the NR 13N
                         and from Km 13 to Km 63 of the NR 13S. It was also found that road expansion from two to four
                         lanes is viable on NR 13N from Km 12 to Km 44 and NR 13S from Km 21 to Km 28. This implies
                         that the potential environmental and social impacts associated with such PPP road construction will
                         be in the scale of Environmental Category A under the Bank OP 4.01. Consequently, the project
                         Environmental Category has to be revised from B to A.

                         The following three components are financed under the AF:



                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         Component 1: Road Network Improvement and Preservation (Additional Financing of US$15.62
                         million). AF ensured completion of 171 km of national roads (NR1B and NR6A). The AF finances
                         cost increases for additional civil works needed to strengthen the disaster resilience of National Road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6A and 1B including slope stabilization of some critical sections, strengthening drainage systems
                         and water crossing structures (small bridges and culverts). AF finances the construction of a bridge
                         over the River Ma (Nam Ma) connecting two sections of National Road 6A, replacing an inefficient
                         ferry. The AF also continues co-financing periodic maintenance of the provincial road network and
                         the application of disaster resilience measures on vulnerable sections. AF finances supervision
                         consultancy services required due to an increase emphasis on disaster resilient standards and
                         additional bridge works on NR6A. Road safety activities initiated under the original project would be
                         complemented with institutional development activities, including strengthening capacities for traffic
                         management, road safety planning, accident prevention, and enforcement of safety rules.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Additional Financing of US$3.58 million). The AF
                         finances scaling up institutional strengthening activities to: (a) develop sector capacities for the
                         management of Public Private Partnerships (PPP); feasibility studies of PPP pilots; (b) further
                         strengthen governance mechanisms through: (i) expanding the ICT platform initiated under the
                         original project by integrating business processes (accounting, asset management, roads management
                         system, and GIS); (ii) further strengthening internal control capacity; and (iii) strengthening citizen
                         feedback mechanisms through the development of the MPWT hotline; (c) continue supporting sector
                         capacities on financial management, safeguards monitoring, supervision and quality assurance, and
                         M&E; (d) developing standard operating procedures for the Emergency Contingency Fund (ECF).

                         Component 3: Disaster Recovery and Contingency (Additional Financing of US$1.80 million). AF is
                         used for topping-up the emergency contingency fund, depleted following rehabilitation efforts after
                         Typhoon Haima
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project location will have national coverage, as was the case with the original and the AF
                         project.

                         The proposed PPP pilot roads would pass through semi-urbanized areas and the road improvements
                         may affect some 1,600 landowners, 30% residential and 70% commercial entities, in case the road is
                         widened for the entire pilot sections. These road sections pass along schools, small businesses/shops,
                         fish farms and residential houses, and impacts to community health safety and security would be
                         expected during the construction and operational phases of the project caused mainly by the influx of
                         workers, increased traffic flows, and from dust, noise and other forms of pollutants mainly during
                         construction but also during the operational phase (i.e., gas emissions). The landscape is typical of a
                         marshy area (with notable flood plains and riverine forest vegetation along both sides) combined
                         with small hilly zones. Furthermore, given a fairly large number of temples and graves along the
                         road, temporary impacts on cultural heritage are also expected. Also, some roadside residents include
                         those who belong to ethnic groups who migrated to the current locations.

                         None of these sections identified for the PPP pilot passes through national parks or protected areas or
                         their assigned buffer zones. The road 13 North sections are located at about 8km away from the
                         designated Phou Phanang National Protected Area and they do not reach the buffer zones (considered
                         5km from the edge of the assigned protected area zone).



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Makathy Tep (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Naima A Hasci (GSURR)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes        The findings from the feasibility study financed under
                         4.04                                   Lao Road Sector Project AF indicate that the PPP is
                                                                viable for sections from Km 12 to Km 70 of the NR13 N
                                                                and from Km 13 to Km 63 of the NR13 S. The FS also
                                                                found that road expansion from two to four lanes is viable
                                                                on NR13 N from Km 12 to Km 44 and NR13 S from Km
                                                                21 to Km 28. This implies that the potential
                                                                environmental and social impacts associated with such
                                                                PPP road construction will be in the scale of
                                                                Environmental Category A under the Bank OP 4.01. The
                                                                environmental and social assessment therefore has been
                                                                carried out and mitigation measures identified at the level
                                                                of Category A in line with World Bank safeguard policy
                                                                provisions. Therefore, in addition to existing safeguard
                                                                policies triggered (Environmental Assessment, Pilot Use
                                                                of Country System for Environmental Assessment,
                                                                Indigenous Peoples, and Involuntary Resettlement),
                                                                Natural Habitats (OP)(BP 4.04), and Physical Cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Resources (OP)(BP 4.11) will now be triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                         Physical Cultural           Yes        Same as above
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                         OP/BP 4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed        No
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60




                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Original project. Under the original LRSP project (category B), the upgrading of two national
                              roads (6A and 1B) and the periodic maintenance of provincial road network have been
                              implemented under Component A, while under Component C, emergency rehabilitation has been
                              conducted in 49 road sections. No major environmental or social impacts have occurred so far.
                              Minor environmental issues such as the improper dumping of waste materials along the riverbank,
                              and the weak integration of safeguard planning, implementation, and monitoring/reporting in the
                              overall project implementation, have been addressed through safeguard trainings and the intensive
                              supervision and implementation support by the task team. Limited land acquisition and loss of
                              assets occurred under the improvement of national roads which are being addressed and
                              compensated as per the respective Resettlement Action Plans. No land acquisition occurred under
                              the periodic maintenance of provincial roads or emergency road rehabilitation. Ethnic Groups
                              Development Plans have been prepared as per the project Ethnic Groups Development
                              Framework, and affected ethnic minorities have been consulted in a free, prior and informed
                              manner, and their broad community support established. Supervision conducted during the
                              implementation found no major outstanding environmental or social issues.

                             Additional Financing. The types and scale of impact related to these AF activities were initially
                             estimated to be similar to those which occurred under the original project and which have been
                             addressed through existing safeguard instruments. No potential large scale, significant, and/or
                             irreversible environmental or social impacts are anticipated as a result of improvements of
                             National Roads 6A and 1B and the periodic maintenance of the provincial road network. The
                             potential negative impact of the construction of a new bridge over the River Ma (10 meters wide,
                             180 meters long, and 3 spans) are limited to minor disturbance of bottom sediment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             construction site which will be temporary, localized, and can be mitigated through the application
                             of good construction management practices and close supervision by field engineers as well as
                             implementation of EMP. The River Ma originates in Vietnam, passing through Lao PDR for
                             approximately 70km and returning to Vietnam again and the construction of the new bridge would
                             not cause a significant adverse impact on environment, hydrology and natural habitat. The access
                             road to the bridge would be constructed on public lands and no loss of private land, assets or
                             access is anticipated.

                             During AF preparation it was discussed that a feasibility study (FS) for a Public-Private
                             Partnership (PPP) road pilot may be financed under the AF. The MPWT prepared the Terms of
                             Reference (ToR) for the full FS in line with the findings and recommendations of the pre-FS.

                             IFC Advisory Services .The International Finance Corporation (IFC) provided an advisory service
                             to the MPWT for the preparation of the road PPP pilot. The Financial Advisory Services
                             Agreement (FASA) was duly signed between the IFC and the MPWT on November 12, 2013. The
                             IFC transaction advisory service includes technical support to FS, the preparation of bidding
                             documents, the selection of concessionaires, assistance to financial closure and guidance to ensure
                             compliance with its Performance Standards.

                             Prior to the signing of the FASA, the IFC reviewed the draft FS ToR prepared by the MPWT to


                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                         ensure compliance with IFC’s Performance Standards (PS). IFC also undertook a gap analysis
                         between MPWT’s Environmental and Social Operation Manual (ESOM) and the PS. The ESOM
                         was found to cover most of the PS aspects. However, Labor and Working Conditions (PS2),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Community Health, Safety and Security (PS4), and Ecosystem Services (part of PS6) are some of
                         the areas requiring additional due diligence. The FS TOR was revised to address these gaps. As
                         part of the transaction advice, IFC will continue providing advice in a manner consistent with the
                         principles of the relevant PS, and determining key environmental and social risks that the
                         government and the concessionaire would need to follow through the legal PPP agreement. The FS
                         started in November 2013, based on the revised TOR, with funding under Component 2 of the
                         LRSP-AF.

                         Ongoing FS. The FS is tasked with assessing the viability of PPP, including the potential of
                         widening from two to four lanes on selected sections of NR 13 North and NR 13 South, from
                         technical, social, environmental and economic perspectives, and refining cost and benefit
                         estimates, including through the preparation of preliminary engineering design. In line with the
                         TOR, the FS includes an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to be conducted in
                         accordance with government regulations, including the Environmental and Social Operational
                         Manual (ESOM) and with the IFC’s Performance Standards (PS) . The ESIA includes: existing
                         baseline status of all the concerned environmental components; prediction and evaluation of
                         impacts; analysis of alternatives; quantification of environmental impacts and risks, and estimate
                         the cost of measures to mitigate them; and an Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan.
                         Potential residual impacts will be considered during ESIA work.

                         The FS also includes a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) which include:

                          i.      Identification of potential positive or negative social impacts e.g. impacts of tolling on the
                         mobility of local people;
                          ii.     Socio-economic and demographic data on all stakeholders as well as project affected
                         population; characteristics of project affected population;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           iii.   A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and an Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP);
                           iv.    Engagement and consultations with project affected persons including ethnic groups and
                         development of a structured Stakeholder Engagement Plan as a follow-up action item;
                           v.     Defining a framework for the project to obtain the free, prior and informed consent of
                         ethnic minority persons if the project:
                                • Adversely impacts their land or natural resources under traditional ownership or
                         customary use;
                                • Physically relocates them from land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership
                         or under customary use; or
                                • Significantly impacts critical cultural heritage associated with local ethnic minority
                         persons, or plans to use cultural heritage associated with IPs for commercial purposes.

                         Proposed change in current AF Project EA categorization. The FS findings indicated that the PPP
                         is viable for sections from Km 12 to Km 70 of the NR 13N and from Km 13 to Km 63 of the NR
                         13S. It was also found that road expansion from two to four lanes is viable on NR 13N from Km
                         12 to Km 44 and NR 13S from Km 21 to Km 28. This implies that the potential environmental and
                         social impacts associated with such PPP road construction will be in the scale of Environmental
                         Category A under the Bank OP 4.01. The environmental and social assessment therefore has to be
                         carried out and mitigation measures be identified at the level of Category A in line with World
                         Bank safeguard policies provisions. Consequently, the project Environmental Category has to be

                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                           revised from B to A. Consequently, the OP 4.01 will apply for any investment of such PPP
                           subproject (rather than the originally use OP 4.00), although other project activities than PPP FS
                           under the AF would continue to be addressed under Country Systems (OP/BP 4.00) triggered for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the original project and AF. Additionally, OP 4.11 and OP 4.04 are applicable to the PPP road FS.

                           Environmental and social impacts being addressed under the on-going FS. The sections of the
                           NR13 where PPP road construction was found to be viable do not pass through national parks or
                           protected areas or their assigned buffer zones. The road 13 sections are located at about 8km away
                           from the designated Phou Phanang National Protected Area and they do not reach the buffer zones
                           (considered 5km from the edge of the assigned protected area zone). The landscape is typical of a
                           marshy area (with notable flood plains and riverine forest vegetation along both sides) combined
                           with small hilly zones.

                           The improvements would follow the existing alignment and right of way (15 meter both sides of
                           the center line) because the current traffic volume does not justify further widening. The majority
                           of social impacts concern loss of private land and income loss for roadside shops, as well as
                           physical relocation of households and shops. The full magnitude of land acquisition and physical
                           relocation will be known once the FS is completed and the location and scale of road widening is
                           fully determined. the PPP pilot roads would pass through semi-urbanized areas and the road
                           improvements may affect some 1,600 landowners, 30% residential and 70% commercial entities,
                           in case the road is widened for the entire pilot sections.

                           As the road sections pass along schools, small businesses/shops, fish farms and residential houses,
                           impacts to community health safety and security would be expected during the construction and
                           operational phases of the project caused mainly by the influx of workers, increased traffic flows,
                           and from dust, noise, and other forms of pollutants mainly during construction but also during the
                           operational phase (i.e., gas emissions). Furthermore, given a fairly large number of temples and
                           graves along the road, temporary impacts on cultural heritage are also expected. Also, some ethnic
                           groups are found to be present along a few sections of the NR 13N.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The FS is assessing alternatives to minimize or avoid significant social impact on the most densely
                           populated sections. Such alternatives include construction of bypasses for the two urban sections
                           of NR 13N at Km 52 and Km 70, with a total length of 7km, or limiting the scope of works in the
                           urban sections to the improvement of surface condition of the existing road.

                           A draft FS report has been presented in December 2014 and the final report is expected for March
                           2015. The MPTW is currently developing the TOR for a separate consultancy to identify the gaps
                           the FS may have with the applicable Bank safeguard policies, and ensure its compliance.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The new bridge over the River Ma, by replacing the existing inefficient ferry that cannot operate
                           over 4 to 6 months during the day season due to low water levels, will significantly increase the
                           trade with Vietnam and positively contribute to local economy. Road improvement and increased
                           traffic, however, would also increase the risk of dust and emissions pollution from passing traffic,
                           road safety, and other social issues related to the transport sector. Road safety including
                           installation of speed limit will continue to be supported under the AF.

                           For the PPP FS, it is expected that following the completion of the FS in March 2015, the tender


                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                           process would start and potential bidders would be invited to submit bids, with financial closure in
                           December 2015. The GoL has expressed its commitment to include environmental management
                           plan (EMP) that fully meets the Bank safeguard requirements in the bidding documents. The Lao
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Government has also expressed its interest in requesting the World Bank to support the public
                           financing portion PPP pilot project as a follow up to the FS financed under the AF. This would be
                           a new project that will be of category A in line with the OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. A
                           Project Concept Note (PCN) to finance the public portion of such PPP project would be prepared
                           by March 2015, with approval expected during the last quarter of Fiscal Year 2015/16.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Project alternatives for the PPP pilot are being analyzed as part of the ongoing Feasibility Study.

                           The OP 4.00 was triggered by the original LRSP project activities. The Safeguard Diagnostic
                           Review (SDR) was conducted during the preparation of the original project confirming that the
                           Environmental and Social Operational Manual (ESOM) was equivalent to OP 4.01, 4.04 and 4.11.
                           As for the potential impacts on involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples, it was decided
                           that such impacts would be addressed through OP 4.10 and OP4.12, due to the differences in the
                           approaches of the Government and the Bank in dealing with these impacts (lack of equivalence).

                           As described above, ESOM has been applied satisfactorily to all civil works financed under the
                           original project, albeit some gaps that have been addressed. The knowledge and understanding of
                           ESOM among the MPWT staff, both at the central and provincial level, has been improved and
                           continue to be strengthened under the AF through a series of trainings and workshops. The ESOM
                           technical guidelines that provide more detailed guidance to MPWT engineers are also under
                           development.

                           With the adoption of the EIA Decree and the establishment of MoNRE, the ESOM has also to be
                           updated in order to make it fully compatible with the new national arrangements.The AF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support the updating of ESOM, and $320,000 have been allocated under the AF for this purpose;
                           and (ii) in the meantime, ESOM will continue to apply to all civil works that will be supported
                           under the AF, including the construction of the bridge over the river Ma.

                           As for PPP, the Bank environmental and social safeguard policies will continue to be applied to
                           address environmental and social impacts associated with the potential PPP road constructions
                           assessed under the on-going FS. The safeguard instruments developed under the FS will be
                           further reviewed and any gaps to meet the Category A requirements under the Bank safeguard
                           policies will be addressed. The IFC’s environmental and social team also conducted a gap
                           analysis of the ESOM and IFC’s Performance Standards (PS). The gap analysis found that the
                           ESOM covers most PS aspects. However, Labor and Working Conditions (PS2), Community
                           Health, Safety and Security (PS4), and Ecosystem Services (part of PS6) are some of the key areas
                           requiring additional due diligence during the ESIA process. The ongoing ESIA will address gaps
                           found to exist with IFC PS.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The SDR had identified several gaps to make ESOM fully equivalent with the OP 4.01, 4.04 and
                           4.11. These gaps were addressed in the revised final ESOM that was prepared during the original
                           project.
                           The Environment and Social Division (ESD) of the Public Works and Transport Institute (PTI) has

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                         eight staff with broad experience in safeguards and, under the support of one environmental
                         consultant and one social consultant, is conducting the training of MPWT staff at the central and
                         provincial level to strengthen their knowledge and understanding of ESOM. The Technical and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Department (TED) of the Department of Roads (DOR) has 3 staff responsible for
                         safeguard compliance, whose capacity has been significantly strengthened through the
                         implementation of the original project. Further capacity development will be provided under the
                         AF. ESOM training has also been initiated and this will be continued under AF but the training
                         approach will be modified to ensure that the activities will also serve the monitoring of safeguard
                         performance at the subproject level.

                         On the social side, the existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Group
                         Development Framework (EGDF) which were prepared under the original project have been
                         updated and disclosed locally and at the InfoShop. Since the AF will finance same project
                         activities as the original project in the similar scale, the existing RPF and EGDF, through the
                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) prepared as per
                         RPF and EGDF, are considered to remain valid under AF. In case new impacts are found to occur
                         that are not addressed under the existing RAPs, or ethnic minorities are found to be present in or
                         have collective attachment to project areas that were not supported under the original project, a
                         separate RAP or EGDP will be developed in line with RPF or EGDF. For this purpose, safeguard
                         screening will continue to be conducted for the provincial road maintenance and emergency
                         rehabilitation programs as works are identified.

                         No significant issues have been identified for the implementation of ESOM, RAPs and EGDPs,
                         and the project has no outstanding safeguard issues. ESOM tools were attached to bidding
                         documents of sub-projects. Environmental and Social Division (ESD) of Public Works and
                         Transport Institute (PTI) will continue to conduct monitoring of ESOM application in all regions
                         and identify key challenges for further improvement of ESOM updates. The capacity for safeguard
                         monitoring and reporting of ESD, Technical and Environment Division of Roads Department as
                         well as contractors have improved significantly under original project. Draft ESOM update has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         been slightly revised based on new Ministerial Order No. 8029/MONRE (December 2013). A
                         national consultative workshop will be carried out for final approval of the updated ESOM, and
                         translated to English.

                         Regarding the PPP feasibility study financed under the LRSP-AF, IFC has been providing
                         transaction advice to MPWT, and will also support the MPWT to prepare the bidding documents
                         for the PPP pilot. World Bank and IFC’s environmental and social specialists have reviewed the
                         terms of reference for the feasibility study to ensure compatibility with safeguard policies and
                         performance standards (PS), and have been providing MPWT and the FS consultants with
                         guidance on environmental and social due diligence for a PPP project. The Bank and IFC
                         environmental and social specialists have also been working closely together, and have reviewed
                         and agreed on the feasibility study methodology proposed to undertake the environment and social
                         assessments. This methodology proposes an iterative approach that consists of an initial fact-
                         finding survey to define the draft road alignment followed by data collection and detailed full
                         impact assessment for the final road alignment.

                         The MPWT, the World Bank and IFC teams have reviewed the first draft FS in December 2014
                         and found that the safeguard instruments developed need to be further improved in order to meet
                         the Category A requirements. The Bank task team will continue to advise the MPWT to ensure
                         that the safeguard instruments prepared under the AF will be developed to fully meet the Bank

                                                                   Page 9 of 12
                           safeguard requirements for a Category A project.

                           As this is a Category A subproject, all safeguard instruments will be submitted to, reviewed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cleared by the Regional Safeguard Secretariat.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders are the ESD of the PTI, the TED of DOR, DESIA, the local governments, and
                           local communities located along the roads. Under the original project consultations with DESIA
                           were conducted through meetings with key officials in Vientiane while consultation meetings with
                           local governments and communities along project roads were conducted during the preparation.
                           The ESOM, RPF and EGDF have been updated for AF and disclosed in Lao and English
                           languages at both the Infoshop as well as the MPWT offices in Vientiane and district offices in the
                           project areas. The simple project booklet that describes the nature of the project, expected
                           impacts, compensation strategies, entitlements and grievance mechanisms would continue to be
                           available to local population. For the maintenance of provincial roads and disaster recovery works
                           that have not been identified so far, screening would be conducted and where ethnic minorities are
                           present, they will be consulted in a free, prior and informed manner and their broad community
                           support will be established.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Apr-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 11-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Apr-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 09-Apr-2012
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Apr-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 09-Apr-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sombath Southivong
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                               Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
