                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA15031

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:   P152870
                                                         Parent        P120398
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      AF Additional Financing for Afghanistan On Farm Water Management Proj
                      (P152870)
   Parent Project     AF On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)
   Name:
   Task Team       Toru Konishi
   Leader(s):
   Estimated                                             Estimated   30-Oct-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GFA12                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                         Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (82%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                     (18%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (85%), Rural policies and institutions (8%),
                     Water resource management (7%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      47.40           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     Borrower                                                                                    2.40
     Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                      45.00
     Total                                                                                      47.40
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?


                                              Page 1 of 13
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The PDO of the project is to improve agricultural productivity in project areas by enhancing the
   efficiency of water used.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
Component 1. Irrigation Rehabilitation and Management in the Five Regions (US$31.7million) This
component will support the continued physical rehabilitation and the associated institutional support
to strengthen and establish IAs as follows:

Subcomponent 1.A. Establishing and Strengthening of IAs. This subcomponent will be implemented
by the IA team established within the PMU and will have the following three activities.
•        Establishment and Strengthening of the IAs. The proposed AF project will support (a)
monitoring and continued TA for the 175 IAs established under the original project and (b)
establishment of an additional 100 IAs for irrigation schemes rehabilitated under the proposed AF
and other donor-financed projects, including the Bank-financed IRDP.
•        Developing the Standard Procedure for Establishing IAs. Supporting the ID to compile an
inventory of the existing training materials and guidelines, including those prepared by the MEW and
MRRD, and consolidating them into a single standard document. The ID will then use the
consolidated material for all donor projects, with periodical updates.
•        Performance Monitoring of the IAs. Supporting the ID to develop a database for monitoring
the performance of the IAs once the rehabilitated irrigation schemes are transferred. The database
will contain basic information such as command area, irrigation area, irrigation fee collected, crop
patterns, infrastructure inventory, and so on and will be used for technical and financial inspection by
the IDs and its regional offices.

Sub-component 1.B. Improvement of Physical Irrigation Infrastructure. This component will support
the continued rehabilitation works for the existing irrigation schemes covering 50,000 ha in total at
the average price of US$600 per ha.

This component will be implemented in two phases:

Phase 1 (2016–2017). The rehabilitation of approximately 90 irrigation schemes covering about
20,000 ha, estimated to cost US$12 million, which had been planned but had been postponed due to
the cancellation of US$16 million under the original project. Design works have been completed and
retroactive financing will be used to start rehabilitation for about 15 irrigation schemes covering
some 6,000 hectares estimated to cost approximately US$600,000. ESMPs will be prepared for the
Bank’s prior review prior to commencement of the civil works contracts.

Phase 2 (2018–2019). Phase 2 project investments will be selected during the implementation of
Phase 1, based on criteria such as potential economic viability, availability of water, readiness of the
concerned communities, and prevailing security. The Phase 2 project investments will be selected
from Phase 2 NIDP supported under Component 2.

Component 2. Support for Enhancing Productivity (US$6.0 million).


                                              Page 2 of 13
The main objective of this component is to enhance agriculture and water productivity in the areas
supported by Component 1 through demonstration activities and technical assistance. The specific
activities to be implemented under this component will include (a) promotion of laser land leveling
and high-efficiency irrigation systems; (b) training and capacity building for IAs and farmers in
various agronomic practices, farm management techniques, and integrated pest management; (c)
operation of demonstration sites to disseminate a wide range of improved water management and
agronomic practices; and (d) establishment of farmers’ information service centers linked with
internet and mobile phone services. The DGAED will be responsible for the technical aspects of the
component.

The activities under the component will mainly be focused in the 23 districts where the irrigation
demonstration plots have already been set up under the OFWMP. First, the component will support
the strengthening and expansion of the 25 demonstrations plots undertaken under the original project
and then establish approximately 120 demonstration plots. The identified technologies and practices
will include the following:
(a)      Water conservation technologies. Laser land leveling, high-efficiency irrigation systems,
including drip, sprinkler, bubbler irrigation systems, water storage pond/tank, gated pipe irrigation,
and so on.
(b)      Agronomic and soil management practices. System of rice intensification, bed and furrow
irrigation, bed planting of crops, line sowing, minimum/zero tillage, mulching, and so on.
(c)      Project investment support to private service providers/farmers. This activity will provide
TA to private farmers and service providers to promote laser land levelers and high-efficiency
irrigation technologies in the project area in close coordination with the possible private suppliers.
(d)      Improvement of selected provincial- and district-level DGAED offices to serve as
information centers for farmers.
(e)      Integrated pest management. As part of the ESMF, the PMP was prepared. This activity will
support the implementation of the PMP to help beneficiaries to understand the rationalized use of
pesticides in the project area. Activities will include training of farmers and IA staff on general
information on available pesticides, application of the pesticides and herbicides, IPM practices,
monitoring of pesticide residues on selected crops (horticulture produce/vegetables), and
dissemination of information. This activity will be implemented in close collaboration with the IAs.

Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of the MAIL(US$3.7 million). This
component will support the strengthening of the ID. The organizational structure and the staffing
plan is being finalized under the JICA-financed CDISP and this component will help the ID
strengthen its technical and administrative capacity, develop a legal framework for the irrigation and
drainage subsector, and develop Phase 2 NIDP. The details of the activities are as follows;

Subcomponent 3.A. Institutional Strengthening of the ID. This component will mainly support the
training needs assessment, TA, and training covering the following aspects: (a) project investment
planning, (b) technical design standards, (c) oversight on construction works, (e) monitoring and
providing technical support to IAs, (f) overall sector M&E, (g) FM, and (h) safeguards and social
development (including gender). This subcomponent will include logistics, office renovation, and
TA, overseas and domestic training, workshops, and exposure visits. This sub-component will also
include TA to be provided by the FAO.

Subcomponent 3.B. Development of a Draft Irrigation and Drainage Law. This subcomponent will
help the MAIL consolidate the current ministerial procedures issued separately by the MEW,

                                             Page 3 of 13
MRRD, and MAIL into a law governing the sector. The law would providing underlying legal
recognition to the traditional mirab, stipulating the responsibilities and privilege of the Irrigation
Associations (IAs) and provides enabling framework for the IAs to manage main canals and
headworks through their federation. This subcomponent will be implemented in parallel with the
government’s effort to amend the current Water Law to be supported by the proposed AF project for
the IRDP in collaboration with other concerned ministries and under the auspices of the Supreme
Council for Water Resources.

Subcomponent 3.C.         Preparation of Phase 2 NIDP. This subcomponent will support the ID to
develop Phase 2 NIDP based on Phase 1 NIDP to be finalized soon. The preparatory works for Phase
2 NIDP will include (a) developing a database on the current irrigation schemes with assessment on
the current physical status; (b) priority analysis based on the social, economic, and environmental
criteria; and (c) assessment of the administrative costs based on the prevailing security and necessary
logistics. Phase 2 NIDP would also include a 10-year implementation plan which will guide the
development partners’ support in the future.

Component 4. Project Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6.0 million).
This component will continue supporting the incremental operating cost, project staff cost, logistics
(vehicles), and critical office equipment pertaining to project implementation so as to ensure sound
management of the project.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will select 5 project regions. These areas may consist of small scale irrigation projects or
tertiary units in medium and large scale irrigation schemes. In each project area, five demonstration
farms will be established where improved irrigation practices will be demonstrated. The project areas
will be selected prior to project implementation and according to the following criteria: demand
of local communities and their willingness to share costs; existing state of water losses; accessibility
in terms of security and physical access; synergy with other projects such as IRDP, HLP and other
non-Bank funded projects; and representativeness in terms of agro-ecological zones and cropping
systems.

 The project involves the rehabilitation of the existing canals and watercourses including related
structures and construction of any new canals or watercourses is not anticipated. Therefore, no land
acquisition is expected in the project; i n case of any, all land transaction will be based on willing
buyer-willing seller. In exceptional cases, minor voluntary land donation may occur in certain sub-
projects, but only provided that there are no structures or assets on the land, the livelihood impact of
the donation on the land owner will be insignificant an d the voluntary nature of the donation is fully
documented and independently verified. Selection of sub-projects will also be screened for land and
water disputes in order to avoid that investments in irrigation would fuel such disputes.

 The social and environmental impacts of the project are expected to be small and overall positive.
The project will build social capital by organizing and training IAs which will contribute to improved
irrigation efficiency and reduced water losses. The nature of the projects# activities is such that they
will not lead to significant deforestation; however, in case there would be a need for some tree
felling, new trees would be planted in a nearby location. The project will ensure uninterrupted traffic
of humans and animals by building bridge structures (culverts) where appropriate. The project will
also respect the use of watercourses as laundry basins, water collection and ablution places by the
local populations through the construction of small diversions. Insofar improved water efficiency


                                             Page 4 of 13
would lead to changes in cropping patterns and/or crop management methods, the agronomic training
provided by the project will include judicious use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides. Moreover the
project sites will be a subset of those of the IRDP project (and may partially overlap with the HLP
project) both of which already have provided some training in sustainable crop production and
O&M of the irrigation schemes.

 The ESMF has been developed to mitigate negative impacts of the project. These measures include:
(i) safe disposal or recycling of silt for agricultural purpose s and construction of washing bays and
cattle baths to avoid polluting water; (i i) setting specifications for the quality of borrow earth to
avoid deterioration in the quality of existing soil; (iii) implementing a pest management plan; (iv )
avoiding cutting of trees as far as possible, and where essential, planting at least double the number
of cut trees as replacement; (v) enhancing the skills and abilities of farmers, through trainings in
appropriate technologies, improved water management practices, (vi) empowering communities,
including women, through improved participation opportunities, (vii) incorporating mechanisms that
rec ognize and pay for labor contributed by sharecroppers; (viii) strengthening the institutional
capacity of IAs, (ix) reducing conflict and improving social relationship between farmers at the head
and tail-ends of canals and watercourses; an d (x) improving networking among IAs, government
local irrigation department, PI U, CDCs, River Basin Organizations (RBOs) and supporting NGOs/
FPs.

 On the other hand, it is predicted that the use of pesticides in the project area could increase as
project interventions improve availability of water with corresponding increase in cropping intensity.
A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has therefore been included in the ESMF to rationalize the use of
pesticides in the project area. The main activities under the PMP would be training of farmers in IPM
practices, and introduction a system of monitoring of pesticide residues in selected areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental               Yes            OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered due to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      some adverse environmental and social impacts from the
                                           civil works planned under the proposed AF and assigned
                                           EA category “B”, the same category as was confirmed for
                                           the original project. However, the potential negative
                                           impact of investments due to rehabilitation works will be
                                           minor, temporary and localized. During the operations of
                                           proposed AF project, support to irrigation and agriculture
                                           activities will increase the use of pesticides/agro-
                                           chemicals or requires an effective pest management
                                           practices. Typical impacts may include (a) toxicity to
                                           human/animal health and local water/ecology due to
                                           improper use, storage, and disposal of pesticides,
                                           fertilizers, and other toxic chemicals; (b) conflicting
                                           demands on surface or ground water supplies including
                                           spread infection and disease through the inappropriate use
                                           of irrigation canals for water supply, bathing or human
                                           waste disposal; and (c) water-logging and salinization in


                                             Page 5 of 13
                              some areas. These impacts could be mitigated through
                              improving knowledge and capacity of farmers to address
                              toxicity and safety issues, undertaking consultation among
                              water users upstream and downstream (or head and tail),
                              and ensuring that adequate consideration regarding
                              drainage and water need for other water users are
                              considered during detailed design.

                              n ESMP will prepared for each of the investments
                              including the ECOP following the templates provided in
                              the ESMF. For large investments estimated to cost more
                              than US$200,000, the Bank's prior review and approval
                              on the ESMP is required prior to the commencement of
                              the civil works; whereas for small investments estimated
                              cost US$200,000 or less, the Bank will carry out post
                              review. In addition, the project will engage an
                              independent social and environmental safeguards auditor
                              to carry out an annual audit.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   This policy is not triggered, because the project
4.04                          components are not expected to be in the area of any
                              natural habitat or will not have any impact on it.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The project activities do not impact forests in any way, as
                              defined by the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   During operation, support to irrigation and agriculture
                              activities would increase the use of pesticides/agro-
                              chemicals or requires an effective pest management
                              practices . Typical impacts may include a) toxicity to
                              human/animal health and local water/ecology dueto
                              improper use, storage, and disposal of pesticides,
                              fertilizers, and other toxic chemicals; b) conflicting
                              demands on surface or ground water supplies including
                              spread infection and disease through the inappropriate use
                              of irrigation canals for water supply, bathing or human
                              waste disposal; and c) water-logging and salinization in
                              some areas. These impacts could be mitigated through
                              improving knowledge and capacity of farmers to address
                              toxicity and safety issues, undertaking consultation among
                              water users upstream and downstream (or head and tail),
                              and ensuring that adequate consideration regarding
                              drainage and water need for other water users are
                              considered during detailed design.
Physical Cultural        No   OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there is no indication
Resources OP/BP 4.11          of presence of physical cultural resources within the
                              selected sites for the additional financing.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   This policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous
BP 4.10                       Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within the



                               Page 6 of 13
                                               project area that could potentially benefit or be adversely
                                               affected by the Project’s activities.
   Involuntary Resettlement Yes                No involuntary land acquisition is expected in the AF
   OP/BP 4.12                                  project since it exclusively supports rehabilitation of
                                               existing structures.However, the WB’s operational policy
                                               on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is triggered as a
                                               precautionary measure. In case the requirement for an
                                               additional land is unavoidable, all land transactions will
                                               be based on willing buyer-willing seller or acquired
                                               against community compensation, to facilitate the
                                               rehabilitation work. In exceptional cases, minor voluntary
                                               land donation may occur in certain subprojects, but only
                                               provided that there are no structures or assets on the land.
                                               The livelihood impact of the donation on the land owner
                                               will be minor (less than 10 percent of an individual’s
                                               holdings) and the voluntary nature of the donation is fully
                                               documented and independently verified. Selection of
                                               subprojects will also be screened for land and water
                                               disputes in order to avoid the situation where investments
                                               in irrigation would fuel such disputes.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No              The project does not have any activity involving dams.
   4.37
   Projects on International   Yes             Similar to the original project, the proposed AF project
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
                                               requirement and will exclusively support rehabilitation of
                                               the existing irrigation schemes without changing the
                                               original scope. Therefore, the proposed AF project will
                                               fall into the category specified under OP. 7.50 para. 7 (a)
                                               for which riparian notification is exempted. The
                                               exemption has been approved by the RVP on September
                                               4, 2015.
   Projects in Disputed        No              The project does not involve any activity in any known
   Areas OP/BP 7.60                            disputed area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Like the original project, the proposed AF project will not induce potential large scale, significant,
     and/or irreversible impacts. The scope of the investments under the proposed AF project will
     remain exactly the same as the original project, and will not involve any major civil works or new
     construction which may generate any impacts on the local environment and people (i.e., major
     resettlement and/or land acquisition). Therefore, the proposed AF project will trigger exactly the
     same safeguards operational policies as the original project, which are Environmental Assessment
     (OP4.01), Pest Management (OP4.09), Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) and Projects on
     International Waterways (OP7.50). Under the original project, a project level ESMF has been


                                                Page 7 of 13
 prepared, disclosed and implemented to provide guidance and compliance requirements for
 investmentsduring implementation of the original project. Following the ESMF, a site-specific
 Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) has been prepared for each of the
 investments as required by the ESMF.

 As part of preparation for the AF project, the implementation of the existing ESMF for the original
 project was reviewed. The review found that while the existing ESMF has been implemented
 satisfactorily, site-specific ESMPs needs to be simplified and made concise in order to improve the
 effectiveness of implementation on the ground. Accordingly the format of the ESMF and the
 ESMP has been streamlined, focusing particularly on simplifying the preparation of the sub
 project ESMP’s and how they were reviewed and processed. The review also confirmed that the
 EA category B, the same category as the original project would also apply to the proposed AF
 project. Provided the ESMPs are prepared and implemented satisfactorily, the overall social and
 environmental impacts will be positive as rehabilitation of water infrastructure will increase
 opportunity for farmers to improve their livelihood and living standards.
 Notwithstanding, there will be potential negative impacts of investments due to rehabilitation
 works; however, these impacts are expected to be minor, temporary, and localized. Typical issues
 would include increased in dust/air pollution, noise/vibration, water pollution, waste generation,
 small levels of localized sedimentation/soil contamination, local traffic/accidents, and nuisance to
 local residents and they can be mitigated through good construction practices with close
 supervision and monitoring and these management measures will be contained in the site-specific
 ESMPs.
 No involuntary land acquisition is expected in the proposed AF project since it exclusively
 supports rehabilitation of existing structures. However, in case that the land acquisition is
 unavoidable, all land transactions will be based on willing buyer-willing seller or on minor
 voluntary land donation provided that there are no structures or assets on the land and livelihood
 impact is insignificant.
 During operation, support to irrigation and agriculture activities would increase the use of
 pesticides/agro-chemicals and these uses will require effective pest management practices .
 Typical impacts may include (a) toxicity to human/animal health and local water/ecology due to
 improper use, storage, and disposal of pesticides, fertilizers, and other toxic chemicals; (b)
 conflicting demands on surface or ground water supplies including spread infection and disease
 through the inappropriate use of irrigation canals for water supply, bathing or human waste
 disposal; and (c) water-logging and salinization in some areas. These impacts could be mitigated
 through improving knowledge and capacity of farmers to address toxicity and safety issues,
 undertaking consultation among water users upstream and downstream (or head and tail), and
 ensuring that adequate consideration regarding drainage and water need for other water users are
 considered during detailed design. These measures are contained in a Pest Management Plan,
 which is part of the ESMF, and the required corresponding actions for each subproject related to
 pest management will also be contained in the site-specific ESMPs.

  Finally, similar to the original project, the proposed AF project will continue to trigger
  International Waterways OP7.50 and will furthermore continue to fall into the cate gory specified
  under para. 7 (a) for which riparian notification is exempted with the approval of the RVP granted
  on September 4, 2015.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area have


                                           Page 8 of 13
  been identified, due to the relatively small sized nature of the individual irrigation schemes/
  subproject being rehabilitated by both the original and the proposed AF project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As stated above, a thorough review of the implementation of the ESMF for the original project has
  been conducted as part of preparation of the proposed AF project. The implementation of the
  safeguards are considered to be satisfactory; there are no major negative social and environmental
  impacts observed under the on-going original project. The PMU has a dedicated team for the
  social and environmental safeguards, and the GRM mechanism and the procedures are
  functioning. The latest rating for the social and environmental aspects are S (satisfactory).

         Moving forward for the AF project, senior management within MAIL has demonstrated its
 commitment to strengthen its current limited safeguards capacity by establishing a safeguards
 team within the Project Management Unit. The team will include a female social inclusion officer,
 an environmental officer and a communications officer at national level with two safeguards
 positions created in each of the five regions. The safeguards team will take the lead in building
 capacity to identify and manage environmental and social issues within the implementing agencies
 and as well as with local beneficiary farmers. Recent safeguard policies requiring the compliance
 with the Bank’s environmental health and safety guideline (EHSG) and the interim guideline for
 technical assistance support by the Bank for technical assistance program/activities have also been
 incorporated into the updated ESMF.

 On the ESMF, given that not all the subproject locations could be identified at appraisal and based
 on the review of the existing ESMF, the MAIL has updated the ESMF to take account of the
 implementation experience gained from the original project. Effort has been made to mainstream
 environmental and social safeguards measures into the overall project planning, implementation
 (particularly engineering), communication, reporting, and evaluation as well as placing greater
 priority on outreach to and consultations with women, especially female headed households. Key
 measures of the updated ESMF are;

 •       Mainstreamed, and simplified ESMP template.
 •       Incorporating of all required subproject safeguards measures and actions into the ESMP,
 including the site-specific required actions of the Pest Management Plan.
 •       Clearly defined thresholds for Post- and Prior-Reviews of the site-specific ESMPs by the
 Bank.
 •       Incorporartion of a standard ESMP template in the ESMF to guide preparation of the
 ESMPs.
 •       Simplification of the review and approval process for the ESMPs at the project level.
 •       Elimination of redundant and irrelevant sections in the ESMF annexes.
 •       Strengthening the existing GRM.

 On the Social safeguards, similar to the original project, no major land acquisition or asset loss is
 expected in the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes. Very small areas of land may be bought
 outright (willing buyer-willing seller), or acquired against community compensation, to facilitate
 the rehabilitation work. In exceptional cases, minor voluntary land donation may occur in certain

                                            Page 9 of 13
 investments, but only provided that there are no structures or assets on the land, the livelihood
 impact of the donation on the land owner will be insignificant (less than 10 percent) and the
 voluntary nature of the donation is fully documented and independently verified. Selection of
 subprojects will also be screened for land and water disputes in order to avoid the situation where
 investments in irrigation would fuel such disputes.

 It is anticipated that the various project activities (e.g., improved operation and maintenance of
 irrigation infrastructure, technical assistance and demonstration activities for farmers,) will lead to
 the expansion of existing, and the development of new, livelihood activities and the generation of
 new sources of income among irrigation and non- irrigation water users. This in turn, it is
 envisaged, will have positive impacts on the concerned communities.

  The updated ESMF also places priority on strengthening the GRM process developed under the
  original project. Greater priority is also given to outreach to, and consultation with, various
  stakeholders especially vulnerable groups including women and landless, on all aspects of sub
  projects. Outreach will include: (a) including pre-construction consultation with the stakeholders
  and contractors presenting the content of the ECOP and respective construction plans, (b) in-depth
  monitoring upon resumption of the irrigation services to confirm fair share of the irrigation water
  particular among vulnerable households (small holders, women headed families, and landless),
  and (c) strengthening clarity regarding communication strategy, consultation mechanisms, and
  dissemination requirements (see more details in Section 5). To ensure effective implementation of
  safeguard measures, the updated ESMF has provided clarity on the M&E process and incorporated
  the application of key safeguard monitoring indicators and annual audit. Further, to ensure
  effective implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, the updated ESMF has also
  provided clarity on the implementation arrangements and identified the need for safeguard training
  and capacity building.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The main direct stakeholders are farmers (women and men), non-irrigation water users within
  communities especially female headed households, and landless. The principal indirect
  stakeholders are representatives from Community Development Councils (CDCs), contractors,
  local NGOs, local government officials in districts where sub projects are located, the 16
  provincial authorities in the project’s five regions including NEPA, and MAIL.

 Consultations on the draft revised ESMF were held in Mazar ( Balk region) on July 28, 2015
 Kabul on August 2, 2015 and Herat ( Herat Region) on August 9, 2015, confirming broader
 support for the proposed project.

 During implementation, the Director of the PMU will liaise with the Director of the Irrigation
 Directorate (ID) to ensure that mechanisms are put in place within MAIL at national, regional, and
 investment level to foster knowledge sharing among the stakeholders on: (a) the benefits of
 including environmental and social safeguards in planning and implementing projects and (b) the
 content and requirements of the ESMF of the proposed AF project. Consultant organizations and/
 or NGOs hired to conduct project studies and surveys will be required to include women as
 members of their consultancy teams in order to ensure women’s involvement in the various
 assessments at community level.

 Further, at the earliest stage of the project implementation, no later than six months after


                                            Page 10 of 13
  commencement of the implementation, a communications strategy and plan, including a public
  awareness campaign to inform local communities of their legal entitlements, rights, and
  responsibilities in respect of water resources management, will be developed and implemented.
  The strategy would aim to: (a) Provide relevant and up-to-date information to affected
  communities about the project through appropriate communication channels; (b) Facilitate a
  meaningful two way exchange of information with different groups of stakeholders throughout the
  lifetime of the project; (c) Build trust between project staff and communities and promoting
  collaboration among all stakeholders; and (d) Facilitate collaborative relationships with local and
  national government departments other development agencies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Sep-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Sep-2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                      22-Sep-2015
  Comments: The Minsitry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock Main Office, PMU, and
                MAIL's five regional offices
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Sep-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Sep-2016
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                      22-Sep-2015
  Comments: The Minsitry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock Main Office, PMU, and
                MAIL's five regional offices
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Sep-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Sep-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                      22-Sep-2015
  Comments: The Minsitry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock Main Office, PMU, and
                MAIL's five regional offices
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                           Page 11 of 13
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
 assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
 livelihoods)

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
 Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
 Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?

                                            Page 12 of 13
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Toru Konishi
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                           Date: 29-Sep-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Madhur Gautam (PMGR)                        Date: 02-Oct-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
