                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16961
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nigeria                            Project ID:   P151488
                            Project Name:      National Social Safety Nets Project (P151488)
                            Task Team          Camilla Holmemo
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          14-Mar-2016                        Estimated   07-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSP07                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (20%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social
                                              Care Services (60%), Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    1911.00           Total Bank Financing:                 500.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        1411.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                500.00
                              Total                                                                                     1911.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to provide access to predictable and targeted transfers to
                           poor and vulnerable households under an expanded national social safety nets system.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will support the set-up of a National Social Safety Net Program which will consist of a

                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         system for reaching the poor at the federal level that can also be used to target and monitor other
                         safety nets and public programs. The building blocks of the safety net system are a common targeting
                         system, harmonized eligibility criteria, a management information system (MIS), a monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evaluation system (M&E), and a payment mechanism linked to the MIS and M&E systems. The lead
                         intervention for the NASSP will be a cash transfer program targeted to extreme poor households
                         across Nigeria. Where supply of services is available, the cash transfers will be linked to household
                         utilization of health, nutrition and education services. In a small number of States, pilots will be
                         implemented to test approaches for sustainable livelihoods for cash transfer beneficiaries.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be managed at the Federal level and the cash transfers will be rolled out gradually
                         across the States.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Amos Abu (GEN07)
                         Edda Mwakaselo Ivan Smith (GSU01)
                         Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No            No physical works will be undertaken under the project.
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     Cash payments will be made to eligible households, with
                                                                    payment being associated with attendance at health
                                                                    clinics, education facilities, or participation in nutritional
                                                                    programmes. Adverse impacts are likely to be minimal or
                                                                    none, and there will be a negative list to ensure that cash
                                                                    payments, including for livelihoods pilots, do not lead to
                                                                    activities that would trigger safeguards policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    No
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed        No
                          Areas OP/BP 7.60


                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project is classified as Safeguards Category C. No physical works will be
                              undertaken under the project. Cash payments will be made to eligible households, with payment
                              being associated with attendance at health clinics, education facilities, or participation in
                              nutritional programmes.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no anticipated indirect or long term impacts for this operation.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              No project alternatives are required for this operation.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Adverse impacts are likely to be minimal or none, and there will be a negative list to ensure that
                              cash payments, including for livelihoods pilots, do not lead to activities that would trigger
                              safeguards policies.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The stakeholders for the project are the poor and vulnerable project beneficiaries from the
                              participating LGAs and States, and the Federal, State and LGA agencies and personnel who have
                              been associated with the preparation and will be associated with the implementation of the project.
                              The negative list will be included in the PIM and broadly disseminated, and all stakeholders will
                              be sensitized on the list.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies




                                                                        Page 3 of 4
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Camilla Holmemo
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 18-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)                    Date: 18-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
