                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16938
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                          Project ID:   P154947
                            Project Name:      Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)
                            Task Team          Marcus John Jin Sarn Lee
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Sep-2016              Estimated     30-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSU08                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       406.00           Total Bank Financing:    200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   203.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      200.00
                              SWITZERLAND, Govt. of (Except for FOFEA)                                                     3.00
                              Total                                                                                      406.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to infrastructure finance at the
                           subnational level through a financially sustainable financial intermediary.
                            3. Project Description
                           1.      Project Scope. The Project aims to support the Regional Infrastructure Development Fund
                           (RIDF) as a retail domestic financial intermediary located within PT. SMI to increase access to
                           finance for basic environmental, productive and social infrastructure. The RIDF will focus on


                                                                       Page 1 of 17
                         meeting an existing gap at the subnational level in access to finance for economically-viable
                         infrastructure that requires medium- to long-term tenor debt. The RIDF will be accessible to
                         creditworthy local and provincial governments (subnational governments - SNGs) across Indonesia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         However, it is expected that the RIDF business strategy will disproportionately target fast growing
                         medium and large municipal governments across all island groups where infrastructure development
                         is unable to keep pace with growing demand. The RIDF will be structured around principles of
                         financial sustainability with the view in the medium-term of being able to increasingly leverage
                         market-based sources of finance. The Project will also include the establishment of a Project
                         Development Facility (PDF) to support the development of a subproject pipeline as well as to
                         channel technical assistance to subnational governments in areas of project identification, design and
                         construction supervision, and related advisory services.

                         2.    Project Cost. The estimated Project cost is USD 406 million with a blend of Bank financing,
                         Borrower equity contribution and bilateral donor grant contributions as outlined below.

                         Project Components

                         3.      The project will be structured with two components as described below.

                         Component 1: Capital Support for RIDF (USD 400 million; comprising USD 200 million of IBRD
                         financing and USD 200 million of Borrower equity contribution)

                         4.      This component will provide up to USD 400 million for PT. SMI to operate RIDF as a
                         financial intermediary lending business line, providing senior debt to subnational governments in
                         Indonesia for economically viable infrastructure projects. The RIDF business line will be housed
                         under the Financing and Investment Directorate of PT SMI.

                         5.       Flow of Funds and Capital Structure. The project will provide funding to PT. SMI to
                         capitalize the RIDF business line through a mix of debt and equity. IBRD financing under this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will be channeled through a two-stage loan process: GoI (represented by MoF) will
                         borrow from the IBRD in foreign currency and on-lend the proceeds to PT. SMI in IDR. Under this
                         arrangement, MoF will assume the exchange rate risk. The sub-loan from MoF to PT. SMI will be
                         priced to cover the exchange rate risk as per GoI regulations for lending to SOEs. Matching equity
                         contributions from GoI will be funded from cash that is currently available on PT. SMIs balance
                         sheet. The source of this equity contribution includes asset transfers from the former Pusat Investasi
                         Pemerintah (PIP), whose mandate for lending to subnational governments is now subsumed within
                         PT. SMI. Additional equity contributions would come in the form of new capital injections from GoI,
                         as needed.

                         6.       Eligibility of RIDF Borrowers. RIDF will extend loans directly, at its own credit risk, to
                         creditworthy subnational governments as final borrowers. It is anticipated that RIDFs initial focus
                         will be on district-level (kota and kabupaten) governments, before eventually scaling up to more
                         complex regional and inter-regional projects at the provincial level as its appraisal and financial
                         capacity deepens. As its business grows, RIDF could also lend directly to local-level state-owned
                         enterprises (e.g. PDAMs and Perusahaan Daerah (PD)). To be eligible to borrow from RIDF, a
                         subnational government must satisfy eight criteria under existing GoI regulations.

                         7.      Eligibility of Subprojects. RIDF will fund subprojects under an open menu of environmental,
                         social and productive infrastructure that fall within the clear jurisdictional responsibility of

                                                                      Page 2 of 17
                         subnational governments under Indonesias decentralized system. Subprojects must also be
                         economically viable and have clear development and poverty reduction impacts. Eligible key sectors
                         include water supply and sanitation, environmental infrastructure (including energy efficiency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subprojects), low-income housing and slum upgrading, transportation and logistics infrastructure,
                         and social infrastructure (details in PAD Annex 2).

                         8.       Detailed operating procedures covering sector eligibility and associated technical, economic,
                         financial, social and environmental appraisal criteria are in RIDF Operations Manual (OM), which
                         has been developed in accordance with RIDFs Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF). Important eligibility conditions for subprojects include, amongst others: (i) all necessary
                         statutory clearances have been obtained, and are fully documented in the project evaluation report;
                         (ii) compliance with environmental and social standards as set forth in ESMF; (iii) use of the most
                         appropriate and cost-effective technology and technical norms and specifications.

                         9.       Framework Approach and Subproject Pipeline. This project is being designed and appraised
                         under a framework approach, where the assessment of project readiness requires that corporate
                         systems, regulations and detailed operating procedures have been developed and put in place. At
                         appraisal, the project does not include a definitive list of subproject investments. Nonetheless, the
                         project preparation process has identified and pre-screened a list of potential subprojects that would
                         be subject to full appraisal as per RIDF operating procedures during project implementation. From
                         the market assessment, the list contains 18 subprojects spread across 10 subnational governments
                         throughout Indonesia, with an estimated investment value of more than USD 567.5 million.
                         Subnational governments that are requesting support from PT. SMI have proposed 32 subprojects
                         with an estimated value of around USD 453.8 million. The investment value of individual
                         subprojects ranges between USD 10 and 90 million. This list of potential subprojects has not yet
                         been fully appraised by PT. SMI, and so not all subprojects and subnational governments that have
                         applied for RIDF financing will necessarily pass the complete set of assessments and screening that
                         will be undertaken by RIDF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10.      Lending Policies. RIDF core lending policies will include the following:
                         (i) Appraisal of subprojects on the basis of economic rather than financial viability;
                         (ii) Use of cost plus pricing (i.e. to cover the cost of capital, operating expenses and anticipated risk);
                         (iii) Medium to long-term tenor loans (e.g. minimum tenor of 5 years, up to a maximum of 20 years);
                         (iv) Loans will be general obligations of the subnational governments with the status of senior debt;
                         (v) Rigorous provisioning norms consistent with OJK regulations; and
                         (vi) A clear system of prudential norms.

                         11.      The set of recommended prudential norms for RIDF include:
                         (i) Maximum loan value of 90 percent of the total cost of a subproject;
                         (ii) Single borrower limit of not more than 15 percent of RIDF total assets;
                         (iii) Single subproject limit of not more than 10 percent of RIDF total assets;
                         (iv) Single sector limit of not more than 35 percent of RIDF total assets.

                         12.      Security Structure. Under current regulations, subnational governments are not allowed to
                         pledge their future revenues or assets as security. Furthermore, only MoF can exercise an intercept of
                         transfers to subnational governments. Therefore, a security structure has been designed for RIDF that
                         is a post-default guarantee with intercept mechanism that would provide protection to PT. SMI in the
                         case of borrower default. Under this structure, all RIDF lending would be covered by a full guarantee
                         from MoF in the case of default by a subnational government. A contingency fund will be set up at

                                                                        Page 3 of 17
                         MoF for this purpose. Upon the triggering of the guarantee, MoF would transfer the necessary
                         amount from the contingency fund to PT. SMI to cover the value of the executed guarantee. MoF
                         would then intercept intergovernmental transfers to the subnational government in question, to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         replenish the contingency fund.

                         Component 2: RIDF Project Development Facility (USD 6 million; comprising USD 3 million of
                         bilateral grant financing and USD 3 million of Borrower contribution)

                         13.     A Project Development Facility (PDF) will be established as part of this project, with the
                         objective of building a subproject pipeline for RIDF by supporting subnational governments in
                         subproject identification, planning and preparation. PDF support will help ensure that subprojects are
                         consistent with the technical, financial, economic, social and environmental appraisal standards of
                         RIDF.

                         14.     The activities eligible for PDF support are:
                         (i)      project identification and preliminary structuring;
                         (ii)     project preparation studies, including feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, and
                         safeguards instruments;
                         (iii)    design and supervision assistance;
                         (iv)     advisory services related to financial management, environmental and social assessments,
                         etc.; and
                         (v)      preparation of procurement and contract documents.

                         15.      These activities are consistent with good practice cases of similar facilities in India, the
                         Philippines and South Africa. These facilities are typically revolving funds financed by the respective
                         government and international agencies. They provide assistance in the areas of undertaking pre-
                         feasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments, project documentation and
                         preparation of detailed project reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16.      The PDF will be housed under a separate business unit within PT. SMI, specifically under
                         the Project Development and Advisory Directorate. This division already undertakes activities
                         similar to those proposed for the PDF, which would become an additional activity under the same
                         directorial oversight. The PDF would naturally adopt the same eligibility and compliance standards
                         of RIDF.

                         17.     Half of the initial funding for the PDF, in the amount of USD 3 million, has been committed
                         by SECO through the Indonesia Sustainable Urbanization (IDSUN) MDTF. The Administration
                         Agreement for the IDSUN MDTF was signed between the Government of Switzerland and the Bank
                         in May 2016. The Bank will channel the grant from SECO to PT. SMI through a Recipient-executed
                         Trust Fund (RETF) arrangement, which is being processed in parallel with the preparation of the
                         IBRD loan for RIDF.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         18.      The initial list of potential subprojects identified from the Market Demand Analysis,
                         Workshops and subnational government applications (refer to PAD Annex 5) shows that applications
                         came from subnational governments (districts/kabupatens and cities/kotas) located in 20 provinces
                         (out of 34 provinces in the country). The applications covered various types of subprojects, among
                         others are water supply, solid waste management, sewerage, roads and bridge, drainage, irrigation,


                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                         hospitals, and traditional markets, all of which fall within the eligible key sectors of RIDF. In terms
                         of proposed investment values, roads/bridges and hospitals constitute the two largest sectors, i.e.,
                         76% and 21% respectively. Based on the applications, PT. SMI is developing its subproject pipeline
Public Disclosure Copy




                         using a set of screening criteria that will produce a list of potential subprojects eligible to proceed
                         with their preparation to get RIDF funding.

                         19.      Overall, investment size of the potential proposed subprojects range from USD 3 to 91
                         million. For roads, the size ranges between USD 7.14 and 90.64 million, and bridges USD 7.0 to
                         22.6. The investment size for hospitals range between USD 3 and 26.5 million. Looking at the nature
                         and investment size of the proposed subprojects from the subnational government applicants, and
                         learning from similar types of subprojects implemented in the past, environmental and social impacts
                         will likely be medium to high, especially for new subprojects. Field visits to the PIP-supported
                         subprojects suggested that for the onsite redevelopment and expansion of existing infrastructure,
                         environmental and social impacts are low to moderate, site specific and can be managed locally by
                         the subnational governments, as was the case of redevelopment and expansion of public markets in
                         Karangasem, Temanggung and medium-sized hospitals in Karangasem and Bangkalan. Social
                         impacts may arise during the construction such as the temporary relocation of the users of the
                         redeveloped markets and hospitals, as well as temporary physical disturbance and economic
                         disruption. At this stage, RIDFs potential subprojects pipeline is being developed with the dynamics
                         of the number of applicants. Applicants that will be included in the RIDFs pipeline for further
                         process to get the loan funding are not confirmed. At this point, footprints and impacts areas of
                         subprojects cannot be determined. Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts of
                         subprojects will be identified and assessed during the RIDF operation at the subproject screenings
                         and appraisal stage.

                         20.      The proposed PDF intends to provide technical assistance (TA) and capacity building (CB)
                         for the subnational governments who would seek financing support from PT. SMI for infrastructure
                         development to be financed by RIDF under Component 1. The objectives of PDF are to meet the
                         capacity gap of subnational governments in planning and designing subprojects as well as generate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subproject pipeline for RIDF and ensure quality delivery of subprojects. The TA and CB will focus
                         on assisting the subnational governments in preparing subprojects of the same five key eligible
                         sectors of RIDF. As explained in the project description above (Component 2), the scope of the TA
                         includes among others, preparation of feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs (DEDs) and
                         necessary environmental and social safeguards instruments, design and supervision assistance,
                         preparation of procurement and contract documents. The detailed and specific downstream activities
                         resulted from the outputs of the TA (such as FS and DED) will be identified during RIDF
                         implementation when the PDF is established and in operation. As is the case with RIDF, subnational
                         governments who apply and eligible to get assistance from the PDF operations will come from
                         anywhere in the country, and therefore potential environmental and social impacts of the downstream
                         activities of the outputs produced by the TA will also geographically spread out in the country, but
                         yet unknown at this stage. However, the list of typical potential impact from future RIDF activities
                         has been identified in the ESMF that can be used when preparing the ToR for FS or DED. A separate
                         project to manage the grant for this PDF has been created with FI category. As the objectives of PDF
                         are to meet the capacity gap of subnational governments in planning and designing subprojects as
                         well as generate subproject pipeline for RIDF ensu ring acceptable standards of quality delivery of
                         subprojects including safeguards, the RIDF and PDF will adopt a single ESMF.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)


                                                                      Page 5 of 17
                         Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GEN2A)

                         6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental             Yes           RIDF will finance environmental infrastructure
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   investments such as water and sewage treatment plant,
                                                                 sanitary landfill, hazardous waste management facilities,
                                                                 hospital revitalization and urban slums improvement that
                                                                 will bring existent benefits for the surrounding
                                                                 communities. The Project Development Facilities under
                                                                 RIDF will provide benefits as well as it will ensure that
                                                                 safeguards considerations are taken into account during
                                                                 feasibility studies and it will support the SNG in preparing
                                                                 the safeguards instruments (EIA, EMP, LARAP, IPP).

                                                                 The project is proposed to be Category FI because it
                                                                 involves investment of Bank funds through a financial
                                                                 intermediary, in subprojects that may result in adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts. As an FI project, subprojects to be
                                                                 financed could fall as Category A or B. Potential
                                                                 environmental and social impacts from infrastructure
                                                                 construction might be significant, diverse and irreversible
                                                                 such as morphology change, adverse impacts to air, water
                                                                 bodies, natural habitats and potential induced impact such
                                                                 as a new access to forest area. The project shall also have
                                                                 likely social impacts other than land acquisition and
                                                                 resettlement (such as influx management, HIV Aids etc)
                                                                 and also there is possibility of cumulative impacts and
                                                                 other impacts related to linked activities funded by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 government or other donors and potential impacts of
                                                                 ancillary facilities.


                                                                 However, the scale and location of impacts can only be
                                                                 identified during RIDF operation when it screens and
                                                                 reviews the subproject proposals/document packages
                                                                 submitted by subnational governments seeking
                                                                 infrastructure financing from RIDF. Impact assessment,
                                                                 minimization and mitigation measures through the
                                                                 conduct of an ESIA will have to be prepared by
                                                                 subnational governments and approved and monitored by
                                                                 RIDF based on an Environmental and Social Safeguards
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) that was approved by the Bank prior
                                                                 to appraisal. The ESMF will be an integral part of the
                                                                 Operations Manual to be adopted by RIDF prior to loan
                                                                 effectiveness.

                                                                 The ESMF refers to the Bank's Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                 Application of Bank Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs


                                                                  Page 6 of 17
                                                        for Component 2 activities (PDF).

                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Some of the subprojects may affect natural habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.04                           especially for municipalities or districts located in eastern
                                                        part of Indonesia (e.g. Papua, Kalimantan, Sulawesi,
                                                        NTB). Potential impacts from road constructions,
                                                        drainage, water supply system on Natural Habitat will be
                                                        screened and addressed through the ESMF, which will
                                                        spell out that the project shall not finance any
                                                        development on protected areas nor with potential
                                                        significant conversion or degradation to critical natural
                                                        habitats or natural habitats.

                                                        For a subproject that is located adjacent to a protected
                                                        areas or that may change the purpose and/or designation
                                                        of a protected area or natural habitats, the subnational
                                                        government shall be required to prepare a full
                                                        environmental assessment (an ESIA or to conduct
                                                        AMDAL study acceptable to the Bank). This includes:
                                                        forest protection area; river edges; marine/freshwater
                                                        conservation areas; nature tourism park; peat areas; areas,
                                                        surrounding lakes and reservoirs, coastal mangrove areas,
                                                        water catchment areas; national parks; coastal edges,
                                                        forest parks; cultural reserves; areas surrounding springs;
                                                        scientific research areas; nature conservation areas; and
                                                        areas susceptible to natural hazards.

                                                        Other typical subprojects such as hospitals, traditional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        markets, urban sewerage system, might have less potential
                                                        impacts to natural habitats. An assessment of potential
                                                        subprojects and subnational governments shows that
                                                        many subprojects are infrastructure located in urban areas
                                                        (Annex 5).

                                                        Subprojects with less potential environmental impacts to
                                                        natural habitats will not automatically be considered to
                                                        require only UKL UPL or EMP. A careful potential
                                                        impact assessment shall be conducted guided by the
                                                        ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Potential subprojects will not involve commercial forest
                                                        plantation, but some other investments proposal may take
                                                        place in close proximity to or within forest areas. The
                                                        project, through its ESMF, shall screen out any
                                                        subprojects with potential significant conversion or
                                                        degradation to critical natural forest or natural forest
                                                        (protection forest, conservation forest). For a subproject
                                                        that is located in production forest area, the subnational



                                                         Page 7 of 17
                                                        government shall prepare an environmental assessment
                                                        and shall fulfill forestry regulation for land use permit as
                                                        per Bank related previous investment project (Upper
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Cisokan Pumped Storage etc.).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The policy is triggered as there are potential irrigation
                                                        subprojects proposed by subnational governments. From
                                                        38 applicants (bottom up approach) there is one proposal
                                                        related to irrigation improvement from West Sumatra.
                                                        The project, including subprojects, shall not finance the
                                                        purchase of pesticides. A specific mitigation measure
                                                        shall be elaborated in the ESIA or EMP for the
                                                        construction of new irrigation systems for a large
                                                        coverage area (such as more than 3,000 ha ) as this would
                                                        potentially increase pesticide use significantly. For
                                                        irrigation projects with medium scale such as the above
                                                        mentioned, the implementation of IPM (Integrated Pest
                                                        Management) will become part of the Environmental
                                                        Management Plan. The preparation of IPM will be guided
                                                        by the ESMF, which uses the WBG Industry Sector
                                                        Guidelines for Crop Production in terms of integrated pest
                                                        management.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Some of the subprojects included under RIDF may affect
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           cultural property and trigger OP 4.11. The environmental
                                                        screening procedure in the ESMF to be included under the
                                                        project will ensure it will not adversely affect sites having
                                                        archeological, paleontological, historical, religious or
                                                        unique natural values. Any contracts under the project
                                                        will include a provision covering procedures to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        followed in the event of chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project anticipates that any LG and subprojects
                         BP 4.10                        eligible for RIDF financing will come from widely
                                                        geographically distributed areas in the country and
                                                        therefore IPs communities which includes Masyarakat
                                                        Adat (MA) or Masyarakat Hukum Adat (MHA)
                                                        communities might presence and affected. The presence
                                                        and impacts (positive and adverse) on IPs including MHA
                                                        communities can only be identified during the operations
                                                        of RIDF through the review of subproject proposals
                                                        submitted by the subnational governments. PT SMI has
                                                        developed an ESMF which includes an IPPF to screen the
                                                        IPs presence once the eligible subnational government
                                                        and potential subprojects seeking RIDF support are
                                                        defined, to assess the potential positive and adverse
                                                        impacts, and develop measures to engage the IPs
                                                        community in the subproject so that they will receive a
                                                        fair benefits and avoid or mitigate adverse impacts
                                                        through a free, prior, and informed consultations with


                                                         Page 8 of 17
                                                        them. The IPPF was prepared in accordance to the OP
                                                        4.10 and relevant GoI laws and regulations. The IPPF is
                                                        part of the ESMF while also being a stand-alone
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        document.

                                                        The ESMF is also applicable for the PDF operations,
                                                        specifically to manage impacts (positive and negative) on
                                                        IPs communities due to the downstream activities of the
                                                        outputs of the TA and capacity building activities
                                                        provided by the PDF operations. IPPF is part of the
                                                        ESMF. The ESMF also includes requirements specified in
                                                        the Bank's Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank
                                                        Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs for PDF operations
                                                        (component 2).
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project anticipates that the clients of PT. SMI could
                         OP/BP 4.12                     be any subnational governments and subprojects eligible
                                                        for financing with a set of criteria for borrowing. The
                                                        Market Assessment Study, workshops and applications
                                                        shows that subnational governments interested in
                                                        borrowing are located in geographically wide areas in the
                                                        country. Eligible sectors include: (i) water supply and
                                                        sanitation; (ii) environmental infrastructure such as solid
                                                        waste and drainage; (iii) slum upgrading; (iv)
                                                        transportation and logistics infrastructure; and (v) social
                                                        infrastructure such as educational and health facilities.
                                                        Proposed subprojects will very likely involve land
                                                        acquisition and/or resettlement. Locations, characteristics
                                                        and scale of subprojects and hence, the nature and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        intensity as well as social impacts due to involuntary land
                                                        acquisition and/or resettlement and/or access restriction to
                                                        protected areas as per OP 4.12 policy are yet to be
                                                        identified during the operations of the RIDF through the
                                                        review of subproject proposals submitted by subnational
                                                        governments. Given the nature of subprojects seeking for
                                                        RIDF financing as described in the Project Description,
                                                        subprojects will have medium to high social impacts. PT
                                                        SMI has developed an ESMF which includes a Land
                                                        Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                        (LARPF) and a Process Framework (PF) to screen and
                                                        assess subprojects on the intensity of the potential land
                                                        acquisition and resettlement and social impacts due to
                                                        these activities, to identify mitigation measures and
                                                        appropriate instrument (such as LARAP, or a Plan of
                                                        Action), to guide subnational governments in preparing
                                                        such instruments and consistently implement them. The
                                                        LARPF includes Grievance Redress Mechanisms and
                                                        Disclosures requirements. The LARPF and PF were



                                                         Page 9 of 17
                                                                      developed in compliance with OP 4.12 and relevant GoI
                                                                      laws and regulations. The LARPF and PF are part of the
                                                                      ESMF while also being a stand-alone document.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The ESMF has covered specific aspects to manage social
                                                                      impacts (positive and negative) of subprojects due to
                                                                      involuntary land taking and/or resettlement and/or
                                                                      restriction of access to protected areas and designated
                                                                      parks that may take place in the downstream activities of
                                                                      the outputs of the TA and capacity building activities
                                                                      provided by the PDF operations. LARPF and PF are parts
                                                                      of the ESMF. The ESMF also covers requirements
                                                                      specified in the Bank's Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                      Application of Bank Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs
                                                                      for PDF operations (component 2).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes           The project might finance the construction of a dam as
                            4.37                                      part of water supply system and water resource
                                                                      management infrastructure in the region

                                                                      For small dams (<15 m in height), policy requirement is
                                                                      for the dam to be designed by a qualified engineer. For
                                                                      large dams (15 m and higher), the ESMF shall requires
                                                                      reviews by an independent panel of experts, preparation
                                                                      and implementation of detail plans (construction,
                                                                      instrumentation, operation and maintenance, and
                                                                      emergency preparedness), prequalification of bidders and
                                                                      periodic safety inspections of the dam after completion.
                            Projects on International   No            Subprojects to be financed by RIDF shall not be located
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      in any international waterways. Confirmation on this will
                                                                      be done during the screening stage as required by the
                                                                      ESMF.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            Subprojects to be financed by RIDF shall not be located
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          in any disputed areas. Confirmation on this will be done
                                                                      during the screening stage as required by the ESMF.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Given the nature of eligible sectors of RIDF, potential environmental and social impacts of
                              subprojects will range from medium to high, significant, diverse, and irreversible. Potential
                              significant/large scale impacts from the water supply projects, sewerage system, road and bridges,
                              and hospital constructions are mainly from the construction activities (such as morphology change,
                              impact to air, water bodies, natural habitats, and potential induced impact such as a new access to
                              forest area). Other than that, land acquisition and hazardous waste management could also become
                              the potential significant impacts.


                                                                       Page 10 of 17
                           The project shall also have likely social impacts other than land acquisition and resettlement such
                           as influx of workers from outside the subproject site, temporary relocation for the traders of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           markets, disturbance on access and livelihoods. Also there is possibility of cumulative impacts
                           and other impacts related to linked activities funded by government or other donors and potential
                           impacts of ancillary facilities such as quarry management.

                           As subprojects may be located anywhere in the country, IPs might be presence and affected in
                           some sites particularly for large subprojects located in rural or remote areas such as regional roads.
                           For Indigenous Peoples (IPs), the specific legal and regulatory frameworks are not yet in place,
                           however relevant laws and regulations that address IPs exist.

                           Country system for safeguarding the large-scale, significant and irreversible environmental
                           impacts of major infrastructure subproject are adequate, however implementation and enforcement
                           remain weak. For land acquisition and/or resettlement, the legal and regulatory frameworks are in
                           place, but consistent implementation remains a challenge, particularly for addressing relocation,
                           impacts on livelihoods and squatters. If not well managed, conflicts around land rights, land
                           acquisition and land administration may present a high risk to the future success of municipality/
                           districts infrastructure subprojects in Indonesia.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Potential indirect impacts from future activities in the subproject area are changes in morphology
                           of the area from the construction activities and also potential changes to natural habitats especially
                           for the proposed subprojects located in eastern parts of Indonesia. Potential long term or indirect
                           social impacts due to new settlement development along the newly developed regional roads and
                           bridges, change in livelihoods and access restrictions might also take place.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           No alternatives were assessed during project preparation as potential subprojects will not be
                           identified until project implementation. However, the ESMF shall regulate that the ToR for
                           feasibility studies and ToR ESIA will include option analysis. The task team will ensure that
                           environmental and social considerations are properly taken into account for prefer option analysis.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project triggers eight safeguards policies including: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01),
                           Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural
                           Resources (OP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and
                           Safety of Dams (OP 4.37).

                           PT. SMI has developed a single ESMF both for RIDF and PDF operations that specify the
                           principles, procedures, requirements and institutional arrangements for screening, identifying
                           impacts, defining the appropriate safeguards instruments, implementing them and monitoring the
                           applications. PT. SMI will use the ESMF for all of its clients both for the RIDF and PDF
                           operations regardless of financing/capital source (RIDF, government budget, and/or other donors,
                           etc.) for a particular subproject receiving support from RIDF and/or PDF.

                           Recently, PT. SMI has developed ten principles of Environmental and Social Safeguards (ESS)


                                                                     Page 11 of 17
                         similar to IFC Performance Standards for projects to be financed by multilateral financial
                         resources. The ESMF has been developed in reference to this PT. SMI ESS along with relevant
                         Indonesian regulations and World Bank safeguards policies. The ESMF also takes into account the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguards Policies for TA and TFs, as well
                         as Guidelines on Advisory Services, as relevant. The ESMF will be elaborated in the Operations
                         Manual as a practical tool for PT. SMI and its LG clients.

                         In addition for RIDF operation, the ESMF also applies for PDF operation, to ensure that
                         environmental and social safeguards are covered in preparing subproject documents. For instance,
                         the TOR of a Feasibility Study (FS) will include the need for the consultant to prepare terms of
                         reference for safeguards instruments in case that infrastructure investment takes place.

                         The draft ESMF has been consulted with relevant stakeholders on 21-22 June 2016, and the Bank
                         will conduct the final review of the ESMF prior to the Project appraisal. The ESMF was disclosed
                         in the PT. SMI website (www.ptsmi.co.id) on 15 June 2016. The draft ESMF has also been
                         disclosed through the InfoShop on 18 July 2016 and will be updated once the final one is
                         reviewed.

                         The following main aspects are to be covered by the ESMF:
                         a.       Objectives, project components to be financed by the RIDF and PDF, organizational
                         structure of SMI that shows the position of RIDF and PDF and operational linkage of the two,
                         types of eligible sectors, type of subprojects in terms of level of preparedness, list of ineligible
                         activities;
                         b.       Safeguards policies triggered; WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines;
                         c.       GOI Laws and regulations and gap assessment between the GOI laws and regulations and
                         the triggered OPs; actions to address such gaps that are mainstreamed in the ESMF
                         d.       Generic potential environmental and social impacts for eligible sectors
                         e.       Process, procedures and requirements:
                         i.       Screening of potential environment and social impacts;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.      Subproject category
                         iii.     Determination of specific safeguard plans/instruments to be prepared for subproject
                         (ESIA/AMDAL, EMP/UKL-UPL, ECOPs, SOP),
                         iv.      Screening and assessment and how to address ancillary facilities and potentially linked
                         activities;
                         v.       Screening and assessment of cumulative impacts following established methodology such
                         as the IFC Good Practice Hand Book on Cumulative Impact Assessment;
                         vi.      Preparation of safeguards instruments
                         f.       Identifying whether the proposed subproject already has the required safeguards
                         instruments; identify the necessary safeguards instruments needed versus those that have been
                         available; review the gaps between the available instruments with the requirements specified in the
                         ESMF; defining the scope and activities in the Corrective Action Plan; In the case a proposed
                         subproject does not have any safeguards instruments, require the LGs to prepare the instruments in
                         accordance with requirements specified in the ESMF;
                         g.       Environmental Management Frameworks including guidance to prepare ESIA/AMDAL
                         and UKL-UPL, Generic ECOPs, Pest Management, PCR Management Plan and Pest Management
                         h.       LARPF (including PF) and IPPF;
                         i.       Stakeholders Analysis, Consultations;
                         j.       Institutional arrangements for environmental and social safeguards management for
                         screening, review/assess, approval, preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments,

                                                                  Page 12 of 17
                         monitoring and reporting
                         k.       Grievance Redress Mechanisms
                         l.       Disclosures
Public Disclosure Copy




                         m.       Capacity Building Assessment Plan, developed based on a safeguards institutional
                         assessment for PT SMI and capacity of LGs. The institutional assessment of PT SMI and LGs will
                         lead to the identification on the scope of capacity building program, resources and budget
                         estimates for the RIDF and PDF operations.
                         n.       Supervision and Monitoring of the implementation of safeguards instruments implemented
                         by the local governments

                         Assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                         Previously, within the PT. SMI organizational structure, environmental and social management is
                         mainly managed by the Environmental and Social Unit under the Risk Management Div ision.
                         Since 24 March 2016, PT. SMI has a special division for safeguards called ESSBCM
                         (Environmental and Social Safeguards Business Continuity Management) under the Risk
                         Management Directorate. A senior environmental expert has been hired just recently, joining the
                         junior environmental specialist who had been hired since last year. PT. SMI just hired a social
                         safeguards expert. There is also pool of on-call consultants including environmental and social
                         experts under the Project Advisory Division. With the RIDF lending facility and PDF operations
                         to be established in the future, the current safeguards management of PT SMI is insufficient to
                         manage the growing portfolio and project pipeline. The plan to improve its capacity is specified in
                         the Business Plan of RIDF. The Business Plan of PT. SMI specifies that in the next five years,
                         there will be a manager for social safeguards, and at least one full-timer senior social safeguards
                         expert. In addition, PT. SMI will hire consulting firms, as needed, to help the RIDF and PDF
                         business units in screening, carrying out due diligence assessment or appraising of the LGs and
                         proposed subprojects, and guiding subnational governments in preparing and implementing social
                         safeguards instruments and capacity building. Each environmental and social safeguards staff in
                         ESSBCM will be given in-house training as well as outside PT. SMI at least once a year.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Key safeguards risks related to lack of capacity in preparing and implementing safeguards
                         instruments, among both participating subnational governments and PT. SMI, have been
                         identified. The most effective way to mitigate this risk is by providing intensive support and
                         mentoring on safeguards implementation to PT. SMI. This will include advice on aspects
                         including the subproject screening process, TORs for safeguards documents (ESIA, LARAP), the
                         appraisal methodology, and also gap filling between Indonesia country systems and the Bank
                         safeguards policies. As part of implementation support and capacity building for PT. SMI, similar
                         to PT. IIIF, the Bank could consider to station one of its consultants to work closely with PT. SMI
                         for about 6 months. Alternatively, a reputable firm having specialized safeguards staff could be
                         hired to provide support to PT. SMI. The Bank will help deliver comprehensive safeguards
                         training for PT. SMI to build their knowledge and capacity to apply and comply with Bank
                         safeguard policies, in particular use of the project ESMF. At the same time, participating
                         subnational governments will receive substantial support from PT. SMI through the PDF
                         mechanism.

                         For the first five high-risk subprojects, the Bank will conduct joint appraisal and review together
                         with PT. SMI prior to subproject approval. If found to be necessary during project implementation,
                         this joint prior review approach could be extended to additional high-risk subprojects beyond the
                         first five. As part of regular Bank supervision of project safeguards implementation, for medium

                                                                  Page 13 of 17
                           and low-risk projects the Bank will monitor RIDF operations through post-review to ensure that
                           the ESMF is consistently adhered to, and promptly initiate any corrective action as required
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is the Borrower while PT. SMI is the Implementing Agency (IA)
                           for this project. RIDF and PDF will be housed at PT. SMI, within separate divisions.

                           PT. SMI is an infrastructure financing company which was established on 26 February 2009 as a
                           state owned enterprise (SOE) with 100 percent shares owned by the Government of Indonesia
                           through the MoF. PT. SMI plays an active role in facilitating infrastructure financing as well as
                           preparing projects and serving advisory for infrastructure projects in Indonesia. Based on its
                           original mandate, PT. SMI aims to finance commercially-viable projects including investments in
                           toll road & bridges, transportation, oil and gas, telecommunication, waste management, electricity,
                           irrigation and waterway, and water supply sectors. By mandate, PT. SMI provides financing for
                           public-private partnership (PPPs) and private sector projects, however to-date this mandate has not
                           been fully implemented due to rigidities in the pipeline for such projects.

                           PT. SMI is one of the key shareholders (with shares of 33.88 percent) in the Indonesia
                           Infrastructure Financing Facility (IIFF), an independent business entity, which has been in full
                           operations since 2011 and since then continued to have growing portfolio. PT. IIFF has an
                           Operations Manual that includes an ESSF and SEMS which was developed in reference to IFC,
                           World Bank and ADB Environmental and Social Safeguards Standards and Policies.

                           Other key stakeholders are the subnational governments that borrower from RIDF, as well as the
                           main beneficiaries of the project i.e. the residents of those areas that will served by the
                           infrastructure subprojects.

                           Mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguards policies, especially on potentially
Public Disclosure Copy




                           affected people:

                           Stakeholder consultations on the draft of ESMF were held on June 21-22, 2016 in Jakarta and
                           relevant inputs have been incorporated in the final drafts of ESMF. The ESMF was disclosed on
                           PT. SMI website (www.ptsmi.co.id) and the Infoshop on 15 June and 18 July 2016 respectively.
                           During the RIDF and PDF operations, mechanisms of public consultations and disclosures for
                           subprojects are specified in the ESMF. In principle, subnational governments receiving support
                           from the RIDF lending facility and TA of the PDF will have to carry out public consultations in
                           relation to subproject preparation (including preparation of safeguards instruments), construction,
                           and operations. Safeguards instruments should be disclosed on the website of the respective
                           subnational government and on PT. SMI website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Jun-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      17-Jun-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 14 of 17
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                         15-Jun-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       15-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    17-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                         15-Jun-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       15-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    17-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                         15-Jun-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

                                                                   Page 15 of 17
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]



                                                                     Page 16 of 17
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marcus John Jin Sarn Lee
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 14-Sep-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                        Date: 14-Sep-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 17 of 17
