INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12486
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Africa                    Project ID:   P155039
Project Name:     SUPPORT TO THE REBUILDING OF THE AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTIVITY IN GUINEA, SIERRA LEONE AND LIBERIA PROJECT
Team Leader(s): Abdoulaye Toure,Sossena Tassew
Estimated Date    29-Apr-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GFADR                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (50%), Other rural development
(50%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  3.2                   Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction MPF                                          3.2
Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The specific and immediate objective of the project is "to support the rebuilding of the farm assets of
small scale producers including women producers, through the provision of improved certified and
foundation seeds for rice and maize in Guinea, Sierra-Leone and Liberia in order to mitigate the
current and forthcoming impacts of the Ebola outbreak on the vulnerable poor rural households".
Rice and Maize are the major food crops in all three countries.
The project will also contribute to a higher objective of food security and poverty reduction in these
selected countries.
C. Project Description
The proposed project being a response to an emergency it will be processed under OP 10.00 para 12.
The project will have three components, namely:
(a) Component 1. Provision of certified and foundation seed to producers (US$2.10 million)- Under


﻿this component the Grant will procure and distribute to targeted beneficiaries: i) 1,000 tons of
certified seeds and 170 tons of foundation seeds of improved rice varieties, and ii) 370 tons of
certified seeds and 45 tons of foundation seeds of improved maize varieties. It is expected that
women beneficiaries will reach at least 40 percent of total beneficiaries. The countries who are
O
U       supplying the seeds have already been identified through the West Africa Agricultural Productivity
Program (WAAPP) which is supporting the strengthening of the seed systems in 13 ECOWAS
countries in collaboration with the USAID funded West Africa Seed Project (WASP). Both Funding
are managed by the West Africa council for Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF/
WECARD).
(b) Component 2. Provision of inputs for foundation seed multiplication (US$0.6 million). Under this
component the Grant will support the procurement and distribution of 850 tons of fertilizer to
producers involved in foundation seed multiplication which will ensure the future scaling up of seed
availability in the countries and also the medium and longer term sustainability of the productivity
increase expected from this operation.
(c) Component 3. Operational cost (US$0.3 million)- includes among others the coordination of the
operation by CORAF/WECARD, M&E activities, the audit of the Grant, consultant services, etc.
The implementation will be done through the existing WAAPP organizational structures and
implementation mechanisms. WAAPP is coordinated at the regional level by CORAF/WECARD and
at country level by the national Project Coordinating Units (PCUs). WAAPP is implemented in 13
ECOWAS countries namely Guinea, Liberia, Sierra-Leone, Cote d'Ivoire, Senegal, The Gambia,
Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Ghana, Togo, Benin and Nigeria. An emergency program that matches
needs for certified and foundations seeds in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone with identified supplies
from neighboring countries has already been identified by WAAPP using its regional network and
experience.
The proposed project will be managed by CORAF/WECARD which will be responsible for the
procurement and transportation of the goods to the countries. This will be done on the basis of an
MOU between CORAF/WECARD and the respective suppliers. The WAAPP PCU in each
beneficiary country will be responsible for the selection of the end beneficiaries ensuring that the
gender target is met and the in-country distribution of the goods to producers is well organized.
CORAF and the PCUs have competent multidisciplinary fiduciary and technical teams who are
familiar with bank procedures. An external auditor will be recruited by CORAF to audit the Grant
o      account.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will consist of technical assistance and training in each of the selected countries. No
physical investments (or feasibilty studies to preparea such investments) will be financed through
this operation. As it's the case under WAAPP, CORAF/WECARD will continue to rely on the
exisiting safeguards instruments to ensure adequate and timely mitigation of any potential adverse
impacts.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The regional implementation agency CORAF/WECARD has been implementing World Bank
Funded operation for more than a decade, and has, both before and under WAAPP established
proven record of handling social and environmental safeguards. The Agency has a dedicated Social
and Environmental Safeguards Unit that was well trained by the World Bank safeguards specialists,
and they have been in turn providing tangible follow up support to each national project team on the


﻿adequate compliance on safeguards. This arrangement will also be applicable to the proposed project
and the World bank safeguard team will continue to provide more advance safeguards capacity
building to the safeguards unit and respective country teams.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Q
Boyenge Isasi Dieng (GSU01)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  Yes           The proposed project component 1 and 2 will be
BP 4.01                                     financing the acquisition and distribution of
certified and foundation seeds for food safety
and security purpose. The use of the provided
seeds on existing farmers land plots, will likely
have minor, site specific and easily manageable
impacts; typical of category B project. To
ensure proper mitigation measures are put in
place, the regional implementing agency
(CORAF/WECARD) will use (update and re-
disclose) the existing Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for
WAAPP IC and disclosed in August 2010 to
mitigate any potential adverse impacts once the
physical footprints of the project are known
during project implementation. This ESMF will
be re-disclosed prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            The proposed project activities will not be
Q)                                                  implemented in Natural Habitat areas, and
therefore, no impacts or disturbance of Natural
habitats is foreseen.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            The proposed project activities are meant to
respond to a food security need, and therefore,
given its urgency nature farmers will use their
existing and ready-to-use agriculture plots to
growth crops. The policy is not triggered as, no
impact on the forest is foreseen.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           Under component 2, the project will purchase
agriculture inputs (fertilizers) to be distributed
to beneficiary farmers. Since the use of
pesticides will likely cause potential social and
environmental impacts, both on the natural and
physical environment; CORAF/WECARD will
use (update and re-disclose) the existing
WAAPP IC Pest Management Plan (PMP)
disclosed in August 2010 to adequately mitigate


﻿any potential adverse impacts. This PMP will be
re-disclosed prior to project appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No             Farmers will be using their own existing
BP 4.11                                         agriculture land plots to rapidly grow crops this
coming rainy season to sustain their family
needs in terms of food consumption, safety and
security. The policy is not triggered because no
impacts on physical cultural resources is
foreseen.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No             There are no indegeneous peoples in the Project
area. Therefore the policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No             The policy is not triggered as farmers will be
4.12                                            using their existing agricultural land plots to
grow crops for the purpose of community/
households food security and safety. There will
be no land acquisition under the Project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No             The policy is not triggered as project activities
will not use water from existing dams nor
finance rehabilitation of existing dams or build/
construct a new one.
Projects on International        No             The project will not affect nor be implemented
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            in international waterways, and thus the policy
is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             The project will not affect nor be implemented
7.60                                            in disputed areas, and thus the policy is not
triggered.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):         Name: Abdoulaye Toure,Sossena Tassew
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                   Date: 16-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)               Date: 16-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


