INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12856
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                    Project ID:  P083581
Project Name: Hanoi Urban Transport Development Project (PO8358 1)
Task Team       Van Anh Thi Tran
Leader(s):
Estimated       1 1-Dec-2006               Estimated    03-Jul-2007
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Urban Transport (84%), Other social services (12%), Sub-national government
administration (4%)
Theme:          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%), Municipal governance and
institution building (20%), Other social development ( 20%), Pollution
management and environmental health (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     304.69            Total Bank Financing:  155.21
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             139.68
International Development Association (IDA)                    155.21
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                9.80
Total                                                          304.69
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The Project has three key components:
The Bus Rapid Transit Component (BRT) [total US$77.19 million, IDA US$67.88 million,
Government of Vietnam US$5.31 million, GEF$4.0 million] will support the development of 15 km
of segregated busways and bus priority along the Giang Vo- Lang Ha and Le Van Luong - Yen
Nghia corridors, the construction of BRT stops, interchange stations, terminals and maintenance
facilities. It will also support the establishment of a modem BRT management system, including bus
ticketing and financial controls. Lastly, the component will finance the implementation of a public
consultation, communications and media strategy for disseminating information on the BRT system.
The Road Infrastructure and Sustainable Urban Planning [total US$162.67, IDA US$59.52 million,
Government of Vietnam US$101.40 million, GEF US$1.75 million] component includes the
construction of a section of the Second Ring Road (RR2) between Nhat Tan Bridge and Cau Giay on
the main western radial arterial and construction of a resettlement site to house persons displaced by
the proposed road, together with support for sustainable urban land development and transportation
planning in Hanoi.
The Institutional Development Component (ID) [total US$8.49 million, IDA US$4.44 million, GEF
US$4.05 million] supports equipment procurement and technical assistance (TA) to: (a) strengthen
Air Quality Management; (b) support traffic management; (c) support establishment and
strengthening of a new Public Transport Authority; (d) support transport planning and policy
development; and, (e) finance replication activities that have been designed to address GEF's priority
on replication.
The main reason for updating this ISDS is that project is undergoing level 2 restructuring and current
status of safeguard implementation is detailed/provided in the updated ISDS.
O
U         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The project area lies in Hanoi City and its ecological environment is highly artificial including some
agricultural environment. The surface water system in Hanoi includes 2 major rivers (Red river and
Nhue river), 4 small rivers and 118 lakes and ponds. West Lake is the largest and most rich in
ecosystem, however it is located about 1 km away from the proposed RR2. Literature review and
field survey showed that the major features of the flora include agricultural plants and road side
plantation trees, and no protected fauna species were identified. There was no indication of the
existence of valuable nature habitats.
Water Quality. Baseline water quality monitoring was conducted in June and October 2005. The
results showed that the water qualities of rivers and ponds along the proposed alignments often
exceeded the relevant standards in terms of COD/BOD, amonia and coliform due to domestic and
industrial wastewater.
Air Quality. The baseline air quality was assessed based on the existing air quality monitoring data,
as well as supplementary monitoring data conducted in July 2005 along the proposed alignments. In
general, air pollution levels in the city exceed the national ambient air quality standards with respect
to PM, and CO and N02 at some urban street locations sometimes exceed the air quality standards.
Page 2 of 8


﻿The result of supplementary monitoring was almost the same as the general situation, i.e. the
concentrations of PM were mostly higher than the standards while those of N02, S02 and CO did
not exceed the standards.
O
U        Noise. Baseline noise monitoring was conducted in July 2005 together with the supplemental air
quality monitoring. Noise levels along the proposed alignments were roughly around the relevant
standard levels and often exceed the standards both in day-time and night-time.
Cultural Relics. A cultural relics survey identified 11 cultural relics sites along the proposed
alignments. They include 7 temples, 2 pagodas, 1 memorial house and ancient tree and ancient dike,
however, no deteriorated impacts is expected or relocation is needed due to the construction of
proposed new alignment.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Chaohua Zhang (GSURR)
Hiroshi Ono (EASRE)
Hoa Thi Mong Pham (GSURR)
Khang Van Pham (GENDR)
Ly Thi Dieu Vu (GSURR)
Noreen Beg (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
Son Van Nguyen (GENDR)
Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASVS)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         No change
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No         No change
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No          No change
Pest Management OP 4.09 No         No change
Physical Cultural      No          No change
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No         No change
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes       No change
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No          No change
4.37
Projects on International  No      No change
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No          No change
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 3 of 8


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
)           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). Although HUTDP would significantly contribute to
O
promoting the use of public transportation, reducing traffic congestion, and eventually improving
air quality in Hanoi, construction and operation of RR2 and BRT might cause potential large scale
impacts on the environment as follows:
* Noise levels would exceed the relevant standards at sensitive sites along RR2 and BRT
routes. Since the proposed alignments go through populated areas, heavy machinery and transport
vehicle operation during the construction phase would cause noise problems.
*      Predicted results of CO and N02 showed general improving trends towards 2020 due to
anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened vehicular emission control. On the
other hand, dust and toxic air pollutants from hot asphalt mixing plants during the construction
work were identified as a major air pollution problem.
*      Wastewater from bus transit and terminal stations and oily waste from bus cleaning and
maintenance during the operation phase, and slurry wastewater produced from construction sites
and domestic wastewater from construction camps during the construction phase might cause
adverse impacts on water bodies and aquatic life.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01 ) continues to be applied for the project. Monitoring of
SEMP implementation is performed regularly. The current environmental safeguards management
is moderately satisfactory along the BRT corridor, as well as under the Road Infrastructure
component due to waste management and electrical and road safety issues. It is noted, however
that these issues are limited in scope and relatively easy to remedy.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) continues to be applied for the project. The Resettlement
O
U           Action Plan has been updated to reflect more precise number of households affected by the second
ring road (RR2) construction activities after the detail design. The cancellation of the second BRT
line and the resettlement site CT5 has made RR2 the only component causing involuntary
resettlement. Land acquisition area of the RR2 has decreased by about 2.5 ha thanks to
realignment of Dao Tan intersection and Buoi interchange to minimize the impact on the local
people. The number of project affected households (PAHs) under the RR2 has increased from
1,374 as in the original RAP to 1,560 but the number of relocated PAHs decreased from 653 to
607 respectively. The entitlements for affected households have also been updated to reflect the
changes introduced under the new Government regulations including the requirement of land
appraisal to ensure compensation rates reflect replacement costs. The new estimated resettlement
cost has increased from US$105 million to US$ 140 million. Because the resettlement site CT5
was dropped and many PAHs want to be relocated in the vicinity, additional resettlement
apartments have been provided from available apartments of the city to meet the demands of the
PAHs. In order to expedite compensation and resettlement activities and provide advisory services
to the PMU, the frequency of resettlement independent monitoring has increased from every 6
months to every 3 months. Similarly, it has been requested that the PMU will submit to the Bank
internal monitoring report monthly instead of quarterly as in the original RAP. The updated draft
RAP has been disclosed locally from August 26, 2013, and in VDIC in Hanoi on August 29, 2013,
and sent to Infoshop for disclosure on the same day August 29, 2013.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Regarding the RAP implementation, the delay of compensation and resettlement activities has
been significant for the RR2. MU has been rated for safeguard based on the fact that resettlement
delay, which has led to delays in some civil works contracts for the RR2, is one of main reasons
O
that the project cannot be completed by the current closing date (June 30, 2015). At the time of
this revision, 98% of the PAHs (1528 out of 1560) have received compensation and cleared the
site. The city committed that all resettlement activities will be completed by end of June 2015.
Once the project is extended, the rating will be upgraded to S/MS.
*         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The HUTDP is fully in compliance with the Hanoi Urban Master Plan and Hanoi Urban
Transport Master Plan. Predicted results of air pollution showed general improving trends towards
2020 when anticipated modal shift to public transportation and tightened vehicularemission
control are in place. In order to make sure this air quality improvement, besides BRT, Air Quality
sub-component of HUTDP will support the development of improved air quality management
policy making system, motorcycle pollution control measures and air quality monitoring system in
Hanoi.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
In the design of the BRT component, three kinds of alternatives were considered before the
choice of a closed BRT system trunk and feeder BRT system with special-buses running primarily
on a network of exclusive bus routes was chosen. In addition to the chosen alternative simple bus
priority measures (rejected because of their relatively little success in environments similar to
Hanoi where there is the potential for significant problems of non-observance and enforcement)
and open BRTs such as in Seoul, Kunming and Taipei where a variety of buses and access and
egress from the exclusive lane system (rejected because of the potential for control problems
leading to excessive bunching) were considered. The BRT system has been designed to be
physically integrated with a potential urban rail system under consideration for financing from
French bilateral donors. Discussions with Hanoi on the PTA have been coordinated with the
relevant French donor agencies.
In the design of the Second Ring Road a series of different alternatives were considered in view of
significant technical, social, economic and financial constraints. The final solution chosen has
many features of interest. First, the inclusion of bus-lanes on the main carriageways in the initial
phases (to avoid congestion and conflict with local traffic and non-motorized traffic) and the
subsequent reservation of an alignment for mass rapid transit compatible with longer term growth
proposals for the area north of Red River and west of West Lake. Secondly, there are significant
reductions in the area within the previously defined planning line at Buoi Interchange resulting in
a significant reduction in involuntary resettlement and associated costs. The final design chosen
for the section between Cau Giay and Buoi reflects an extensive analysis to provide forecast
capacity needs in a very tightly constrained space bounded by the dyke and the drainage canal. As
mentioned above, further minimization of land acquisition during project implementation has been
conducted to reduce impact to the local people.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment impacts: A stand-alone EMP was developed, and the proposed measures are to be
incorporated into bidding documents and contracts. The EMP defines mitigation measures and
Page 5 of 8


﻿costs, training plan, environmental monitoring plan, and environmental management
organizations. The PMU established under HPC is responsible for the implementation of EMP.
Environmental monitoring will be carried out by a qualified independent monitoring institution to
be selected through procurement process.
o
For the proper implementation of EMP, a specialized social and environmental unit was set up
under the PMU with one professional staff designated to supervise the overall implementation of
EMP. In addition, key staffs engaged in environmental management in contractors, construction
supervision consultant, road operation company and government organizations were receive
adequate training.
During implementation, the original EMP for BRT component was updated by Ha Noi UTDPMU
and cleared by the Bank. This updated EMP was subsequently disclosed locally in the project sites
and VDIC.
Social impacts: A Resettlement Policy Framework and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
prepared in line with the local laws, regulations and the World Bank's policy on Involuntary
Resettlement. As mentioned above, the RAP has been updated to reflect the changes introduced
under the new Gov. regulations. Its objective is to ensure that all project affected people (PAPs)
will be compensated for their losses at replacement cost and will be provided with rehabilitation
measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain, their pre-project living standards
A multi-level organization has been established for the management and implementation of the
resettlement program at Hanoi Municipal, district and ward levels. Ha Noi People Committee
have overall responsibilities for implementation of the RAP. The City Resettlement Committee
assists the People Committee in carrying out its overall responsibility. The Department of Ha Noi
Urban Transport Project Management Unit (PMU) is responsible for implementing the RAP on
behalf of Ha Noi People's Committee.
Both internal and external monitoring mechanisms have been established. While internal
monitoring serves largely as a PMU internal tool for managing the resettlement program, an
external agency has been engaged to carry out an independent monitoring, and evaluation of the
RAP's implementation. As mentioned above, the frequency of both internal and external
monitoring will be increased to expedite compensation and resettlement activities as well as to
provide advisory services to the PMU to implement RAP properly
Cultural Property: There are no significant impacts expected on cultural relics along the
alignments due to their distance from the alignments and environmental considerations
incorporated in the engineering design. However in order to minimize any unexpected
environmental consequences during construction, prior to the construction the PMU and
contractors will conduct consultation with relevant authorities and local communities on necessary
protection measures. The civil work contracts will include a procedure in the event of chance finds
during construction. There are about 600 graves to be relocated under the project, and all 600
graves were relocated smoothly. Grave relocation and its mitigation measures have been described
in the project RPF and RAP as there had been practice in the region in the past to manage graves
though OP 4.12.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 6 of 8


﻿Environment: Two rounds of public consultation were carried out according to the World Bank's
guideline in August 2005 (first round), and January/February 206 (second round). During this
process, a total of more than a thousand project-affected individuals, groups and representatives of
district PCs, NGOs, wards and communes were intensively consulted. The participants showed
concerns about environmental issues during construction and operation such as dust, exhaust gas
and noise, and requested adequate mitigation measures. Their feedback was reflected in the
engineering designs and EMP. EIA and EMP were disclosed locally at DONRE, TUPWS offices
and relevant 4 districts as well as at InfoShop in May 2006.
Social: During the project preparation phase, project information and resettlement policy were
disseminated through household visits, public meetings, group and focus group discussions and
the household socio-economic survey. They were intensively consulted and actively participated
in discussions on their development needs and priorities, about their perception towards project
objectives. Their views, concerns and recommendations have been taken into consideration in the
project design. This consultation process has been continued during implementation as further
project design information becomes available. The RAP details the plan for consultation during
project design and implementation, including the procedures, methodologies and subjects of
consultation. A Public Information Booklet (PIB) was prepared and distributed to all affected
population in the project area. The project has developed grievance redress mechanism and
described it in the RAP. It describes the steps and procedures for grievance filing as well as the
responsible institutions and timeframe for receiving and addressing the grievances.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                14-Oct-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                             14-Oct-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                29-Aug-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                             29-Aug-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
o          in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
O          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Van Anh Thi Tran
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                    Date: 11-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 11-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


