                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7101

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Russian Federation                Project ID:      P147429
                            Project Name:       Local Economic Development of Small Towns (P147429)
                            Task Team           Soraya Goga,Tatyana Shadrunova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           01-Dec-2016                       Estimated        25-Sep-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSU09                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                       Total Bank Financing:        200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          200.00
                              Total                                                                          250.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed objective of the project is to support the economic development of selected small
                           towns. This will occur through leveraging their economic assets, particularly cultural heritage assets.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project will aim at leveraging investments in cultural heritage and tourism in an effort to
                           improve the economic development of 3-5 selected towns. It will use an integrated development
                           approach. It will, therefore, finance activities related to urban planning, tourism development,
                           (including marketing and branding), and capacity building for cultural heritage management and
                           tourism promotion, It will also finance investments in physical restoration of historic sites, and
                           upgrading of surrounding infrastructure in historic core of the selected towns. This is a shift from
                         previous Bank financed projects which focused primarily on the rehabilitation of individual cultural
                         heritage monuments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Towns were selected through a two-phase selection process on the basis of methodology prepared by
                         the Ministry of Culture (MOC) and endorsed by the Bank. Eligible towns for this competitive
                         selection were 41 towns which already had status of historic settlement of federal significance and
                         included in the List of historic settlements approved by the Order of the Ministry of Culture of the
                         Russian Federation and the Ministry of Regional Development of the Russian Federation #418/339
                         of July 29, 2010. First, there was a set of pre-conditions (eligibility criteria) designed to short list the
                         eligible towns for participation in the Project. In particular, this set of eligibility criteria were as
                         following: (i) population of town from 10 thousand up to 100 thousand people; (ii) town already has
                         status of historic settlement of federal significance in accordance to federal law 73-FZ dated June 25,
                         2002 (version of May 7, 2013); (iii) distance to the regional capital not exceeding 150 km; and (iv)
                         absence of overdue regional arrears to the federal budget. Second, the eligible towns completed their
                         applications and were subsequently ranked for participation in the project using a performance
                         ranking system. The performance ranking system would include a set of transparent selection criteria
                         based on historic significance, tourism potential, required basic infrastructure and readiness for
                         implementation (including willingness to co-finance). The competitive process and willingness to co-
                         finance criterion were to foster ownership by the selected towns whilst the remaining selection
                         criteria would ensure the viability of the investments.

                         Proposed Project components include:
                         ➢❨¢ Component 1: Support for Economic Development and Tourism
                         ➢❨¢ Component 2: Physical Investments in Historic Towns
                         ➢❨¢ Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring

                         COMPONENT 1: SUPPORT FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM. This
                         component would finance the following 4 sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         It is planned that this component would support the development of tourism and marketing strategies
                         for the towns, small investments for strengthening the tourism potential of the selected historic towns
                         and institutional capacity building for cultural heritage tourism.

                         Subcomponent 1.1. Support for Tourism Development and Marketing: This component of the project
                         will support the development of the marketing strategies and branding to all selected towns for the
                         project. In addition, this component will finance the establishment or expansion of tourism
                         information centers. Successful destinations operate such centers as a focal point for the tourism
                         including providing background information on the area; orientation with maps, exhibits and
                         brochures in combination with basic amenities and services.

                         Subcomponent 1.2. Small investment subprojects for strengthening the tourism potential of Selected
                         Historic towns: This subcomponent would assist selected towns in improving their tourism assets and
                         promotion (including landscaping activities, limited small scale repair and construction, purchase of
                         technology and equipment, furniture etc.) to ensure that the project participating towns receive a
                         wide range of economic development benefits associated with cultural heritage tourism.

                         Subcomponent 1.3. Institutional Capacity Strengthening for Cultural Heritage Management and
                         Tourism Development:. This subcomponent will aim to provide support to the participating regions,
                           municipalities and their cultural institu tions to manage their cultural resources (including those
                           financed through the project) and marketing interventions, through an extensive training program.
                           This training program will be delivered throughout the duration of the Project, and will include a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           combination of Long-Term and Short-Term trainings. Regional, municipal and cultural institutions
                           would also be eligible for the training. The subcomponent would also facilitate exchange of
                           experiences between participating small towns and their regions and cultural institutions for
                           knowledge and innovation sharing via study tours and workshops.

                           COMPONENT 2: INVESTMENTS IN HISTORIC TOWNS.
                           This component will finance the physical investments in the 4 towns➢❨ selected urban fragments.
                           The investments will include restoration and regeneration construction activities, upgrade and
                           modernization of the engineering networks and municipal utility infrastructure, landscaping, and,
                           whenever necessary, purchase and installment the equipment required for operation of the cultural
                           institutions that will function at the territory of the selected urban fragments. The component would
                           finance engineering design, construction supervision and civil works. Co-financing of required
                           regional infrastructure (engineering, transport improvements) will be identified and then provided
                           from Regional budgets.

                           COMPONENT 3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING.
                           This component will finance goods and consultants services for project management and monitoring.

                           The content of the proposed components would be further developed at the later stages of the Project
                           preparation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be implemented in several selected small historic towns in the Russian Federation.
                           The Russian Government considers this Project as a pilot that could subsequently be extended to
                           other towns (and respective regions) of the Russian Federation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Ministry of Culture (MoC) and the Implementing Agency (the St
                           Petersburg Foundation for Investment Projects) have substantial experience in preparation and
                           implementation of Bank-supported projects. FISP has internal controls for project implementation
                           including financial management, procurement and safeguards and these proved as adequate and well
                           established in the course of preparation and implementation of other Cultural Heritage related
                           projects. FISP also has experience extensive experience in managing expected environmental and
                           social impacts. Currently, FISP has one safeguards specialist and the Team will explore whether a
                           second specialist would be required, during the course of preparation. Each Bank supervision
                           mission will include safeguards specialist(s) to ensure the project compliance with the Bank
                           safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GEN03)
                           Nicolas Perrin (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    Yes                        OP 4.01 is triggered for the small to medium scale
                                 OP/BP 4.01                                                                             construction works anticipated under Component 2.
                                                                                                                        As the civil works will not be identified prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        Appraisal, an Environmental Management
                                                                                                                        Framework (EMF) will be prepared. This will
                                                                                                                        provide guidance for the preparation of sub-project-
                                                                                                                        specific Environmental Management Plans (EMP)
                                                                                                                        which will be prepared as part of the design
                                                                                                                        documentation for the sub-project investments.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        OP 4.11 is triggered as the project will support works
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             affecting historic buildings, monuments and spaces.
                                                                                                                        No separate Physical Cultural Protection Plan will be
                                                                                                                        prepared as ensuring appropriate restoration is a core
                                                                                                                        objective of the project. The EMF will describe the
                                                                                                                        relevant national legislation and measures to ensure
                                                                                                                        that the appropriate provisions are included in the
                                                                                                                        site-specific EMPs. It will also describe required
                                                                                                                        participation and oversight by relevant authorities.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered.
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                Issues are expected to be relatively minor, mainly
                                                                                                                        temporary disruption of income sources. A
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared and
                                                                                                                        disclosed prior to Appraisal, and will provide
                                                                                                                        principles and guidance for preparation of
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans as needed during
                                                                                                                        implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Drafts of Environmental Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework have been
                             prepared. Consultations are expected to be held by September 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Soraya Goga,Tatyana Shadrunova
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                              Date: 08-Jul-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)           Date: 08-Jul-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
