INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
,2 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2015
6                                              Report No.: JSDSC1O72
Country:        Swaziland                  Project ID:   P151433
Project Name:   SZ: Private Sector Competitiveness (P 15143 3)
Task Team       Austin Francis Louis Kilroy, Smita Kuriakose
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Apr-2015                Estimated     30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (20%), Agro-indstry, marketing, and trade
(20%), Public administration- Industry and trade (20%), SME Finance (20%),
Other industry (20%)
Theme(s):       Regulation and competition policy (25%), Other Financial Sector Development
(25%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Export
development and competitiveness (25%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      25.00            Total Bank Financing:   25.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           25.00
Total                                                           25.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the proposed project are: to increase private investments and exports;
and to increase jobs in the agribusiness and tourism sectors.
C. Project Description


﻿COMPONENT 1: Improving the business environment
Subcomponent 1A: Accelerated implementation of the Investor Road Map (IRM)
O
The Government of Swaziland deems it a key priority to improve its business environment, and has
requested that this World Bank project should focus on four priority areas: starting a business;
O
registering property; protecting investors; and trading across borders.
Project activities will address the main constraints to implementation of the IRM, which will improve
the business environment in Swaziland regardless of sector:
(i)    Improved legal foundations for implementation.
(ii)   Refined IRM plan and institutional structure for implementation.
(iii)  Adoption of new ICT systems to streamline key business processes.
Sub-component 1 B: Increased focus and strategy for investment, export, and tourism promotion
Evidence from most countries shows that active investment and export promotion is a necessary
complement to a business enabling environment. Swaziland will need to strategically market and
facilitate new investments, so that reforms are publicized and known amongst potential investors,
and so that new investments can be guided and assisted. Public sector assistance to exporters will
facilitate entry into new markets and increased exports into existing markets.
The project will support the following activities:
(i)       Strengthened investment promotion and facilitation (including strategy, branding, a
customer relationship management system, and improved aftercare functions).
(ii)    Strengthened export promotion and facilitation.
(iii)  Improved tourism sector strategic planning and regulations.
Sub-component 1 C: Improved access to finance for SMEs
There does exist in Swaziland a moderately well-developed commercial banking sector; but SMEs
find it difficult to access commercial financing for investment capital and working capital.
Commercial lending to agriculture in Swaziland is focused almost entirely on the sugar industry,
which is the most established agricultural industry, is constituted mainly by large firms, and is
perceived to be lower risk than other agricultural products.
In order to increase access to finance for SMEs, the project will support the following activities:
(i)       Restructuring of the Export Credit Guarantee Scheme (ECGS) and Small Scale Enterprise
Loan Guarantee Scheme (SSELGS) to simplify application requirements, achieve more stability, and
generate increased uptake.
(ii)   Improved risk strategies and business assessment skills in financial institutions.
(iii)  Investments in new payments and credit infrastructure, including a collateral registry for
secured interests in movable assets.
(iv)   Extension of financial inclusion via producers' cooperatives.


﻿COMPONENT 2: Job creation in strategic industries
This component comprises activities to catalyze a sustained growth amongst private sector firms in
O
U       Swaziland.
Sub-component 2A: Competitive business plans in agribusiness and tourism
The project will engage with a key constraint to the establishment and scaling-up of firms in
agribusiness and tourism: the ability of entrepreneurs to identify and pursue competitive advantages,
through technical and sector knowledge plus the development of viable business plans.
Project interventions will support:
(i)       Establishment of SWADE and STA as mentorship organizations for entrepreneurs;
(ii)   Focusing of SEDCO business skills training on development of viable business plans.
Sub-component 2B: Catalytic Fund for start-ups and early stage 'market makers'.
A Catalytic Fund will complement the development of competitive business plans, given that
entrepreneurs pursuing new product-market segments or riskier activities including test marketing
will not have access to commercial bank financing. In order to complement the skills needs required
for this move to new products or markets, the fund will include financing for technical and
managerial training identified by firms.
Project interventions will support:
(i)       Design and establishment of a Catalytic Fund.
0
COMPONENT 3: Project Implementation
0
.       This component will support the costs of the Project Implementation Unit including: externally
a consultants if required; safeguards support; and monitoring and evaluation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All planning, regulatory and institutional support will be provided to the Ministries located in
Mbabane, while sub-projects to be supported under the Catalytic Fund will be implemented
throughout the countries once the sites are identified during the implementation stage of the Project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower has prior experience of managing World Bank projects and, therefore, has knowledge
and capacity for implementing and monitoring environmental and social aspects of the Project.
However, the capacity of the Borrower to implement and monitoring of safeguard issues will be
assessed during preparation and during the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and appropriate capacity building measures will be included in the Project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Albab Akanda (GENDR)
Kisa Mfalila (GENDR)
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
0
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
S afeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes          Safeguards Policy 4.01 is triggered given that the
OP/BP 4.01                              Catalytic Fund to be supported by the Project is
expected to finance agribusiness and tourism sub-
projects at both industry and community levels. The
activities may involve construction of new facilities,
expansion of existing facilities, and support to
agribusiness related processes all of which may have
minor to moderate impacts on the environment. The
degree of the environmental risks and impacts will be
determined by the nature, scope and location of the
sub-projects during the implementation phase of the
Project. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, consulted
upon and publicly disclosed in the InfoShop and
locally in Swaziland to provide guidance in
identifying sub-projects, screening, managing and
monitoring of likely environmental and social risks
and impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         Given that that the primary emphasis of the Project is
on planning, regulatory and institutional aspects, the
agribusiness and tourism sub-projects to be
supported by the Catalytic Fund will not generate
substantive changes to the ecology, and flora/fauna
in Swaziland. However, this assumption will be
confirmed during preparation based on additional
information on the nature, scope and location of the
sub-projects.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The Project will not support activities that will affect
the management or health of forest not will the
project support activities related to forestry or
logging.
Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes         The Project is not expected to support sub-projects
involving pest or pesticide management. However,
given the inherent characteristic of agri-business
activities involving the use of pesticides, appropriate
screening, management and monitoring the use of
pesticides will be included in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The project may provide TA or financing for
OP/BP 4.11                              activities related to supporting tourism, which may
involve or affect physical cultural resources. The


﻿EMF will provide guidance on "chances finds" and
management of cultural assets.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          The project will not finance activities that involve
BP 4.12                                   land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement
and/or restrictions of access to resources and
a                                                  livelihoods.
&        Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The Project does not involve dams.
Projects on International    No           The Project will not support sub-projects that will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      have impacts on International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The Project will not support sub-projects located in
BP 7.60                                   disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Before appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared,
consulted upon and publicly disclosed in the InfoShop and locally in Swaziland to provide
guidance in identifying sub-projects, screening, managing and monitoring of likely environmental
and social risks and impacts.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Austin Francis Louis Kilroy,Smita Kuriakose
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                           Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                           Date:
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


