                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC15923

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P154623
                            Project Name:      China: Gansu Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project
                                               (P154623)
                            Task Team          Liping Xiao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       23-Aug-2016                         Estimated        03-Jul-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GED02                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    141.00                     Total Bank Financing:        120.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                     21.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       120.00
                              Total                                                                       141.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the quality of technical and vocational education
                           and training (TVET) in selected project schools of Gansu and improve school-industry linkages.
                           C. Project Description
                           International experience suggests that combining work-place experience and training with school-
                           based vocational education holds the most promise for successful outcomes provided the following
                           general principles are observed:

                           1. There needs to be a clear understanding of what the market and government failures are and where
                         the skills gaps are;
                         2. Training programs must have incentives to respond to market demands and ensure the quality of
                         their graduates ? often by working in close collaboration with employers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will be guided by such principles and available international evidence on what
                         works to strengthen skills development programs in TVET schools. Activities proposed under this
                         project align well with the existing international evidence on education, skills, and jobs. A recent
                         systematic review by Solutions for Youth Employment (2015), in partnership with the World Bank,
                         highlights the importance of skills training on youth employment outcomes. The review reports on
                         113 experimental and quasi-experimental studies on youth employment interventions between 1990
                         and 2014. Results show that on average, interventions that focus on skills-training raise the
                         probability of employment by 3.35% and lead to higher aggregate earnings (effects on both
                         employment and earnings are statistically different from zero). Returns are larger when there are
                         strong, explicit links between education and training programs and employers.

                         The importance of establishing strong linkages between training and jobs is also highlighted in the
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)?s 2012 report ?Youth Employment Programs: An Evaluation
                         of World Bank and IFC Support.? Drawing on the World Bank Group?s extensive experience with
                         TVET programs, the report notes two key ingredients for success. First, comprehensive programs
                         that combine both skills training and career guidance are the most effective in raising youth
                         employment outcomes. Second, private sector participation in the content of skill development
                         programs?such as curriculum development and training of teachers?leads more often to success.
                         These ingredients are also highlighted in the framework for the SABER Workforce Development ?
                         What Matters? paper.

                         In addition, the activities proposed in this project reflect the lessons accumulated in the skills,
                         livelihoods and jobs training literatures. For instance, the World Development Report on Jobs (World
                         Bank, 201) notes that: ?On average across countries, the return to one additional year of work
                         experience in nonagricultural activities is roughly one-half the return to one additional year of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education at the beginning of work life.? Thus making industry-sponsored workshops available to
                         students during their schooling can help develop relevant experience that TVET graduates can take
                         with them to their first employment.

                         The activities included in this project reflect the project design and implementation lessons learned
                         from the Bank?s TVET portfolio in China which spans projects in Guangdong, Liaoning, Shandong,
                         Yunnan and Xinjiang. The experience from these projects underscores the importance of
                         comprehensive reform packages at both the provincial and school levels which focus not only on
                         improving facilities but on strengthening systems of instruction, assessment and evaluation.

                         Thus, the Gansu TVET Project follows these best practices identified by the World Bank Group and
                         the broader scientific literature to improve the school-to-work transition for poor, rural youth in
                         Gansu province.

                         The project activities are organized into four components.

                         Component 1: Strengthen the provincial TVET system
                         Under this component the project will:
                         ?       Undertake a study of financing mechanisms in Gansu?s TVET sector to understand the
                         causes of and solutions to funding gaps and propose policy options (Possibly using SABER-
                         Workforce Development)
                         ?       Undertake a STEP Skills Measurement Survey to assess skills mismatches between
                         graduates and employers
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ?       Improve the provincial system for evaluating TVET schools by incorporating third-party
                         evaluation
                         ?       Support provincial level TVET groups to review selected course content and establish a
                         mechanism to evaluate the curriculum being taught in TVET schools
                         ?       Establish a public-access online resource bank for TVET teaching and learning material, the
                         content for which will be curated by sector experts
                         ?       Support an entrepreneurship incubator for students

                         Component 2: Improve school capacity to provide higher quality and more relevant skills
                         Under this component, the project will:
                         ?       Enhance school-industry linkages
                         o       For students: promote establishment of industry-sponsored workshops in TVET schools
                         o       For teachers: promote exchange of teachers and industry workers for short term training
                         ?       Improve in-service teacher training (ToT) to develop the professional knowledge and
                         teaching skills of teachers in the project schools
                         ?       Reform curriculum and develop new teaching and learning materials
                         ?       Reform pedagogical practices. Focus on
                         o       Student-centered teaching
                         o       Competency-based teaching
                         ?       Improve existing school-based evaluation system for teaching and students
                         ?       Strengthen featured majors for each project school

                         Component 3: Improve school infrastructure
                         Under this component the project will:
                         ?        Construct buildings
                         ?        Procure equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Infrastructure improvements will take place in existing schools and shared infrastructure will be
                         provided to the schools that will be relocated to the TVET park

                         Component 4: Capacity Building, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
                         Under this component the project will:
                         ?       Provide training and office equipment for PMO and PIUs
                         ?       Facilitate South-South Learning for relevant departments and dissemination of experiences
                         ?       Supplement capacity of the PMO for project management, by ensuring consultants are
                         available to assist with:
                         o       Project Coordination
                         o       Monitoring and Evaluation
                         o       Procurement and Financial Management
                         o       Environmental and Social safeguards
                         o       Civil Works Engineering
                         ?       Undertake an impact assessment of key project activities, including a tracer study comparing
                         the graduates of TVET schools that participate in the project with graduates from non-project TVET
                         schools. In order to have the most meaningful assessment of impact, the impact assessment will
                         compare graduates from similar programs. The design of this impact assessment will be based on
                         lessons learned from the evaluation literature described in preceding sections and on lessons from the
                         evaluations that are a part of the existing portfolio of China TVET projects.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The activities described above will be carried out by the following project schools ? all of which are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           DoE schools:
                           ?       Gansu Energy & Chemical Vocational College (to be relocated to the TVET park)
                           ?       Gansu Commerce & Trade Vocational College (to be relocated to theTVET park)
                           ?       Gansu Provincial Art School located in Lanzhou
                           ?       Gansu Senior Technical School of Mechanics located in Tianshui
                           ?       Jinchang Vocational and Technical School located in Jinchang
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Department of Education (DoE) has set up a Project Management Office (PMO) in charge of
                           project preparation and implementation at the provincial level. The PMO, headed by the Director of
                           DoE, has a full management team and technical staff in place. The PMO staff are drawn from the
                           Management Office for the TVET park in the new district. Most of the PMO managers and staff have
                           been working on the TVET park and have recently been called to join the preparation of the
                           proposed project. They do not have prior experience working on Bank financed projects and have
                           little knowledge of Bank policies and procedures in procurement, financial management, monitoring
                           and evaluation (M&E), and safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Yiren Feng (GEN2A)
                           Youxuan Zhu (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The proposed project will finance the construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP/BP 4.01                                      new school buildings for additional training space
                                                                           and skills training. The planned civil works consist
                                                                           of the construction of five or six- floor building for
                                                                           each school on the existing land within the
                                                                           campuses. No land acquisition or relocation of
                                                                           people is anticipated. The water supply, drainage and
                                                                           power supply will be provided by the existing system
                                                                           within the campuses, no additional facilities are
                                                                           needed to make the buildings function properly.
                                                                           Considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale
                                                                           of the proposed project, the project is proposed to be
                                                                           classified as Category B due to the potential impacts
                                                                           that are small scale and limited to the site. An
                                                                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                                                                           prepared for the civil works of the five schools to
                                                                           cover the environmental management activities of
                                                                           the project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No             The civil works of the project are within the existing
                                                                           campuses, sites visit confirmed that the project will
                                                                                                                        not affect any natural habitats or critical natural
                                                                                                                        habitats as defined under the policy.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                         Project activities will not affect forest areas, it will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        not involve any logging or planting activities in
                                                                                                                        forest areas.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No                         The project will not procure pesticides or increase
                                                                                                                        use of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                         The civil works of the project are all within the
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             existing campuses, the EA team conducted the
                                                                                                                        survey and confirmed there are no physical cultural
                                                                                                                        resources as defined by the OP4.11. However, the
                                                                                                                        chance finding procedure will be included in the
                                                                                                                        EMP, and the relevant clauses will be included in all
                                                                                                                        construction contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    TBD                        Based on initial consultations with PMO, the project
                                 4.10                                                                                   will not likely trigger OP4.10 since all project
                                                                                                                        schools (with three in Lanzhou City, one in Tianshui
                                                                                                                        City, and one in Jinchang City), are not located in the
                                                                                                                        areas with concentrated ethnic minorities. This will
                                                                                                                        be confirmed during screening to be carried out by
                                                                                                                        the task team.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                TBD                        According to initial consultations with PMO staff, all
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                proposed school improvement activities will be
                                                                                                                        carried out within the existing campus of five project
                                                                                                                        schools with no new land acquisition. Among them,
                                                                                                                        three are located in new TVET Park in Lanzhou City,
                                                                                                                        one is urban area of Tianshui City, and one in urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        area of Jinchang City.

                                                                                                                        The task team will conduct due diligence on the
                                                                                                                        recent land acquisition completed for TVET park in
                                                                                                                        Lanzhou City where three project schools are
                                                                                                                        located. Such review is to see whether land
                                                                                                                        acquisition for TVET park is in compliance with
                                                                                                                        national laws and regulations.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                        policy.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not located in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways as defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any known disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2016




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             TBD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liping Xiao
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                            Date: 12-Jul-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Franco Russo (PMGR)                          Date: 12-Jul-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
