                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC13954

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                           Project ID:      P156251
                            Project Name:   International Road Assessment Program for Bloomberg Initiative for Global
                                            Road Safety
                            Team Leader(s): Dipan Bose,Tawia Addo-Ashong
                            Estimated Date 30-Sep-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTIGE                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Urban Transport (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%)
                            Theme(s):            Rural services and infrastructure (10%), Injuries and non-communicable
                                                 diseases (60%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.6                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Road Safety Program                                                                    1.6
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To build capacity for road infrastructure safety management in selected countries and cities under the
                           Bloomberg Initiative for Global Road Safety through the assessment and inspection of high risk
                           roads.
                           C. Project Description
                           This project will focus on inspecting high risk roads, making recommendations for safe and
                           economically feasible design solutions and building technical capacity to manage and improve road
                           safety in client countries. This effort requires a systemic approach to share best practices on
                           infrastructure safety management and design solutions that have demonstrated the ability to reduce
                           fatalities and serious injuries in the event of a crash. The International Road Assessment Program
                           (iRAP) is a diagnostic tool to survey high risk roads for different categories of roads users and
                           subsequently provides recommendations to guide the detailed design of infrastructure related safety
                           interventions. Using video images and road attribute characterizations, a baseline risk assessment is
                           developed using iRAP’s star-rating methodology which can be applied to the different road users -
                         vehicle occupants, motorcyclists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The risk posed by the physical
                         attributes, supplemented by the information on traffic speeds and volume, is translated into a star
                         rating system which can applied to each 100 m section of the road. The results from the survey
Public Disclosure Copy




                         further provides recommended guidelines for the designers on appropriate solution to mitigate the
                         risk for each section along with cost and Benefit-to-Cost ratio information for each solution. The
                         results can thus be used for overall identification of high risk sections in the network, solutions that
                         can be implemented specific to a road user group and assist in developing an investment to maximize
                         the impact on lives saved.

                         As part of this project, the focus on infrastructure safety will address the following issues:
                         1. Priorities for urban and inter-urban roads: While the priorities for inter-urban roads are speed
                         management, segregation of motorized two wheelers, and reducing the risk of vehicle to vehicle
                         collisions and run off crashes, urban priorities are more focused on vulnerable road users such as
                         pedestrians and bicyclists. This project will aim at identifying solutions which can be applied for the
                         specific context and applicable risk factors.
                         2. Meeting the functional requirements of the road network: Often roads may function under
                         conditions different from the original design parameters. For instance, highways designed for cars
                         may be used by a significant share of non-motorized traffic which requires that design solutions are
                         adapted accordingly. Design solutions derived through iRAP recommendations not only aim to
                         comply with highway codes and existing national guidelines but also address the functional
                         requirements of the road and specially target all categories of road users.
                         3. Providing safe facilities accessible for vulnerable road user groups: As a significant portion of
                         road fatalities include vulnerable roads users (more than 50%), a core aspect of this project will be to
                         develop solutions for the non-motorized road users. This project will help in sharing knowledge and
                         solutions for the vulnerable group which has been proven elsewhere as effective measures.
                         4. Benchmarking of infrastructure safety and target setting. The project will develop capacity for the
                         road and transport agencies to benchmark their road infrastructure assets in terms of safety ratings
                         and develop cost effective investment plans to improve the overall safety of the assessed network.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The partnership is innovative and effective in terms of leveraging government spending on proven
                         road safety interventions as a result of initiatives undertaken through the grant fund.

                         The activities focused on road infrastructure safety and capacity buildings will include:

                         Part 1. Identification and Assessment of High-Risk Roads in Project Cities

                         a.      Development of a work plan and identification of the road network to be assessed in the
                         following Project cities:

                         i.      Accra, Ghana
                         ii.     Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
                         iii.    Bandung, Indonesia
                         iv.     Bangkok, Thailand
                         v.      Bogota, Colombia
                         vi.     Fortaleza, Brazil
                         vii.    Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam
                         viii.   Mumbai, India
                         ix.     São Paolo, Brazil
                         x.      Shanghai, China

                         b.      Carrying out of baseline iRAP assessments of the road networks and of assessments of road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         designs, and training of road agencies on infrastructure safety management in the following priority
                         Project cities:

                         i.      Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam
                         ii.     Mumbai, India
                         iii.    Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
                         iv.     São Paolo, Brazil
                         v.      Shanghai, China
                         vi.     Accra, Ghana
                         vii.    Fortaleza, Brazil
                         viii.   Bangkok, Thailand



                         Part 2. Survey and Evaluation of High-Risk Road Network in Project Countries

                         a.      China

                         i.       Provision of technical support and strategic advice to the Research Institute of Highway on
                         iRAP methods and assessment.
                         ii.      Carrying out of baseline and design assessments of the Wuhan ITDP (Anlu), Xiangshan,
                         Tianjin, Anhui, and Xiaogan road projects supported by the World Bank.
                         iii.     Training of government officials in identifying high risk roads and designing and building
                         safe roads.

                         b.      Philippines
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i.       Provision of technical and training support to Department of Public Works and Highways
                         staff to undertake design and post-construction Star Rating assessments of road safety demonstration
                         corridors.
                         ii.      Provision of technical and strategic training and support to Philippine partners as they
                         prepare and undertake development bank-financed, government-financed and private sector projects.

                         c.      India

                         i.      Carrying out of Star Rating and Safer Roads Investment Plan analyses and reporting for
                         World Bank project roads in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
                         ii.     Carrying out of Star Rating and Safer Roads Investment plan analyses and reporting for up to
                         2,000 kilometers of World Bank project roads.
                         iii.    Provision of training and technical support to the implementation of existing iRAP results in
                         Karnataka, Gujarat, Assam, Kerala, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu.

                         d.      Thailand

                         i.       Identification, together with the Thailand government and development partners, of corridors
                         that are soon to be upgraded.
                           ii.      Development of an iRAP Thailand project plan for 2017-2019 that includes the identification
                           of a local technical lead agency and plans for an initial assessment of up to 3,000 kilometers of high-
                           risk roads as a demonstration assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Not Applicable

                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not Applicable

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hocine Chalal (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              This initiative is rated as environmental risk
                           BP 4.01                                              category C as there are no civil works or other
                                                                                activities to be undertaken which would have
                                                                                social or environmental impacts. Likewise, none
                                                                                of the safeguards policies are triggered as
                                                                                project activities have no implications for these
                                                                                policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Dipan Bose,Tawia Addo-Ashong
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:        Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                            Date: 24-Aug-2015
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Maria Marcela Silva (PMGR)                                   Date: 02-Sep-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
