                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                    Report No.:ISDSC23852
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2018
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 04-Dec-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Nicaragua                   Project ID:             P120657
    Project Name:                 Nicaragua FCPF REDD Readiness (P120657)
    Task Team Leader(s):          Augusto Garcia
    Estimated Appraisal                                       Estimated Board
    Date:                                                     Date:
    Managing Unit:                GEN04                       Financing
                                                              Instrument:
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       5.00                          Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
      Borrower                                                                                             0.00
      Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                             5.00
      Total                                                                                                5.00
    Environmental Category:       B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    To help Nicaragua become ready for future REDD+ implementation by preparing those key elements,
    systems, and/or policies needed, generally referred to as the REDD+ Readiness Package, in a socially and
    environmentally sound manner.
    C. Project Description
    The Additional Funding (AF) activities will continue supporting MARENA’s capacity to implement
    Nicaragua’s road map to REDD+ Readiness. The safeguards instruments are the same identified at the
    beginning of the REDD Readiness preparation process. The national R-Package (including the ESMF and its
    safeguards instruments) will be used for future REDD projects. The Emissions Reduction Program (ERP) is
    possibly one of these and at that point in time would implement the safeguard instruments which have been
    drafted and will be finalized with the AF. The five Components are as follows:
    (1) Readiness Coordination and Consultation - by
    a) supporting the REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangements established under the original grant; and
    b) continuing to support Consultation, Participation and Outreach through outreach activities and


                                              Page 1 of 7
stakeholder engagements in the west, central and northern region of the country
(2) REDD+ Strategy Development - by
a) strengthening MARENA’s capacity to identify alternatives to improve forest law enforcement and land
governance and to deepen its understanding of the drivers of forest degradation;
b) strengthening MARENA’s capacity to identify effective alternatives to consolidate the Bosawás and Indio
Maiz Forest Reserves, helping MARENA assess the economic feasibility of the ENDE-REDD+ strategy
options and design appropriate incentives to promote REDD+ activities, helping MARENA improve the
conditions for private sector involvement in low-deforestation land-use activities, and contributing to
creating and strengthening forest development instruments and institutions, and also contributing to updating
the National Forest Program and the Forest Regency Mechanism.
c) helping MARENA deepen the legal, institutional and forest governance framework analysis aiming at
identifying and removing barriers to implementing the strategy options included in the first version of the
ENDE-REDD+ strategy;
d) supporting MARENA to strengthen the draft ESMF and improve the Indigenous Peoples Framework and
the Safeguards Information System. MARENA will also implement the SESA Plan in the west, central and
northern regions which will help produce a revised version of the ESMF.
(3) Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL) - by helping the MRV working group continue developing the
FREL and supporting the GHG inventory development;
(4) Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) - by allowing MARENA to finance the cost of the
MRV system coordination and implementation, improve the sub-national nodes of the National Environment
Information System (SINIA), and make progress in defining the systems to monitor non-carbon aspects of
the ENDE-REDD+ strategy;
(5) Monitoring project implementation by supporting MARENA’s capacity to monitor and evaluate project
progress, including complying with FCPF reporting requirements, and World Bank Financial Management
and Procurement policies.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                 relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The AF to the FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant does not entail physical investments or pilot projects on
the ground. The AF will continue to finance a number of analytical and diagnostic studies as well as a series
of consultation meetings and workshops with relevant stakeholders. While Readiness Preparation is
conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, key policy and regulatory precedents are being set at the
readiness phase that will have downstream impact at the national level once the national REDD+ strategy is
ready to be implemented.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The institutional arrangements for the implementation of the AF grant remain the same, with implementation
managed by the Ministry of Environment (MARENA), for its acronym in Spanish. MARENA has a number
of experienced staff that worked on previous World Bank projects with adequate experience in compliance
with Safeguard Policies. This staff is an integral part of the PMU of the project which has since been
subsumed under the Climate Change Office.

Under the Parent Project and this team’s supervision an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF), and Process Framework (PF) were drafted for the Strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation
and forest degradation (ENDE REDD+). The Strategy will have a national scope. The Strategy´s
interventions are focused on removing the direct and underlying causes mentioned in the section Causes of
Deforestation, although they do not directly target fundamental causes, such as the construction of the
necessary infrastructure for the country’s development, international markets, poverty, demographic
expansion and migration, due to their structural nature. However, they are expected to have an indirect


                                            Page 2 of 7
impact on markets, infrastructure and poverty. ENDE-REDD+ is based on the promotion of sustainable
forest production, food security, the stabilization of vulnerable areas, protection of water recharge areas, and
the development of a funding mechanism. In addition, as an implementation platform it considers the
strengthening of strategic alliances, inter-institutional coordination and forest governance, all according to
their corresponding capacities.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Arelia Jacive Lopez Castaneda( GSU04 )
 Gunars H. Platais( GEN04 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                    The policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
                                                           4.01) is triggered due to the critical nature of
                                                           strategic options and choices being considered
                                                           under REDD+. The explicit goal of the REDD+
                                                           strategy is to promote the reduction in rates of
                                                           deforestation and degradation by rewarding
                                                           measures to protect and conserve forests, the
                                                           environmental impacts of the strategy are expected
                                                           to be mostly positive. Nevertheless, if the strategy
                                                           fails to achieve its objectives, indirect adverse
                                                           impacts, through the unintended creation of
                                                           incentives to clear forests for other purposes, are
                                                           likely to occur. The Strategic Environmental and
                                                           Social Assessment (SESA) documented the
                                                           environmental benefits and risks of the REDD+
                                                           strategy. The SESA assessed key social and
                                                           environmental risks and potential impacts
                                                           associated with REDD+, and developed a
                                                           management framework (ESMF) to manage and
                                                           mitigate any possible risks and potential impacts
                                                           during the implementation phase.
                                                           The ESMF integrates concerns of a complex group
                                                           of stakeholders, including the Miskitu, Sumu-
                                                           Mayangna, Ulwa, , Creole, Garifuna and Rama
                                                           indigenous and Afro-descendant peoples and
                                                           Mestizos who live in the Caribbean Coast Region
                                                           of Nicaragua, the Council of the 22 indigenous
                                                           peoples of the Central and North Pacific of the
                                                           country, agricultural and livestock producers, PRO-
                                                           Nicaragua, foreign cooperation, local governments,
                                                           etc. These spaces constitute the multiethnic,
                                                           multilingual and multi-cultural melting pot that is
                                                           Nicaragua. In addition, there have been dialogues
                                                           with cattle ranchers at a municipal level in
                                                           coordination with the mayor’s office and producers
                                                           associations. Dialogues in reference to the forests
                                                           were held with representatives of the private sector,


                                            Page 3 of 7
                                            which not only allowed for their concerns and
                                            proposals to be heard, but also for the sharing of the
                                            course being defined by ENDE-REDD+. An
                                            important outcome of these dialogues and
                                            consultations is that the livestock sector expressed
                                            its commitment to the environment and forests. It is
                                            encouraging for ENDE-REDD+ that within the
                                            objectives and content of CONAGAN’s Regional
                                            Congresses III and IV, held in Siuna and Waslala,
                                            respectively, the issue of END-REDD+ was
                                            addressed, acknowledging the environmental
                                            services provided by the forests.
                                            The process consultation was required to
                                            continuously adjust the analyses of their impacts
                                            and risks as well as measures for mitigation in the
                                            strategic lines for the Strategy to reduce emissions
                                            from deforestation and forest degradation in
                                            Nicaragua (ENDE-REDD+). The strategy has been
                                            elaborated under a dynamic process.
                                            The implementation of ENDE-REDD+ will provide
                                            social and environmental benefits for the
                                            indigenous, Afro-descendant and rural
                                            communities, derived from enhanced biodiversity,
                                            water sources and access to food that comes from
                                            the forest. However, potential risks are foreseen in
                                            regards to access to the livelihood of families due
                                            mainly to the protection measures for those
                                            protected areas that are contemplated within the
                                            Strategy. the application of ENDE-REDD+ will
                                            have a strong impact on forested areas of the
                                            country, which significantly overlap with areas
                                            belonging to indigenous and Afro-descendent
                                            peoples; 59% of the country’s forests are found in
                                            indigenous and Afro-descendant territories.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) will
                                            apply considering that the REDD+ strategy
                                            involves work both within existing protected areas
                                            as well as other forest habitats of varying
                                            significance. The SESA evaluated the possible risks
                                            associated with strategic options on forest habitats
                                            within protected areas as well as other sensitive
                                            forest habitats under private or communal control.
                                            The ESMF includes provisions to assess possible
                                            impacts prior to any actions being undertaken on
                                            the ground.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           The policy on Forests (OP/BP 4.36) will apply
                                            considering the importance of REDD+ as part of
                                            Nicaragua’s long term forest and environmental
                                            management programs and due to the great


                              Page 4 of 7
                                                     importance of forests to the livelihoods and well-
                                                     being of local communities, indigenous people and
                                                     afro-descendant people. During the preparation
                                                     phase, forestry and rural development initiatives
                                                     associated with REDD+ were evaluated and the
                                                     lessons incorporated in the design. Key social and
                                                     environmental risks and potential impacts
                                                     associated with REDD+ are considered in the
                                                     ESMF including any initiatives that involve
                                                     plantations or forest management activities
                                                     consistent with policy provisions regarding
                                                     certification or time-bound measures to achieve
                                                     such standards by small-holders.
Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes            The policy on Pest Management (OP 4.09) is
                                                     triggered since it is conceivable that some forest
                                                     management practices may involve pesticide use.
                                                     The ESMF establishes that should a project activity
                                                     entail the use of pesticides it will follow that
                                                     established in Law 274 (Basic Law for the
                                                     Regulation and Control of Pesticides and Toxic,
                                                     Dangerous or Other Similar Substances) with
                                                     special attention given to the follow-up and support
                                                     to Integrated Crop Management Plan (MIC) and
                                                     Integrated Pest Management Plan (MIP).
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes           The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
                                                     4.11) is triggered given the uncertainty regarding
                                                     the exact location of activities to be carried out
                                                     under the REDD+ Strategy. The ESMF includes
                                                     specific provisions to assess the potential impacts
                                                     on forests, sacred valleys or landscapes considered
                                                     to have historical or cultural significance prior to
                                                     any activities being undertaken on the ground.
                                                     These are supported inter alia by Decree No. 1142,
                                                     Protection of the Cultural Wealth of the Nation Law
                                                     and Decree 142, which establishes that the
                                                     Archaeological, Historical and Artistic Monuments
                                                     belong to the State.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes            This policy was triggered due to the project being
                                                     implemented in areas with the presence of
                                                     indigenous peoples. In addition, the project has the
                                                     objective of building capacities that will bring
                                                     benefits to local authorities, including those in
                                                     indigenous communities. The SESA was carried out
                                                     during the Readiness phase focusing on the
                                                     Caribbean Coast, the priority REDD+ region for
                                                     Nicaragua considering a high incidence of
                                                     indigenous peoples’, with the aim of identifying
                                                     main issues and providing recommendations for
                                                     REDD+ design. The ESMF has been under

                                       Page 5 of 7
                                                    preparation by GoN in coordination with the World
                                                    Bank, and will include an Indigenous Peoples
                                                    Planning Framework (IPPF) that will be developed
                                                    in a culturally appropriate way in compliance with
                                                    the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP. 4.10) for
                                                    addressing potential issues arising from specific
                                                    investments during the implementation of the
                                                    REDD+ Strategy. The IPPF will ensure the
                                                    mitigation of potential negative impacts of REDD+
                                                    interventions.
                                                    The IPPF is aligned with the Caribbean Coast
                                                    Development Strategy as well as Law 445 and
                                                    Convention 169 in matters of consultations of
                                                    indigenous communities and people. The process
                                                    dialogue and consultation called by regional and
                                                    central government authorities to inform, consult
                                                    and take contributions of different participants on
                                                    the issue, among them peasant farmers; producers;
                                                    youths and women; the Cabinets of the Family,
                                                    Community and Life; and the general population.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes           The SESA was also used to assess the risk of
                                                    potential restriction of access to natural resources or
                                                    involuntary resettlement due to the ENDE-REDD+
                                                    Strategy implementation. The SESA concluded that
                                                    during the implementation phase, the REDD+
                                                    Strategy could lead to potential relocation and/or
                                                    land acquisition and also potentially restrict access
                                                    to natural resources.
                                                    An Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                    (RPF) is being prepared which will provide
                                                    procedures to manage impacts from potential
                                                    relocation and/or land acquisition cases resulting
                                                    from the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy.
                                                    The Process Framework (PF) is being prepared by
                                                    the government of Nicaragua. The PF will include
                                                    measures to be implemented in cases of restriction
                                                    of access to natural resources that arise from the
                                                    implementation of the REDD+ Strategy. It will
                                                    also ensure participation of IPs in the design,
                                                    implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the
                                                    management plan, so that IPs share equitably in the
                                                    benefits of the parks and protected areas. The draft
                                                    RPF and PF are being prepared as a specific chapter
                                                    of the ESMF. With additional financing MARENA
                                                    will reinforce and conclude both frameworks.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No            This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                    support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                    nor will it support other investments which rely on
                                                    the services of existing dams.


                                      Page 6 of 7
    Projects on International Waterways                  No                Nicaragua has two rivers delimiting international
    OP/BP 7.50                                                             borders (Coco and San Juan) and the REDD+
                                                                           Strategy does not contemplate any action that will
                                                                           adversely modify the quality, quantity, course or
                                                                           flow of its waters. To the contrary, the actions
                                                                           planned for reducing deforestation and forest
                                                                           degradation will in fact potentially improve water
                                                                           quality.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                No                The REDD+ strategy covers the country as a whole
                                                                           including border areas. The activities of the
                                                                           REDD+ Strategy are located within the national
                                                                           territory, and no situation of territorial conflict with
                                                                           other countries is envisioned.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        26-Jan-2018
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the         safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific      studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage       ISDS.
        The original grant to support the ENDE REDD+ process produced a SESA out of which a draft ESMF
    was prepared. The ESMF includes an Involuntary Resettlement Plan and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
    Framework. This Additional Financing will contribute to finessing these documents and prepare a final
    ESMF, including the Environmental Management Plan and the Integrated Pest Management Plan, and
    Indigenous People Plan. Also, the Additional Financing will be used to carry out the process of free, prior,
    and informed consultation of ENDE-REDD+, the mechanism for Distribution of Benefits of the ENDE
    REDD+ that would be culturally adequate and finalize the Grievance Mechanism. All these instruments will
    be used for the preparation of the Emissions Reduction Program of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua


V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Augusto Garcia
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Ivan Matias Besserer Rayas                   Date: 24-Jan-2018
                                              (SA)
    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Angela G. Armstrong (PMGR) Date: 26-Jan-2018


    1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
    persons.




                                                         Page 7 of 7
