INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC15397
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Philippines                Project ID:   P153268
Project Name:   Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P 153268)
Task Team       Alan F. Townsend,Roberto La Rocca
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Nov-2015                Estimated     31-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE02                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
(20%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      35.39            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
a         Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                           3.00
Philippines - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                  32.39
Total                                                           35.39
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The overarching objective of the proposed trust fund (TF) is to assist the Philippines in increasing
access to electricity in a sustainable manner. The TF will do this by 1) enhancing governance and
regulatory effectiveness of key sector institutions through technical assistance (TA); and 2)


﻿facilitating the flow of additional private investment into rural electrification and renewable energy
through technical assistance and output-based subsidies.
C. Project Description
The TF technical assistance (C9.5-million) and targeted subsidy program (l 9.5-million)
complements the Government's ECPCG program, the expansion of which is supported by the CTF-
financed PHRED project. GPOBA is additionally contributing $3-million to the solar home systems
subsidy component. The subsidy components will be managed by LGUGC which is experienced in
a      safeguards compliance because of past project experience with the Bank. Their institutional capacity
will be supplemented by using specialist consultants during due diligence and later, at the monitoring
stage.
The TA package focuses primarily on NEA and ERC. Both have critical roles to play in the sector
and are intimately involved in the DOE's ECPCG program, which provides guarantees to
commercial banks to cover some of their risks of lending to ECs. It is designed to contribute to long-
term capacity strengthening and to help the agencies make contributions to the short and medium
term goals of DOE's access and renewable energy programs. The TA activities include: (i) Capacity
Building of NEA's Office of Renewable Energy Development (ORED); (ii) EC Project Development
and Management ( 1-million); (iii) Enhancing EC Service Delivery ( 1-million); (iv) Bangsamoro
EC Capacity Building (Cl.5-million); (v) Implementing the Key Performance and Governance
Standards (KPGS) System (C2-million); Developing the Inter-Agency GIS RE4RE Planning Systems
(C2-million); ERC Technical Assistance (El.5-million); and Pre-Paid Metering Study and small pilot
(C0.5-million). It should be noted that ERC is not an environmental regulator and is not the agency
primarily responsible for safeguards compliance. NEA, the ECs, and private companies that would
participate in the subsidy programs will be primarily responsible for compliance, with LGUGC, as
program manager of the subsidy window, checking that safeguards provisions have been complied
with both at the due diligence stage and during implementation. This approach was folllowed in a
previous project in which LGUGC, as manager of a DOE guarantee facility, undertook due diligence
on EC network investment plans and then monitored compliance through investment project
implementation.
The proposed grant would also fund two output-based subsidy components. First, the DOE's PV
Mainstreaming program (E12.5-million) which targets rural electricity service providers - Electric
Cooperatives (ECs) and Qualified Third Parties (QTPs) - providing performance-based grants to
accelerate electrification via solar home systems. Under this component, a partial subsidization of
30,000 systems is being targeted. GPOBA funding of a further $3-million will support 7,000
additional connections. Second, support to small network solar power (C7-million) with output-
based subsidies designed to bring their costs to the purchasing utility to equivalency with the least-
cost (usually coal-fired) alternative generation option. Under this component, a partial subsidization
of 14 megawatts of installed capacity is being targeted.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The outputs and outcome of the technical assistance component of the project will support the
development and rehabilitation of renewable energy facilities and equipment and related support
services in the entire Philippines. Specific locations of the output-based subsidy projects have not yet
been identified specifically and subsidy allocation will be demand driven. Project locations will be
in the franchise areas of a subset of the country's 120 electric cooperatives.


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
NEA and LGUGC have limited capacities in planning and implementing safeguards measures. To
address this, a safeguards orientation workshop specifically tailored for them has been conducted by
the Bank. Specific weaknesses particularly in staffing for safeguards have been identified in NEA
and LGUGC. These will be used in the planning and conduct of measures to address gaps. For
staffing, focal persons have been identified by both institutions; environmental and social
development consultants will augment the work force as needed. Partner institutions including ECs,
a      financial institutions, renewable energy developers and independent power providers, private solar
power developers will be asked to participate in WB safeguards forum and other trainings which are
expected to become available in the proposed Philippine Learning Center on Safeguards. LGUGC
and NEA will organize regular workshops and symposia with its potential clients -to regularly
update them as part of their marketing strategy. Safeguards requirements described in the ESSF for
PHRED to enhance project sustainability will be included in these discussions. On the job support
using learning by doing activities will be provided by the task team to help the institutions and its
subproject proponent especially in the first year of operations. Additionally, LGUGC will have
access to technical assistance resources provided by GPOBA.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gerardo F. Parco (GENDR)
Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project supports the National Electrification
OP/BP 4.01                              Administration (NEA) and Department of Energy
(DOE) efforts to work with the electric cooperatives
(ECs) on the expansion of electrification and meeting
the demand for energy in an affordable, equitable
and sustainable manner. One investment component
is to provide subsidies for the installation and
operation of solar home systems which require
battery maintenance and, eventually, need proper
disposal management. Likewise, solar farms may
entail the clearing of tracts of land to make way for
open spaces for setting up of the photovoltaic (PV)
panels and its attendant facilities. Given the potential
environmental impacts that may be generated need to
be addressed, this policy is triggered.
The team proposes a Category FI for this project.
The LGUGC will act as a financial intermediary in
this project. Investments will be supported through
output-based aid mechanisms, with subsidies
allocated via competitive mechanisms. Safeguard
compliance requirements will be clear to all bidders
as a part of the bid process, which will be structured


﻿as a competition for subsidy allocation. Sub-projects
which are ultimately financed will arise from this
process, making this project a good fit with the FI
category.
The ESSF and RPF of the PHRED project will be
applied in the ASEP. The ESSF will be updated to
include specific provisions and procedures in
handling and disposal of used batteries. ASEP will
finance only products that are quality-certified by
Lighting Global, which means that only modern,
lithium ion batteries and LED lights will be financed.
Battery disposal is less challenging for Li-on
technology than for older, lead-acid varieties; LED
lights, unlike CFLs, contain no mercury and thus
really have no significant environmental issues
associated with them. The Philippines has
regulations specific to the storage, transport,
treatment and disposal of toxic and hazardous waste
under Republic Act 6969 or the Toxic and Hazardous
Waste Act. TSD facilities (Treatment Storage and
Disposal) have been accredited by the Environmental
Management Bureau throughout the Philippines.
Collection centers for batteries are located in most
major towns and cities. Improper disposal of
batteries is unlikely due to the opportunity of turning
these in for cash.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will not cause any degradation or
conversion of natural habitats as defined under the
safeguard policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project will not degrade critical forest areas as
defined under the safeguard policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           Electric cooperatives do not use chemicals for
vegetation control.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          The project will not adversely affect sites with
OP/BP 4.11                               archeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
or unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         There is a possibility that IPs are present in the
4.10                                     project area. The IPs may be positively or adversely
affected by investments related to the subsidy
components. The IP Policy Framework formulated
for PHRED shall apply to this project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Installing solar home systems, and prepaid metering
BP 4.12                                  will most likely not require land outside those
already owned by homeowners who will benefit
from the project. Limited land acquisition may be


﻿required for the rural network solar plant. The Land
Acquisition and Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Policy Framework formulated for PHRED shall also
apply to cases that may trigger the policy on
involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project does not involve any dams.
 Projects on International  No           The project does not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not be located in any known
BP 7.60                                   disputed areas as defined in the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
There are no safeguards specific studies needed.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alan F. Townsend,Roberto La Rocca
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 21-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Dejan R. Ostojic (PMGR)                   Date: 22-Dec-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


