INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14152
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Haiti                      Project ID:   P155201
Project Name:    Municipal Development and Urban Resilience Project (P155201)
Task Team        Elisa Muzzini
Leader(s):
Estimated        02-Feb-2016                Estimated     26-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU10                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%), Sub-national
government administration (25%)
Theme(s):        Natural disaster management (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (40%), Municipal governance and institution buildin g (15%), Climate
change (15%), Urban planning and housing policy (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      37.50             Total Bank Financing:    30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
IDA Grant                                                        30.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                      7.50
Total                                                            37.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve delivery of resilient infrastructure, local services
and urban management in the metropolitan area of Cap-Haitien.


﻿C. Project Description
The Project will contribute to the sustainable and resilient urban development of the metropolitan
region of Cap Haitien through a combination of investment support and capacity building. The
Project will focus on the six municipalities of the metropolitan regionof Cap Haitien, benefiting the
populations of Cap Haitien (244,660 inhabitants), Limonade (50,150 inhabitants), Quartier Morin
(24,881 inhabitants), Plaine du Nord (37,518 inhabitants), Acul du Nord (50,884 inhabitants) and
Milot (29,094 inhabitants). The Project will include four main components:
Component 1: Investment Support and Capacity Building for Metropolitan Local Authorities
The component aims at providing investment and technical support to municipalities in the
metropolitan region with the objective of enhancing the capacity of the municipalities to plan, fund,
and implement resilient infrastructures and local services and coordinate delivery of services at the
metropolitan level through on-the-job training. The component also aims at reducing disparities in
service delivery and capacity among Metropolitan Local Authorities (MLAs) and promoting
sustainable and resilient growth opportunities in peripheral municipalities of the metropolitan region,
thus contributing to a more balanced spatial development pattern within the metropolitan region of
Cap-Haitien. The component will fund the following three inter-linked sub-components: (i)
investment support for municipalities; (ii) support to metropolitan development planning and
strategies, and (iii) institutional strengthening and capacity building for municipalities. Resilience
considerations will be mainstreamed in all sub-components.
Sub-component 1-1: Investment support for municipalities
This sub-component aims at strengthening municipal capacity to deliver local services through
targeted investment support and on-the-job training. To do so, this sub-component would fund a line
of financing (grant) and implementation support for small scale municipal investments (sub-projects)
identified based on local priorities and implemented under a number of conditions and incentives
agreed with the MLAs to ensure the sustainability and resilience of the investments, and full
alignment with metropolitan and local plans. The investment support will help MLAs to (i) respond
effectively to local demand for better and more resilient services and infrastructures and gain greater
credibility with their constituencies through immediate and visible service delivery improvements,
and (ii) support implementation of selected pilot inter-municipal projects of metropolitan relevance
The design of the line of financing will build on the experience of the Investment Fund of Local
Authorities (FICT) under the pilot Appui d la Gouvernance et d l'Investissement Local en Haiti
(AGIL) (Euro 5.5 million) funded by the European Union in 16 municipalities in the North and
North-East Departments. One of the emerging lessons learnt from AGIL is the importance of
providing strong technical support to the municipalities in the implementation of works. The line of
financing would comprise two complementary windows: (i) investment support for small-scale
municipal investments. The objective of this window would be to build local capacity to implement
resilient urban development sub-projects through on-the-job training. (ii) investment support for pilot
inter-municipal investments. The objective of this window is to incentivize municipalities to take
incremental steps toward inter-jurisdictional voluntary cooperation at the metropolitan level by
supporting MLAs in the joint identification, preparation, and implementation of small-scale, inter-
municipal pilot investments - with potential demonstration effects on the benefits of metropolitan
coordination. Possible inter-municipal projects that could be financed under this window include
rehabilitation of inter-municipal roads, solid waste management, and disaster preparedness plans.
Municipal sub-projects would be identified by MLAs in line with needs identified in the Local


﻿Investment Plans, and based on conditions, eligibility criteria and incentives set in the Operational
Manual. The project will draw on municipal implementation capacity and participatory mechanisms
developed under the Cultural Heritage Preservation and Tourism Sector Support Project and the
Urban Community Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR) for the selection of the investments.
O
It is expected that the first batch of municipal investments will be identified during project
preparation.
Sub-component 1-2: Support to Metropolitan Development Planning and Strategy
This sub-component will support strategy and planning for resilient metropolitan development to
provide a coherent strategic framework for the development and implementation of local plans. The
subcomponent will finance the following activities: (i) update and validation by local constituencies
of the existing metropolitan strategy for Cap Haitien (Esquisse de Plan d'Urbanisme) prepared in
2013 by the Ministere de la Planification et de la Cooperation Externe (MPCE); (ii) development of a
metropolitan plan with associated investment and financing plan incorporating resilient
considerations; and (iii) detailed studies for selected priority resilient metropolitan services as
identified in the metropolitan plan. In the absence of a regional metropolitan agency, it is expected
that the departmental office of the MPCE in the North, which led the preparation of the 2013 plan,
will continue coordinating the metropolitan planning function with municipalities. Special attention
will be paid to the governance and institutional arrangements of the metropolitan planning process,
and participatory process will developed to ensure ownership of the participating municipalities in
the metropolitan planning process.
Sub-component 1-3: Institutional strengthening and capacity building for municipalities
This sub-component will support capacity building for institutional strengthening of municipalities in
the priority areas of (i) municipal development and resilient spatial planning and (ii) municipal
finance. Capacity building would aim at strengthening capacity of the municipalities to provide
sustainable local services, with an emphasis on resilient planning for urban expansion. Given the
significant difference in capacity and needs across the MLAs, a customized capacity building
program will be developed for each municipality, while aiming to bring all MLAs to a minimum
level of institutional capacity. The delivery of capacity building will draw on local institutions (e.g.
the University of Limonade) to the extent possible to ensure the sustainability of the outcomes.
o       Progress in the implementation of the capacity building agenda will be rewarded with a higher
allocation under the line of financing for small-scale municipal investments. The capacity building
program will build on the Programme d'Intervention Nord/Nord-Est (PINNE), a flagship initiative of
the Ministry of Interior and Local Authorities (MICT) covering 16 municipalities. F ive of the six
MLAs receive support from PINNE (except Plaine du Nord). PINNE aims at strengthening
municipal administrative structures by funding the recruitment and training of competitively hired
key professional municipal posts based on local needs. The capacity building will also complement
the LOKAL+ project ($19.8 million, Jan 2013-2018), funded by USAID in 9 municipalities in Haiti,
including 3 MLAs (Acul du Nord, Cap-Haitien and Limonade). LOKAL+ provides technical support
to municipalities to generate a sustainable increase in local own-source revenues.
Component 2: Investments in Vulnerability Reduction and Climate Resilient Urban Infrastructures
The component aims at building the physical resilience of Cap Haitien metropolitan area through
vulnerability interventions in selected high risk areas. This includes urban watershed restoration and
river bank stabilization interventions, and strengthening institutional capacity to maintain urban


﻿infrastructure. These interventions builds on the results from a detailed flood risk assessment of Cap
Haitien, conducted in 2014 under the Emergency Bridge Reconstruction and Vulnerability Reduction
Project (P114292). The component will fund the following three sub-components: (i) integrated
urban "ravines" management; (ii) investments in flood mitigation management, and (iii) investments
O
in resilient infrastructure.
Sub-component 2-1: Integrated Urban "Ravines" Management
The objective of this sub-component is to pilot risk mitigation interventions in specific ravines of
Cap Haitien in the context of an integrated urban watershed management approach. Specific
activities identified include: (i) the preparation of an urban watershed management plan (with flood
and landslide risk analysis using high resolution data already collected under the on-going IDA
financed DRM and Reconstruction project), (ii) the identification of ravine corridors and critical
points for interventions, (iii) upper watershed restoration activities to reduce storm water runoff, and
(iv) lower watershed interventions such as slopes stabilization, canal cleaning and sediment
management, and protection of critical urban infrastructures. The sub-component will also support
the establishment of a service responsible for maintenance and cleaning of the cities' canals and
drainage systems and roads within the Direction D6partementale and/or the municipality, and in
coordination with the ongoing waste management inter-municipal project to better ensure the
sustainability and efficiency of the mitigation interventions' implementation.
Sub-component 2-2: Investments in Flood Mitigation Management
This sub-component aims at protecting the populations living in the proximity of the Rivire Haut du
Cap from flooding, and stop illegal urbanization along the river banks. To do so, this sub-component
will include (i) the development of an integrated flood management plan for the metropolitan area of
Cap Haitien, (ii) the cleaning of the river from solid waste and sediments, and (iii) the stabilization of
the river banks with infrastructure works and its occupation with public spaces.
Cleaning operations associated with removal of materials accumulated in the Rivire Haut du Cap
will be carefully designed to avoid the redirection of the removed material towards the river's
upstream areas or the estuarine water basin of Bassin Rodo where land is illegally reclaimed with
solid waste as well as to ensure proper handling and treatment of the removed materials. Sub-
component
2-3: Investments in Resilient Infrastructure
Within the designated metropolitan region, the proposed project would support a balanced urban
metropolitan development by financing complementary medium-scale resilient infrastructure
investments to benefit local communities such as public structural investments at the communal
levels pertaining to small urban equipment, water and sanitation facilities. This sub component
would also focus on specific locations of the transportation network that are known to be vulnerable
to erosion, flash floods, river overflows, and sea level rise, given their importance in terms of access
and connectivity to social and economic services such as health centers, airports, or domestic
markets.
Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response
The proposed Project includes a Contingent Emergency Response (CER) component, to respond
rapidly at the GoH's request in the event of an eligible emergency, including, the carrying out of


﻿emergency infrastructure reconstruction, rehabilitation and associated studies (Emergency Response
Activities). Disbursements would be made against a list of critical goods or the procurement of
goods, works, and consultant services required to support the immediate response and recovery needs
of the GoH. If not disbursed 24 months prior to the closing date, the resources will be reallocated to
O
U       other project components.
Component 4: Project Management and Implementation Support
This component would finance the costs associated with strengthening and developing the
institutional capacity for Project management, coordination, implementation, and monitoring and
evaluation, as well as costs associated with supporting the project implementing agencies.
Component 4 would be divided into two sub-components. Sub-component 4.1 would finance the
strengthening of UCP-DPC/MICT capacity for: (i) overall coordination of the Project including,
consolidation of financial and progress reports; and (b) management, coordination, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation of the municipal strengthening and emergency preparedness capacities
elements of the Project. Sub-component 4.2 would finance the strengthening of the capacity of the
UCE-MTPTC for management
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will take place in the Cap Haitien metropolitan region, which includes coastal areas; low-
lying areas prone to flooding; and elevated zones surrounding the downtown area. While heavily
degraded from an environmental point of view, some areas still harbor important biodiversity. Also,
Cap Haitien is the original capital of Haiti, and one of the oldest towns in the Caribbean, with strong
historical and cultural significance.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Borrower capacity for managing environmental and resettlement aspects is moderately weak. One of
the two executing agencies (UCE) has experience implementing Bank-funded projects and is familiar
with Bank policies. However, the preparation of the Framework documents and implementation of
mitigation measures will require specific follow up and training. Robust solutions for disposal of
solid waste in particular will require special attention, as this issue remains problematic in the project
area.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ash Gurkan (GSURR)
Nicolas Kotschoubey (GEN04)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The policy is triggered because potential
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental impacts are expected from
components 1 (upgrading of local market facilities,
road works, development of open spaces) and 2
(works within ravines to control flooding). Key
impacts associated to these components include
construction impacts related to earthworks, noise,
dust, sourcing and disposal of construction waste,


﻿etc.; and health and safety of workers and the public,
including traffic disruption.
Disposal of debris from ravines, which consists of
municipal solid waste (MSW), gravel and soil, will
have to be done in a designated, controlled disposal
site. The disposal of this material in the natural
environment, and especially in a sensitive habitat,
wetland, forest, along the shore, in or near a water
body, will not be acceptable.
Improving drainage of ravines, rivers or wetlands
may have negative environmental impacts to the
hydrology of these water bodies if the natural
hydrology is not considered. Specifically, the
ecology of the Bassin Rodo in Cap HaYtien is not
well known, and altering its hydrology will require
specific studies. During sediment removal, it is
important not to remove or damage aquatic plants,
which are critical to absorb organic pollutants and
provide oxygen.
Finally, however, some of the risks that the project
will address will also reduce environmental
liabilities, for example, the project will remove waste
from ravines, which will also improve the urban
environment, and the project will stabilize slopes in
the watershed and along riverbanks, which will have
environmental benefits.
As the exact nature and location of some of the
works remains unknown, a "Framework" approach
will be adopted by the Project, in which each sub-
project implemented will be screened according to
the Framework. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be used to
screen each sub-project and determine what
measures and documents are required to mitigate any
environmental, social, cultural, and resettlement
impacts. Once the sites are known, site-specific
Environmental Assessments or Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared,
according to the Framework, and implemented by the
client prior to the start of any construction.
ESMPs or Environmental Assessments (EAs) for the
Bassin Rodo and for the ravines will be prepared in


﻿accordance to the ESMF. ESMPs and EAs will cover
environmental, natural habitat and cultural resource
impacts. Any work within the Bassin Rodo will
require taking into account the existing wetland
hydrology, aquatic plants, wildlife, unplanned
settlement in the Bassin, and a bridge that was built
at the mouth of the wetland. The works contract for
the Bassin will specify exactly the actions to carry
out, including how to dispose of excess material, and
how to minimize the removal of aquatic plants.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Any works from Components 1 or 2 next to or within
Bassin Rodo, a wetland near Cap Haitien city center,
which provides habitat to Caribbean flamingos, may
have impacts on this natural habitat. Although the
ecology of the Bassin Rodo is heavily degraded in
places, and not well known, some parts of the Bassin
are still relatively unspoiled, and will require specific
studies. Any work within the Bassin Rodo will
require taking into account the existing wetland
hydrology, aquatic plants, wildlife, unplanned
settlement in the Bassin, and a bridge that was built
at the mouth of the wetland (NB the bridge was
constructed independently, and was not financed by
the Bank).
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         The project could have impacts on mangrove forests
around the municipalities by coastal works and other
investments. Since not all investments are known at
appraisal, the ESMF will include screening,
assessment, and management measures for Forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not finance any pesticides, nor will it
attempt to control pests, or agricultural pests.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         While activities to be carried out under the Project
OP/BP 4.11                               are not expected to impact any known cultural
heritage sites, impacts on physical cultural resources
could occur, as Cap Haitien and surrounding
municipalities are over 300 years old, and contain
some historical monuments and buildings. If
restoration of physical cultural resources is required
under the project, for example of ancient bridges
over the ravines (Component 2), this will have to be
done in a historically acceptable way.
Also, technical specifications for works will include
"chance find procedures" to be followed in the event
that culturally significant materials are discovered
during the execution of works.


﻿The ESMF will include screening, assessment, and
management measures for physical cultural
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           The policy is not triggered as there are no indigenous
4.10                                      people in Haiti.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The overall social impacts are expected to be
BP 4.12                                   positive, particularly linked flood prevention and
mitigation, better access to infrastructure services,
and improved community health and safety as a
result of ravine rehabilitation. Potential negative
social impacts include land acquisition, resettlement,
loss of economic livelihoods particularly for street
vendors who are common and widespread in urban
areas in Haiti. Other social risks are linked to illegal
settlers and shortage of safe alternative land sites to
resettle people in congested urban areas such as Cap
Haitien. Temporary adverse impacts on access to
basic services are possible, should the dismantled
structures include schools, clinics, electric poles,
water points etc. (all of which will be rebuilt under
the project). Land acquisition and resettlement
impacts could potentially be irreversible. To
mitigate some of these risks, the project will rule out
any sub-project that will likely result in significant
land acquisition/resettlement/economic loss of
livelihood impact. The project will retain an
experienced social safeguards specialist based in the
project site who will be in charge of monitoring
social and resettlement impacts for the project.
Local government representatives will also be trained
as part of overall capacity-building activities on
social and environmental safeguards.
The rehabilitation of urban infrastructure, such as the
rehabilitation of ravines, riverbanks, and roads,
public squares etc. may result in land acquisition,
possible involuntary resettlement of affected people,
and/or temporary or permanent loss of economic
sources of livelihood. The exact location of the
works remains unknown, and the feasibility studies
to identify the sites are just starting which will only
be completed in the next few months. Due to this
fact, a "Framework" approach will be adopted.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
prepared, consulted on and disclosed before
appraisal. Once the sites are known, site-specific
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)- including


﻿cumulative RAPs- will be prepared and implemented
by the client. Prior to the start of any construction,
the affected people must have received their
compensation, relocated or re-housed under
conditions equal to or better than their conditions
before the investments. The first draft of the ESMF
and RPF will be ready December 15. Consultations
are scheduled to take place the second week of
January and the ESMF/RPF will be finalized before
the end of January.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           No dams will be financed, or included, in the project.
Projects on International    No           The policy is not triggered as there are no
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways under the project.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The policy is not triggered as there are no disputed
BP 7.60                                   territories under the project.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The first draft of the ESMF and RPF will be ready December 15. Consultations are scheduled to
take place the second week of January and the ESMF/RPF will be finalized before the end of
January.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elisa Muzzini
O
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                   Date: 24-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Catalina Marulanda (PMGR)                 Date: 17-Dec-2015
*       Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


