INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12438
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        SriLanka                  Project ID:  P151916
Project Name: Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)
Task Team       Saurav Dev Bhatta
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-May-2015               Estimated    25-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Pre-primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (90%), Other human development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     50.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               50.00
Total                                                                     50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective is to enhance equitable access to and improve the
quality of ECD services.
3. Project Description
Introduction
The Government of Sri Lanka has an embryonic ECD program (framework) encapsulated in
Page 1 of 15


﻿different policy and plan documents, including the National Plan of Action for Children of Sri Lanka
2013-17 and the Sri Lanka National Budget which includes a three-year plan. Drawing upon these
policy and plan documents, GoSL is currently in the process of finalizing a National Plan for Early
Childhood Care and Development (NPECCD), 2015-2020.
The draft NPECCD provides a situation analysis of the sector, identifies key issues and challenges,
outlines strategic areas of focus, and presents planned interventions aimed at addressing the
challenges faced by the sector. It identifies equitable access to and quality of ECD programs as the
most important key issues in the sector. In order to address these issues, it proposes interventions in
the following strategic areas: (1) policies, systems and structure of early childhood development; (2)
access to ECD; (3) quality improvement of ECD; (4) health, nutrition and safety; and (5) monitoring/
regulation of ECD. NPECCD provides the foundation for the proposed IDA-financed operation.
The ECD Project supports some of the key interventions outlined in the five strategic areas of
NPECCD with the objective of enhancing equitable access to and improving the quality of ECD
services for 3-5 year old children. The Project supported interventions are structured around two
components: (1) expanding and strengthening the delivery of ECD services, and (2) project
management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).
Description of Project components
Component 1: Expanding and strengthening the delivery of ECD services (estimated cost US$ 45.0
million)
This component aims to improve the provision of ECD services in Sri Lanka by: (i) improving the
quality of ECD provision across the country, (ii) expanding equitable access to ECD services across
the country, and (iii) improving the quality of ECD in the Plantation sector.
Subcomponent 1.1: Improving the quality of ECD provision (estimated cost US$ 28.0 million)
o
In order to improve the quality of ECD provision in Sri Lanka, the Project will support quality
management, improvement of ECD facilities, provision of teaching-learning materials, and the
training of ECD teachers, teacher assistants, and trainers.
Quality management
The Project will finance the revision of the government's curriculum framework and child
development standards that are meant to guide the teaching-learning processes in ECD centers
throughout the country. It will also support the development of age-appropriate teaching-learning
materials for 3-5 year old children and teachers in the Sinhalese, Tamil and English languages, and
the acquisition of these materials by ECD centers. The development of these materials will be guided
by the above curriculum framework and development standards endorsed by the government. To
measure the improvements made towards meeting development standards, all project-supported
centers will be required to conduct annual child development assessments.
The Project will also support the development of a compact set of prioritized minimum quality
standards for ECD centers based on the government's existing quality standards. Project support for
ECD facility improvement discussed below will put special emphasis on helping centers meet these
prioritized standards. In addition, the Project will support the establishment and consolidation of a
provincial ECD center registration system in each province. It will coordinate with the PCs to ensure
Page 2 of 15


﻿some degree of consistency in the registration systems across Provinces. These systems will be
based on national quality standards, and will have the ability to grade ECD centers according to their
service quality.
O
The Project will also support the development of ECD resource centers (that would include library
and other resources to support ECD practitioners) at the provincial level by upgrading or extending
existing facilities. These resource centers may also include facilities for conducting small workshops
and training programs, and will be linked with specific ECD centers which can be used as model
centers for good ECD practices.
Facility improvement grants to existing ECD centers
The quality of physical infrastructure and equipment in ECD centers is among the key determinants
of the quality of ECD services. Most ECD centers are resource constrained, and are inadequate in
terms of basic infrastructure, play equipment, and teaching learning materials. Government support
for the improvement of center facilities is currently very limited. In order to help improve the
physical quality of center facilities, around 6,000 eligible state- and non-state-run ECD centers across
the country will receive support in the form of grants for minor works and for upgrading equipment
and furniture. Beneficiary centers that do not meet the government's prioritized minimum quality
standards will be required to focus the support on meeting these standards. It should be noted,
however, that even with the assistance provided under the Project, enabling most of the centers to
meet the prioritized minimum quality standards will be a challenge due to the limited availability of
resources.
Support for minor civil works will focus on construction of toilets, water connections for sanitation,
and refurbishment of facilities. Facility refurbishment can involve, inter alia, enhancement of
disability access; repairs of roofs, doors and windows; installation of water tanks; construction of
fences; cleaning up play areas; and construction of room partitions. Centers located in rented private
premises will not be eligible for refurbishment support, but will be eligible to receive learning
materials, consumables and play equipment. The broad categories of equipment, consumables and
furniture that can been provided to centers by the Project include play area equipment, toys, water
filters, safety equipment, equipment for children with special needs, equipment for administrative
support, consumable classroom materials, and basic furniture for students and teachers.
The Project will target ECD centers serving poorer families and locations by allowing only centers
charging monthly tuition fees below a pre-specified maximum amount to apply for support. The
eligible centers would need to have been in operation for at least two years , and should meet pre-
specified minimum requirements for building space and staffing. Details on the eligibility criteria for
ECD centers will be provided in the OM. Project funds for facility improvement must give particular
attention to the requirements of children with special needs.
Interested eligible centers will submit proposals to the SMCA ECCD divisional office requesting
support for a set of activities/equipment/materials that fit within the broad categories of works and
equipment discussed above. The total estimated cost in the proposals must be equal to or less than a
pre-determined maximum amount. The application must also include detailed data on the state of
their facilities. In order to make the application process efficient, each proposal will be required to
follow a simple, pre-defined format which will help the applicant to easily document the center's
status and key needs, estimate itemized costs, and present their activities timeline. As part of the
proposal evaluation process, each applicant will be visited by an ECCD officer to ensure that the
Page 3 of 15


﻿requests made in the proposal are consistent with the needs of the center and are prioritized to help
the center in meeting the government's quality standards. While the support will cover centers across
the country over the Project period, priority will be given to centers in poor, remote and/or
underserved areas during the initial years. Activities/items under this sub-component will follow
O
community driven development (CDD) based procurement.
In order to enhance transparency and accountability, each beneficiary center will be required to
publicly display information on the amount and the results of the support received. All participating
centers will be also be required to have a functioning parent committee which will assist the ECD
teacher(s) in developing the grant proposal and implementing the approved work plan. Grants under
this sub-component will be distributed by the PMU.
Provision of teaching-learning materials.
The Project will support the provision of age-appropriate, high-quality teaching-learning materials to
both state- and non-state-run centers across the country . SMCA has already identified a list of
essential educational materials for ECD centers, which are on display in the ministry. These materials
include durable wooden toys, blocks and shapes, different types of puzzles, shapes, and measuring
devices such as scales and clocks. Using this list as the basis, the Project will prepare a standard
package of play-oriented educational materials for distribution. In addition, the Project will also
identify a list of around 100 age-appropriate picture books, storybooks and other reading materials in
Singhalese, Tamil and English that will be distributed to these centers as a package. This reading
package, which can include board books, cloth books, and ordinary paper books, will be made
available in Singhalese, Tamil, English, or in a mix of languages. Interested ECD centers must
submit a request for the packag es to the SMCA ECCD officers. SMCA will procure the packages
centrally and make arrangements for their distribution to the centers.
Training of ECD teachers, ECD teacher assistants, and trainers
The Project will support the development and delivery of training programs for ECD teachers,
teacher assistants, and teacher trainers. As an initial essential step in the development of these
training programs, SMCA will prepare a comprehensive capacity development plan for these
stakeholders, which will guide the plans for the different types of training.
Training of ECD teachers and ECD teacher assistants: The Project will support the following
categories of training for ECD teachers and teacher assistants: (i) one to two-year long ECD
certificate and diploma programs; and (ii) short-term training. Both types of training programs will
be targeted mainly towards in-service as well as freshly recruited incoming teachers and teacher
assistants. The Project will prioritize training for ECD teachers from geographical areas which lag
behind others in terms of teacher training and qualifications .
Full tuition scholarships will be provided to qualified and financially needy teachers and teacher
assistants on a competitive basis to pursue certificate and diploma programs offered by selected
government universities and institutions . Interested candidates must submit their applications for
scholarships to SMCA. The beneficiaries will be selected by a scholarship committee that will
include government officials as well as independent experts. The Project will pay the selected
beneficiaries' tuition fees directly to the educational institutions in which they are admitted and
enrolled. In order to ensure that the scholarship candidates have access to programs relatively close
to where they reside, the institutions selected to participate in the scholarship scheme will, as a
Page 4 of 15


﻿group, have a physical presence in each of the nine provinces. Information on the available
scholarships will be disseminated widely to the target groups by both SMCA and the participating
institutions. Around 500 ECD teachers and teacher assistants will be supported during the Project
period.
Short-term training will be organized and delivered at the divisional level by ECCD officers with the
support of resource persons and other key stakeholders, including non-governmental and private
organizations working on ECD in Sri Lanka. As there are currently no clear guidelines for the length
and content of short-term training, there is a wide variation in the quality and quantity of training
across locations and time. Hence, before the commencement of short-term training, a standardized,
week-long, certified short-term training module will be developed centrally by the Open University
of Sri Lanka (OUSL), through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with SMCA. The
development of this module will also involve the preparation of a trainer's manual and a training
package for trainees consisting of a workbook and resource materials for future reference.
While the short-term training program will focus primarily on enhancing ECD domain knowledge
and developing pedagogical skills grounded in child development principles, it will also cover issues
related to child rights, child protection, health, nutrition, simple screening for developmental
problems, and approaches to facilitating the learning of children with special needs . Approximately
5,000 ECD teachers and teacher assistants will benefit from short-term training during the Project
period.
Training of trainers: Currently, Sri Lanka does not have any program for training trainers for
delivering short-term training in ECD. As a result, there is a near absence of properly trained
resource persons who can be engaged to support the delivery of short-term training. The training of
trainers (TOT) program supported by the Project will prepare the necessary pool of trainers to deliver
short-term training across the nation. Around 500 trainers will be trained through Project support
during the Project period.
The TOT module will be a 2-week training program that focuses on developing skills in planning,
designing and conducting training for ECD teachers and teacher assistants according to the week-
long short-term training package. In addition, it will include sessions on conducting parental
awareness and parenting education programs. The eligibility criteria for applicants to the TOT
o         program will include, inter alia, minimum educational qualifications (bachelor's degree) and sector
experience. The selection of candidates will be done on a competitive basis. Details on the eligibility
and selection criteria for TOT trainees will be provided in the Operations Manual (OM). The TOT
module will be developed by OUSL in consultation with the government's National Institute of
Education (NIE). Both OUSL and NIE will be responsible for delivering the TOT program. During
the development and implementation of the training module for trainers, OUSL and NIE will also
closely interact with and obtain inputs from organizations with practical experience and expertise in
specialized areas such care for children with special needs, health and nutrition, and child
protection. Apart from ageneral TOT for ECD teacher trainers, the Project will also support
specialized TOTs that focus on children with special needs .
Other related activities: To reinforce the skills emphasized in the short-term training program
through peer-to-peer learning, the Project will provide support to Divisional Secretary's Office for
organizing periodic interaction programs among teachers. Give n that children's smooth transition
from pre- to primary school depends partly on the primary school teachers' understanding of child
development principles, the Project will also support short orientation programs on holistic child
Page 5 of 15


﻿development for primary school teachers and head teachers. These programs will be organized and
conducted by ECCD officers in coordination with the Ministry of Education at the Provincial level.
Center-based health and nutrition support
The Project will also support efforts to improve knowledge of early childhood health and care
practices among both teachers and parents. For teachers, the Project will support the development
and implementation of health sub-modules as part of ECD teacher training programs. Parental
awareness programs supported by the Project will also include modules aimed at increasing parental
awareness of best practices in the health and care of young children.
Subcomponent 1.2: Expanding equitable access to ECD services (estimated cost US$ 7.0 million)
Both demand side and supply side interventions will be used to make ECD more accessible to all,
and to increase the enrollment of children in the 3-5 year old age group.
Demand side interventions
Parental awareness and interaction programs: Parental awareness programs are one group of
activities currently being carried out each year by SMCA. However, the scale of these activities is
small, program manuals do not exist, and program content is not well defined. As a result, the quality
and intensity of these programs vary widely across time and locations. The Project will support the
development of standardized program modules as well as the regular delivery of these programs
across the country. Targeted towards parents of children in the 0-5 year age group , these programs
will include awareness campaigns for enhancing parents' understanding of holistic childhood
development and making them familiar with available opportunities for enrolling their children in
ECD centers, interaction programs for guided parental experience, and parent education programs to
enhance parenting practices and behaviors .
The awareness campaigns will include the use of local print media, radio and television to reach out
to families and communities in their homes, as well as the use of workshops and group meetings to
bring families together for presentations and discussions on early childhood development. Interaction
programs for guided parental experience will include modeling sessions conducted by trained agents
a        where parents and children participate in a sequence of activities selected depending on the age of the
child and his or her development needs and are highly recommended for those children with some
developmental delay. Those sessions could be held at home or in group settings of same age children
using a learning-by-doing teaching approach. Parent education programs will be provided mainly in
group settings through workshops conducted by trained agents based on peer-learning strategies,
combining delivery of basic content and dialogue with parental experience sharing.
Standardized modules and relevant teaching-learning material, including resource materials for
parents, for these programs will be developed centrally by expert agencies or organizations
contracted by SMCA. The programs will be organized and delivered at the divisional level by
ECCD officers with the support of resource persons and other key stakeholders, including non-
governmental and private organizations working on ECD. To enhance the effectiveness of these
programs, the ECCD officers will also coordinate program delivery with local health and nutrition
campaigns targeting mothers and children.
Special support for poor students channeled through ECD centers: The Project will give grants to
Page 6 of 15


﻿fee-levying state- and non-state-run ECD centers for providing fee waivers to 3-5 year old children
from poor households. Beneficiaries will be selected by individual ECD centers and parents'
committees, with concurrence from the ECCD officer, primarily on the basis of their household
economic status. Priority will be given to poor children with special needs. Around 25,000 children
are expected to benefit from this scholarship scheme.
The tuition fee support will be channeled to the students through participating ECD centers. Each of
these centers will receive a total of Rs. 3000/month from the PMU to support poor students. Full
tuition fee waive rs equivalent in amount to the funds received must be provided to the children
selected for scholarships. As in the case of facility improvement grants, centers charging tuition fees
above a pre-specified maximum amount will not be eligible to apply for scholarship support.
Similarly, eligible centers must have a track record of having been in operation for at least two years
at the time of application. Other eligibility criteria for ECD centers, and guidelines for the selection
of scholarship recipients and funds utilization, will be detailed in the OM.
Scholarship funds will be provided to each participating ECD center by the PMU in four installments
spread out over the academic year, and will be conditional on the centers' submitting evidence of
regular attendance of the selected scholarship students. Each participating center will be required to
submit to the ECD officer basic profiles of individual scholarship recipients at the beginning of the
academic year and attendance records of these children at the end of each trimester.
The Project will also support the provision of transportation to ECD centers for orphanage children
who would like to attend a pre-school near the orphanages. The ECD officer in charge of that
particular pre-school will coordinate with the orphanage to arrange for transport facilities. Details
will be documented in the OM.
Supply side interventions
Establishment and extension of facilities in unserved and underserved areas: The Project will support
the establishment of new ECD facilities in unserved areas to enhance equitable access to ECD
services. Unserved and underserved areas, and gaps in ECD provision, will be identified through a
comprehensive mapping of ECD facilities and distribution of the 3-5 year old population. This
information, along with poverty mapping data, will be used to prioritize poor, unserved areas for the
a         construction of new facilities.
It is expected that the mapping exercise will be completed by SMCA by April 2016. The exact
locations for new Project supported centers will be determined on the basis of the mapping data and
requests from the different districts. Government-owned land for the construction of these facilities
will be identified and provided by PCs and local government authorities. Project support can also be
used to convert existing government-owned structures to ECD centers. In such cases, the Project will
provide funds to renovate these structures in accordance with SMCA's minimum standards for new
ECD facilities. The responsibility for managing all newly constructed ECD centers, including
financing teacher salaries, will lie with the PCs or the local government authorities. The teachers in
these centers will be eligible for teacher training support under the Project.
In underserved areas identified through the mapping exercise, the Project will support the extension
of existing state-run ECD centers to expand enrollment. The selection of beneficiary centers in these
areas will be done jointly by the SMCA district and divisional officers, PCs and local government
authorities.
Page 7 of 15


﻿All activities related to facility extension, new construction, and teacher recruitment for new centers
will be undertaken by the PCs and local government authorities. Basic furnishing, equipment and
teaching-learning materials for new Project supported centers will be provided by SMCA through the
O
DSOs. In total, the project will support the construction or extension of around 45 ECD centers
across the country, excluding centers in the Plantation sector.
Subcomponent 1.3: Improving the quality of ECD in the Plantation sector (estimated cost US$ 10
million)
T he Plantation sector, with its distinct, historically marginalized, resident worker population needs
special support to enhance the quality of ECD services. Unlike in the rest of the country where
SMCA plays the lead role in overseeing ECD related activities, social development programs-
including those targeted towards young children-in the Plantation sector are implemented by the
Plantation Human Development Trust (PHDT), a tripartite organization consisting of GoSL,
Regional Plantation Companies and Plantation Trade Unions. Furthermore, as many of the mothers
of young children in the Plantation community are engaged as Plantation workers, the centers in the
Plantations serve as both childcare facilities and ECD centers. Hence, project support for the
Plantation sector through PHDT is categorized as a separate subcomponent of the Project. Funds will
be provided to PHDT by SMCA via an Implementation Agreement to implement Project supported
interventions in this sector.
The Project's focus within the Plantation sector is on improving the quality of ECD services
provided by the ECD centers. More specifically, the activities supported include: (i) upgrading of
old, poor quality ECD centers; (ii) refurbishment of existing ECD center facilities; (iii) training of
ECD teachers ; and (iv) parental awareness/parenting education programs. All Project supported
activities will be managed by PHDT.
Given the difficult terrain of the Plantations, the construction and locations of many of the old
centers pose health hazards to the children. Furthermore, despite the need for daycare, some of these
centers do not have the required infrastructure to adequately serve this purpose. Hence, according to
the estimates made by PHDT, there is a need for the reconstruction or extension of around 140
centers in the Plantations. The Project will support PHDT to meet this need. The salaries of staff in
a        these centers will be paid by the plantation estates, and center services will be provided free of
charge to plantation families. As the land for these prospective centers has already been identified,
most of the Project supported new center construction work in Plantations will be carried out during
the first two years of the project.
Both short-term training and certificate/diploma programs for ECD teachers will be organized and
delivered by PHDT with the assistance of resource persons. The Project will provide scholarship
support to around 50 ECD teachers to participate in the nationally recognized Diploma program
offered by PHDT. Similarly, it will support the short-term training of around 1000 ECD teachers,
and the delivery of parental awareness/parenting education programs to Plantation community
members.
Component 2: Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (M &E) (estimated cost US$ 5
million)
This component finances different inputs, including technical assistance in specific areas, to support
Page 8 of 15


﻿the project management team in achieving the Project targets. It also supports the Project's
monitoring and evaluation activities.
Project management: The Project will finance incremental costs associated with project management,
O
U         salaries of PMU staff, consulting services, transportation, equipment, training of ECD administrators,
and other administrative expenses incurred during program implementation. As the Project will entail
a significant increase in the responsibilities of SMCA, the capacity building of staff at all levels of
the ministry's administrative structure is essential for effective Project implementation. The Project
will support the development and implementation of a comprehensive capacity development plan for
govern ment units and staff, including relevant staff from the PCs, engaged in implementing ECD
activities.
Within the framework of this plan, the Project will support the development of a short-term training
module for field level staff (e.g., district and divisional level officers) as well as specialized modules
for staff working at the Provincial and Central levels. These modules will cover a broad range of
topics including administration, planning, budgeting, procurement, financial management, ECD
domain knowledge and computer literacy. In the case of the module for field staff, the content will
also include training on organizing and managing ECD teachers training programs and parental
awareness/parenting education programs. Around 350 government staff will receive this type of
training during the Project period. The training will be designed and delivered by an agency with
experience in delivering training to government staff. In addition, around 100 officers working on
ECD will be supported to pursue further studies leading to ECD diplomas and higher degrees. The
capacity development of government units will also involve the provision of necessary equipment,
transportation facilities, and technical support in different areas at the central, provincial, district and
divisional levels.
The Project will provide support for technical assistance to the project management team in a number
of areas including, inter alia, institutional analysis, preparation of guidelines, development of
information systems, monitoring and evaluation, planning, communication, procurement, financial
management and social and environmental safeguards, as necessary. It will finance the design and
implementation of a comprehensive mapping exercise to identify the locations of existing ECD
centers and areas that are unserved or underserved. The Project can also support other technical
assistance necessary for the smooth implementation of the Project such as assessment studies,
a         surveys, independent audits of grant expenditures and evaluations.
M&E and results framework: The Project will support the development and implementation of a
robust and comprehensive ECD monitoring and evaluation system for ensuring compliance with
quality assurance standards and providing constructive feedback to ECD centers. The Project will
develop and systematically utilize a comprehensive electronic management information system
(MIS) as an integral part of the M & E system. The MIS will allow decentralized entry of data on
ECD centers, teachers and children, and regular updating of monitoring information. Project progress
will be tracked through a set of key performance and intermediate results indicators reflecting the
PDO. A results framework with annual targets for these indicators is included in Annex 1.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in all 9 provinces of Sri Lanka. Physical activities are proposed to
be undertaken on state owned or community land identified for development. No natural habitats or
forest areas will be opened up for physical interventions.
Page 9 of 15


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darshani De Silva (GENDR)
Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSURR)
O
Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Bank will provide financing for the development of
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                the GOSL's ECD program. Under the identified supply
side interventions of Component 1, the construction of
new and rehabilitation and up gradation of existing ECD
infrastructure facilities in unserved areas will be financed.
It is expected that potential environmental impacts from
the proposed physical intervention will not pose major,
irreversible environmental impacts due to their nature and
scale. In order to mitigate potential impacts that may be
caused predominantly during the construction phase as
well as to ensure that all such activities undertaken are
conducted in an environmentally sound manner, an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been
prepared by the GOSL.
The EMF includes environmental assessment and
preliminary analysis guidelines, environmental codes of
practice, has identified preliminary impacts and outlines a
generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which
will be used as guidance to prepare site specific EMP for
all subprojects, environmental safety guidelines,
monitoring mechanisms etc. that are in line with bank
safeguard requirements whilst maximizing the use of
country systems.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The construction of new facilities will be on either state
4.04                                 owned land or community owned land as set forth in the
project design. The rehabilitation and upgrading activities
will focus on existing ECD centers operating in
government/community owned structures. Thus there are
no foreseen impacts to sensitive natural areas or
designated natural areas due to project interventions.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No activities in forests or in close proximity to forest
areas are expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Not Applicable as no project interventions are made
where significant use of pesticides and other such
substances are utilized.
Physical Cultural       No           Project interventions are not envisioned to be conducted
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 in areas close to sites of cultural importance. Renovation,
rehabilitation and improvements will be made to buildings
built over the last few decades and not deemed socially or
Page 10 of 15


﻿culturally important. Measures to safeguard chance finds
will be included as part of the measures taken under
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The national population census does not show presence of
BP 4.10                              any identifiable IP population in project locations. The
services offered through project interventions are equally
accessible to all citizens of the country regardless of their
ethnic, religious or IP backgrounds.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Although, it is expected that construction of ECD
OP/BP 4.12                           facilities will be confined to existing premises, new
constructions of training centers are proposed to build at
district and provincial levels in Government owned lands.
Therefore, the policy is triggered as a precautionary
measure in case there are temporary occupations of land
by squatters and to ensure free form any encumbrances.
Social Impact Management Framework will be prepared
to guide the project in managing potential social issues
related to land and assets.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable as the project does not involve new
4.37                                 construction/rehabilitation of any Dams
Projects on International  No        Not Applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not Applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
Environmental Safeguards
As per the planned supply side interventions of Component 1, which aims on expanding equitable
access to ECD service the establishment and up gradation of ECD facilities in unserved and
underserved areas is identified as a key physical intervention? The Project will support the
establishment of new ECD facilities in unserved areas to enhance equitable access to ECD
services. The exact locations of the centers to be supported will be identified post the district wise
mapping of island wide ECD centers. Space for the construction of these facilities will be
identified and provided by the Provincial Councils or local government authorities (state owned
land) or through the beneficiary communities. In unserved areas where existing building space is
made available by communities for use as ECD centers. The Project will also support the
extension of existing state- and community-run ECD centers.
Under Component 1 the project will also provide funds for minor works at ECD centers that do
not meet the government's prioritized minimum quality standards. This includes support for minor
civil works such as the construction of latrines, water connections for sanitation, and
refurbishment of existing infrastructure facilities. Facility refurbishment can involve, inter alia,
enhancement of disability access; repairs of roofs, doors and windows; installation of water tanks;
Page 11 of 15


﻿construction of fences; cleaning up play areas; and construction of room partitions.
Under Sub-Component 1.3, where the focus is on the Plantation Sector, physical interventions will
include the replacement or extension of centers to upgrade their quality and the refurbishment of
O
existing ECD infrastructure. Given the difficult terrain of the Plantations, the construction and
locations of many of the old centers pose health hazards to the children. Furthermore, despite the
need for daycare, some of these centers do not have the required infrastructure to adequately serve
this purpose. Hence, according to the estimates made by PHDT, there is a need for the replacement
or extension of a number of centers in the Plantations. The Project will support PHDT to meet this
need. As the land for these prospective centers has already been identified, all Project supported
new center construction work in plantations will be carried out during the first two years of the
project.
The planned physical interventions under both Components are not anticipated to cause major,
irreversible environmental impacts due to their nature and scale. The works associated with these
activities will generate site-specific and temporary impacts associated with construction work and
impacts due to use of construction material such as sand, gravel and metal. With appropriate
mitigation measures and due diligence these impacts can be minimized as well.
For new constructions as well as expansion work under Sub-Component 1., due to the natural hilly
landslide prone terrain of the plantation areas, there may be need for the construction of landslide
prevention structures which will help to reduce potential landslide in a given site to ensure the
long term safety of the ECD center, due diligence will be necessary to ensure the surrounding
areas will not reduce their stability due to the landslide mitigation measures that will be put in.
This will in turn have a positive environmental impact as it will also mitigate landside risk. There
are no large scales or irreversible environmental impacts that will be caused due to the project
interventions.
Social Safeguards
There are no adverse social impacts or risks due to the project interventions. All new constructions
and /or expansion of ECD facilities will be confined to the government lands. No private land
acquisitions planned under the project. The services offered through project interventions are
equally accessible to all citizens of the country regardless of their ethnic, religious or IP
backgrounds.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None Anticipated
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No alternatives have been considered
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The GoSL has prepared a comprehensive Environmental Management Framework (EMF) which
will serve as the guiding document for undertaking safeguards analysis for all physical
interventions funded under the ECD project. While the potential nature of the project activities are
known at the preparatory stage, their exact scope is not known as designing the required
infrastructure as well as identifying exact locations where the physical interventions will be made
will require more time. Thus the EMF has been prepared in order to ensure proper due diligence
Page 12 of 15


﻿on environmental aspects is undertaken. It will act as a guide to be used during implementation at
the point the scope and designs of all physical interventions will be known.
The safeguards management process recommended in the EMF primarily includes the preparation
O
U           of a site specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for all physical intervention subprojects
identified, post the design stage, including guidelines for the construction of other planned
interventions such as sanitary facilities. In addition new constructions as well as expansion work
under Sub-Component 1.3, due to the natural hilly landslide prone terrain of the plantation areas,
there may be need for the construction of landslide prevention structures which will help to reduce
potential landslide in a given site to ensure the long term safety of the ECD center, specific due
diligence has been outlined in the EMF, where consultation with the National Building Research
Organization (NBRO) will be required to identify appropriate measures to mitigate such site
specific issues that may come up during initial sub-project feasibility screening. In addition the
EMF outlines both national and World Bank standards to be adhered to during the implementation
of physical interventions.
The lead implementing agency, the SMCA has no prior experience with Bank funded projects and
is therefore new to Bank safeguard procedures, guidelines and requirements even though they are
familiar with National Environmental requirements and standards. However the PHDT who will
be implementing the envisioned physical interventions in the plantation areas has prior experience
in working with safeguards and conducting environmental management activities and therefore
can confidently implement the EMF in the field. The EMF also includes a capacity building
program, which will commence prior to project implementation, in order to build better
understanding among the main implementation agencies, predominantly the SMCA, on the
processes of field level environmental safeguards implementation as set forth in the EMF to
facilitate good execution.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMF was disclosed by the State Ministry of Children's Affair's (SMCA) and in the Bank's
InfoShop as at 4/16/2015
The Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) was disclosed by SMCA on 4/6/2015 and in
the Bank's InfoShop on 4/16/2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              3 1-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                06-Apr-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           07-Apr-2015
Page 13 of 15


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                 06-Apr-2015
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Saurav Dev Bhatta
Page 14 of 15


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)               Date: 06-May-2015
Manager:
P
Page 15 of 15


