                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA12988
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jan-2015, 09-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mali                              Project ID:    P151318
                            Project Name:     Higher Education Support Project (P151318)
                            Task Team         Pierre Joseph Kamano
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         26-Jan-2015                       Estimated   07-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEDDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (70%), Vocational training (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Other human development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          33.00              Total Bank Financing:     33.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             14.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                               19.00
                              Total                                                                                   33.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed Mali Higher Education Support Project (HESP) is to
                           improve the relevance of selected higher education programs and the stewardship of the higher
                           education system in Mali.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed project will support the Government’s ongoing and planned higher education reforms
                         to enhance the capacity of higher education institutions (HEIs) in Mali to produce high quality
                         graduates with skills aligned to labor market needs. The HESP will do so by improving the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governance framework for higher education, while concurrently supporting direct improvements in
                         selected programs and institutions. The project will achieve the governance objective through a
                         pragmatic approach, supporting ongoing institutional reforms aimed at conferring more autonomy to
                         HEIs while strengthening the planning, oversight, and information management of the Ministry of
                         Higher Education and Scientific Research (MoHE) (autonomy with accountability). This approach
                         will be implemented in a two-pronged fashion. On the one hand, it will entail supporting stronger
                         stewardship of the MoHE through strengthened quality assurance, monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
                         and the coordination functions of systems and bodies. On the other hand, it will entail supporting the
                         implementation of measures to improve governance in selected institutions based on best practices
                         with the potential for replication and scaling up in other institutions.

                         By contributing to the progressive improvement of the sector’s governance framework, the project
                         aims to improve the relevance of programs through direct support to the implementation of a set of
                         new (and/or upgraded) labor market-oriented academic programs and the introduction of innovative
                         financing mechanisms (performance-based financing - PBF) through Disbursement Linked
                         Indicators (DLIs) linked to results. The DLI approach (further illustrated below) is expected to
                         contribute to the establishment of a more efficient financing structure for the sector.

                         In sum, the Project will: (i) support the development and implementation of labor market oriented
                         programs in selected HEIs through quality enhancing measures and better governance of the HEIs
                         (including management and financing); and (ii) strengthen the capacity of the higher education
                         system to better plan and implement higher education reforms, monitor the quality and relevance of
                         programs, provide relevant data for policy decisions and coordinate the system’s key stakeholders.
                         The project will undertake these activities through three components: Component 1: Support to
                         Selected Public HEIs; Component 2: Higher Education System Support; and Component 3: Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management and Technical Assistance. These three components will be implemented using a two-
                         pronged disbursement mechanism: DLIs for sub-Component 1.1 to support the implementation of
                         performance contracts with HEIs and to directly support the implementation of activities aimed at
                         improving governance, quality, and relevance of programs. Traditional expense-based disbursement
                         will be used for Sub-components 1.2 and 1.3 as well as for Components 2 and 3.

                         Component 1: Support to Selected Public Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) (US$22 million)
                         This component will improve the relevance of selected higher education programs, while also
                         contributing to improving stewardship, by supporting governance improvements and quality related
                         interventions in selected existing HEIs with strong commitment to reform and supporting a new
                         institution offering programs in agriculture, livestock, mining and technology. It is composed of three
                         sub-components: Sub-Component 1.1: Support to selected existing public HEIs; Sub-Component 1.2:
                         Support to the University of Segou’s livestock department; and Sub-Component 1.3: Support to the
                         development of the new Bamako Africa School of Mines.

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Support to selected existing public HEIs (US$16 million). This sub-component
                         will support, at most, four selected existing institutions, namely: The Rural Polytechnic Institute of
                         Katibougou (Institut Polytechinique Rural de Katibougou-IPRK) focusing on agriculture, research
                         and outreach; the University of Segou (Université de Ségou-UOS) focusing on livestock, and
                         agriculture programs with a component on water management and irrigation; the University of


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Science and Technology (Université des Sciences, Techniques et Technologies de Bamako-USTTB)
                         providing training in applied sciences to support other sectors; and the National School of
                         Engineering (Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs-ENI) dealing with engineering programs including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mining.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Support to the University of Segou’s livestock department (US$4 million).
                         Unlike the three other HEIs due to benefit from the HESP (which are already established and have
                         facilities that will require upgrading), the UOS, the first public regional university in Mali, is still in
                         the process of development and will require greater support for the delivery of programs.
                         Specifically, this sub-component will support the development of a new livestock and animal health
                         department at UOS through the construction and equipping of new teaching facilities on existing land
                         owned by the university.

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Support to the development of the new Bamako Africa School of Mines (US$2
                         million). The government has legally established a new Bamako -Africa School of Mines to more
                         effectively address the intermediate and higher skills gaps inhibiting the further development of the
                         country’s mining sector, and is exploring opportunities for the participation of the private sector in
                         the establishment of the school. Some mining companies operating in Mali have already shown
                         interest in this regard, with Randgold allocating US$1 million towards the purchase of land for the
                         school and the financing of consultation processes. Towards these ends, the government has
                         requested Bank support to develop a business model for the new school incorporating a Public
                         Private Partnership (PPP) framework. Following the development of this framework, the
                         government and the Bank will assess the development process, phases for the establishment of the
                         school, and financing options (including PPPs, other international partners, and, if needed, additional
                         financing). Further steps will be defined following the completion of these studies in coordination
                         with the Ministry of Mines.

                         Component 2: Higher Education System Support (US$8 million)
                         This component aims to improve the stewardship of the higher education system in Mali by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening the Government’s capacity to: (i) articulate and implement reforms; (ii) play an overall
                         oversight and regulatory role, including for the private sector; and (iii) manage information. This
                         component will support implementation of the MoHE reform package and its Operational Plan,
                         including contingent laws and decrees, to ensure that: (a) the roles and responsibilities of the MoHE
                         are focused and capacitated for policy formulation, quality assurance (QA), M&E, and the promotion
                         of improved performance in HEIs; and (b) universities and other tertiary institutions are empowered
                         with greater autonomy with regard to student admissions, teacher recruitment and budget
                         management. In order to strengthen these functions of the MoHE, the National Directorate of Higher
                         Education and Scientific Research (DNESR) tasked with monitoring the implementation of the
                         national strategy on higher education will be strengthened by financing the building of new premises,
                         and the procurement of new office furniture, information technology (IT) equipment and the
                         provision of staff training.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$3.0 million)
                         Component 3 will fund activities with project management, and associated TA, with regard to
                         fiduciary issues, as well as studies and analytical work. The project will finance studies contributing
                         to the improvement of M&E in the higher education sector as well as the design of a new sector plan
                         integrating a financing system that incentivizes a more competitive higher education system.
                         Financed studies will include: background studies towards the development of the sector program
                         (financed under Component 2); annual higher education reports; a study of potential financing

                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                         mechanisms; and an assessment of the implementation of new programs, including those developed
                         with the support of ECOWAS. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the
                         daily management, implementation, administration, project coordination, and M&E of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project sites will be located in Bamako, Katibougou, and Segou cities. There are no specific
                         physical characteristics of safeguard concerned in the project sites or nearby.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
                         Salamata Bal (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           Though the envisioned civil works (construction and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    rehabilitation of facilities) will take place in delineated,
                                                                   even fenced premises/land, owned by the University of
                                                                   Segou and the MoHE (for the DNESR) even temporary
                                                                   risks and nuisances may occur. Given the expected low
                                                                   significance of the said potential adverse effects, the
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                   (ESMF) of the ongoing Emergency Education Project has
                                                                   been updated for use during the implementation. This
                                                                   document has been reviewed, consulted upon and
                                                                   disclosed in-country on March 30, 2015 and in the Bank’s
                                                                   Infoshop on April 2, 2015.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No            The project will not finance activity related to natural
                          4.04                                     habitat exploitation or that will threaten such ecosystem.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No            The project will not finance activity linked to forest
                                                                   exploitation.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No               The project will not finance activity intended to
                                                                   purchasing, storing or distributing pesticides or any other
                                                                   chemical or harmful product.
                          Physical Cultural          No            The project activities will not be implemented in known
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                     historical area. However, the chance find procedure as
                                                                   described in the ESMF will be implemented if such matter
                                                                   arises.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/   No              There are no indigenous people in the project
                          BP 4.10                                  implementation areas.
                          Involuntary Resettlement Yes             The project will not finance any activity that induces land
                          OP/BP 4.12                               acquisition or economic displacement; relocation of
                                                                   persons or buildings because the civil works will be
                                                                   executed within the beneficiary institutions’ facilities. The
                                                                   social impacts will be minor to negligible. However the
                                                                   existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the
                                                                   Emergency Education Project has been updated reviewed,
                                                                   consulted upon, disclosed in-country at end March 2015


                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                                                                       and at the Bank Infoshop in early April 2015. The RPF
                                                                       will be used during implementation if such case arises.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not finance any activity related to dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             The project will not finance any activity located on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       international waterways or that necessitate the withdrawal
                                                                       of substantial quantity of water from such waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             There are no disputed areas in the project location.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation
                              of activities that will be financed under this project. Most of the adverse environmental and social
                              impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. Hence, they will be
                              manageable at an acceptable level.

                              The project is classified as being EA category B and triggers two safeguards policies which are
                              OP/PB 4.01 and OP/PB 4.12. To comply with these policies the existing ESMF of the ongoing
                              Emergency Education Project has been updated for use during the implementation. It has been
                              disclosed within the country and at the Bank’s Infoshop, while updated RPF of this same ongoing
                              project will be used during the implementation if such case arises.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Given the nature of the activities and their potential adverse impacts that will be manageable at an
                              acceptable level, no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Borrower has required safeguard instruments (ESMF and RPF) at its disposal; the ESMF of
                              the on-going Emergency Education Project has been updated to suit the civil works (construction
                              and rehabilitation of facilities) that will take place within the University of Segou and the
                              Direction Nationale de l’Enseignement Supérieur.

                              The updated ESMF has identified (a) when -activity specific environmental and social impact
                              assessment (ESIAs) for all activities in the construction sites and the additional Environmental
                              Management Plans (EMPs) are necessary before implementation; (b) procedures for conducting
                              activity-specific ESIAs, Limited Environmental Impact Assessments (LEIA) or Environmental
                              and Social Management Plans (ESMP); (c) capacity strengthening and awareness raising
                              campaigns targeting relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of
                              project safeguard measures; and (d) establishment and implementation of a consultation


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           framework for the environmental control and monitoring.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultations have been held with teachers, jobs seekers, students, HEI staff, entrepreneurs and
                           public investors. In addition, other ministries were consulted. They are the Ministry Higher
                           Education, the Ministry of Public Works, and the Ministry in charge of Environment, the Ministry
                           of Economic and Finance. During the updating process, all the above stakeholders were consulted
                           and their comments taken into account. Later, the Client will prepare for each construction site a
                           focused specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and
                           Social Management Plan (ESMP) based on the procedure contained in the updated ESMF.
                           Stakeholders will be consulted during the preparation of these specific ESIAs and ESMPs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       01-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02-Apr-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       01-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pierre Joseph Kamano
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (PMGR)                   Date: 09-Apr-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
