                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13043

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                        Project ID:      P150937
                            Project Name:      Dar es Salaam Urban Transport Improvement Project (P150937)
                            Task Team          Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          04-Jan-2016                     Estimated        14-Apr-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI01                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (35%), Infrastructure services for
                                               private sector development (30%), Trade facilitatio n and market access (30%),
                                               Other public sector governance (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    143.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:          31.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       112.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           10.       The proposed Project Development objective (PDO) is to reduce delays at the Ubungo
                           intersection, and improve the bus rapid transit operations and management capacity in Dar es Salaam
                           city, to the benefit of all roads users.
                           C. Project Description
                         12.     Ubungo intersection is the main gateway along both the Central Transport Corridor and Dar
                         es Salaam Corridor for the traffic into and out of Dar es Salaam city. Apart from bringing agricultural
                         supplies to the city, the two corridors are critical for hinterland connection of the Port of Dar es
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Salaam to and from neighboring countries of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, DRC, Zambia, and Malawi.
                         The junction also intersects the freight traffic (mainly to and from the Port) with the BRT Corridor
                         along the Morogoro road. The BRT system was established through CTCP2. Ubungo is already one
                         of the most congested intersections in Dar es Salaam, therefore its improvement is critical for traffic
                         mobility in the city as well as for the economic growth within the region.

                         13.     Improvement of key BRT feeder routes would facilitate the efficiency of the BRT operation.
                         The Dar es Salaam BRT system is designed to be operated through trunk BRT service (using 177
                         buses, 18 meters length and 140 passengers capacity) and feeder BRT service (using 128 buses each
                         with 12 meters length and of 80 passengers capacity). The CTCP2 supported the infrastructure for
                         BRT trunk system comprising of 20.9 km of trunk roadway corridor, two BRT bus depots, five BRT
                         bus terminals, 27 stations, and four feeder transfer stations. The roadway corridor comprises of two
                         exclusive BRT bus lanes (with overtaking lanes at stations), four mixed traffic lanes, two cycle lanes,
                         and two pedestrian lanes. The feeder services are through mixed traffic roads along 57.9 km of roads.
                         The poor pavement condition and traffic congestion in some of the key feeder routes would have a
                         negative impact on the operation of the BRT feeder services. It would also be necessary to introduce
                         an innovative long-term performance based maintenance program to ensure adequate care is
                         provided to the BRT assets.

                         14.      The newly created Dar Rapid Transit Agency (DART) requires to be strengthened to be able
                         to manage the BRT operations by the private sector. The management of the system is quite a
                         complex undertaking for a country that currently has no scheduled urban transport services. DART is
                         currently a semi-autonomous agency under the Prime Minister's office – Regional Administration
                         and Local Government (PMO-RALG). The Agency has a Ministerial Advisory Board with advisory
                         role to the Permanent Secretary and Minister of PMO-RALG. The capacity strengthening for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agencies responsible for management of the BRT operations is critical for successful introduction of
                         the BRT system in Tanzania. It is critical to ensure that the structure and mandates of the agency are
                         aligned with the role of overseeing BRT operations including the flexibility of decision-making
                         under commercial demands. It is therefore essential to support the transformation process of DART
                         agency.

                         15.     It is essential to support the designs of the future phases of the Dar es Salaam BRT system.
                         The entire Dar es Salaam BRT system comprises of six phases totaling 130.3 km of the trunk system.
                         Phases 2 and 3 were designed under CTCP2, and the African Development Bank (AfDB) and Korea
                         Exim-Bank are jointly appraising the financing for BRT phase 2. The remaining phases of the BRT
                         system need to be designed.

                         16.      The design of the DUTP and selectivity of interventions are based on: (i) the overall impact
                         in resolving public transport bottlenecks in the city; (ii) economic impact nationally and
                         internationally through transport corridors; (iii) introducing new innovations in public transport
                         operation; and (iv) an opportunity to strengthen urban transport management capacity and to ensure
                         long-term sustainability of the bus rapid transit system.

                         17.     The main components proposed include: (i) Ubungo grade separated intersection; (ii) BRT
                         phase 1 complementary infrastructure and services; and (iii) BRT system management capacity
                         strengthening and technical assistance.

                         18.     Component 1 - Improvement of Ubungo Intersection: The project plans to support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction of a flyover at the Ubungo intersection. The traffic network analysis done under the Dar
                         es Salaam transport master-plan study (2008) identified it among the three most critical intersections
                         needing to be grade-separated.

                         19.      The traffic survey conducted in February 2014 indicated a peak hour traffic volume of 6,704
                         vehicles. 16 percent of right turning vehicles from upcountry to the direction of the Port are
                         articulated and trailer freight trucks. The study noted an average delay of 711 seconds per vehicle,
                         which was forecast to increase to 2,560 seconds per vehicle in 2034. Four design options were
                         developed in line with available space constraints. The selected option would reduce average delay to
                         12 seconds per vehicle upon completion of the intersection.

                         20.     The conceptual design of the grade separated intersection was completed in July 2014 and
                         the detailed engineering design of the preferred option was completed in November 2014. The
                         selected option would have the traffic directly along the BRT corridor and all left turning traffic
                         remaining at the ground level. The right turning traffic would be elevated through ramps to the first
                         level and the Nelson Mandela – Sam Nujoma direct traffic would be at the second level. The selected
                         design has a flyover along the ‘Nelson Mandela – Sam Nujoma roads’ in the direction of another
                         flyover being implemented at TAZARA, through JICA support.

                         21.      Component 2 - BRT phase 1 complementary infrastructure (9 km): The complementary
                         infrastructure and services planned to be supported includes the rehabilitation of three feeder routes,
                         introduction of long-term performance based maintenance contract for BRT phase 1 infrastructure.
                         Feeder roads proposed to be rehabilitated includes Shekilango street (3.8 km), Fire station –
                         Muhimbili (1.75 km), and Kigogo junction – Urafiki via Usafirishaji (3.4 km). The proposed
                         rehabilitation works would include provision of bus bays/stops, bicycle lanes and pedestrians
                         walkways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         22.      The project will also help to establish a long-term contract for maintenance of the BRT
                         infrastructure. This will help demonstrate to the Government on how to ensure adequate and timely
                         maintenance of the BRT infrastructure.

                         23.     Component 3 - BRT system management, capacity strengthening, and technical assistance.
                         On a short to medium term, the project will support capacity strengthening to DART, through the
                         provision of technical assistance, including introduction of an exchange program with successful
                         BRT operators from other parts of the world, for hands-on knowledge transfer. Support will also be
                         provided in the preparation and facilitation of Government approvals for the transformation of
                         DART to become a more autonomous entity. The Surface and Marine Regulatory authority
                         (SUMATRA) would also receive support to put in place a regulatory framework for mass transit
                         system.

                         24.     The Project will also provide technical assistance for further design work and road safety and
                         ICT innovations. The detailed design works to be supported would include the BRT phases 4, 5, and
                         6. The project will leverage the investments to introduce innovations and best practices including: (i)
                         conducting an impact evaluation of the BRT system on the livelihood of the poor; (ii) introduction of
                         open data system in the public transport in Dar es Salaam; (iii) coordinate with Dar es Salaam
                         Metropolitan Development Program (DMDP) on the development of the transit and pedestrian
                         oriented design principles for the BRT corridor; and (iv) coordinate with DMDP in the development
                         of strategies for integrated transit and land-use planning.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         25.     Cost table:

                         Component 1 - Improvement of Ubungo Intersection: the total cost for the proposed interventions
                         amounts to US$90.0 million inclusive of GoT's contribution of US$8.0 million for implementation of
                         RAP and IDA allocation of US$82.0 million.

                         Component 2 - BRT Phase 1 complementary infrastructure and services: the total cost is US$24.4
                         million inclusive of US$4.0 million for implementation of RAP and IDA allocation of US$8.5
                         million (financing gap of US$11.9 million).

                         Component 3 - Capacity Strengthening for BRT management and Technical assistance: an estimated
                         total of US$9.5 million from IDA.

                         Physical and Price- Contingencies: Total of US$19.1 million (financing gap).

                         The estimated Total of US$143.0 million inclusive of about US$12 million from GoT and US$100.0
                         million from IDA and a financing gap of US$31 million. (See cost Table in Annex 3)
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the Central Business District of Dar es Salaam City. The proposed
                         construction of a grade separated junction at the Ubungo intersection is within the BRT Corridor
                         along the central corridor serving all traffic into and out of Dar es Salaam and the hinterland.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Tanzanian Environmental Management law requires a full environmental and social impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment (ESIA) for a project of this type and magnitude. An Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action
                         Plan (RAP) have been prepared to identify, assess and mitigate the potential environmental and
                         social impacts. The final draft of the ESIA is under review by the National Environmental
                         Management Council (NEMC) and has been cleared for disclosure by the Bank. It was publicly
                         disclosed in country on January 20, 2015 and at the InfoShop on January 21, 2015. The RAP is
                         being finalized and after being cleared by the Bank will be disclosed in the country and Infoshop
                         before appraisal.

                         The Ministry of Transport has in place an Environmental Code of Practice for Road Works (2009),
                         which defines environmental criteria to be applied in Tanzania during feasibility, design,
                         construction and operation of the road infrastructure. The ESIA and Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP) have been prepared by the implementing agency, TANROADS on the
                         basis of the environmental criteria as defined in the Code of Practice together with the requirements
                         of Bank’s Safeguards policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

                         Institutional arrangements for environmental and social management are included in relevant
                         safeguards documents. Overall responsibility with the implementation of ESMP and the RAP is with
                         TANROADS. TANROADS has an experienced social and environmental unit being part of its
                         Directorate of Planning. This unit will be responsible for quarterly monitoring and reporting on
                           progress of the implementation of ESMP measures throughout the project period. The Environmental
                           and social management reports will be part of the quarterly project progress reports (QPR).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       Yes           ESIA has been prepared and environmental impact
                           OP/BP 4.01                                   would be mitigated as outlined under the disclosed
                                                                        ESIA.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                           Physical Cultural Resources    Yes           Most of the works under the Project involves
                           OP/BP 4.11                                   improvements within existing road corridors
                                                                        therefore it is unlikely to have effect on physical
                                                                        cultural sites of national and international
                                                                        importance. However, it has been decided to trigger
                                                                        Operational Policy (OP) and Bank Procedure (BP)
                                                                        4.11 to put in procedures for addressing any chance-
                                                                        finds of physical or cultural resource such as burial
                                                                        and archaeological sites. The procedures will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        incorporated in the works contracts and, during
                                                                        project implementation; the supervising engineers
                                                                        will ensure that the contractor implements
                                                                        appropriate measures. The measures include
                                                                        informing local authorities and the Antiquities
                                                                        Department; and preparing an appropriate mitigation
                                                                        plan, which will be approved before commencing
                                                                        any works in that area, as provided in the OP/PB
                                                                        4.11.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                           4.10
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes           The RAP has been prepared and would be
                           BP 4.12                                      implemented in line with the OP/BP 4.12.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

                           Projects on International      No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                                          No
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
                                 BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-May-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Ubungo ESIA is already prepared and disclosed. The RAP for Ubungo is also already prepared
                                      and commented by the Bank team. The ESIA for BRT feeder routes would be prepared and
                                      disclosed to the public prior to advertisement of bids for related works.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 10-Nov-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Richard Martin Humphreys (PMGR)                                                                                        Date: 10-Nov-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
