                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13399

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                   Project ID:      P155121
                            Project Name:      Economic Governance and Citizen Engagement Project (P155121)
                            Task Team          Maimouna Mbow Fam
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Sep-2015                    Estimated        12-Nov-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGODR                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (60%), Public administration- Other social
                                               services (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Managing for development results (30%), Public expenditure, financial
                                               management and procurement (50%), Other accountability/anti-co rruption
                                               (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                    Total Bank Financing:        30.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                30.00
                              Total                                                                      30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           23.    The proposed project development objective of the project is to enhance transparency and
                           accountability mechanisms in the management and use of public resources, enhance domestic
                           revenues mobilization and improve the efficiency of expenditure.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project, which will have four inter-related components over a five-year period, at an
                         estimated total cost of about US$30 million. It will provide an integrated package of interventions
                         aimed at supporting the demand and supply sides of governance. These areas of intervention should
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be mutually strengthened: transparency and participation require the effective provision of goods
                         and services and the production in good time of relevant information on public expenditure and
                         performance; in return, transparency and participation can contribute to improving the performance
                         of public services. It will therefore focus on strengthening core areas of economic governance and
                         citizen engagement including (i) developing mechanisms for social accountability, transparency and
                         access to information on the management of public funds, including strengthening capacities of audit
                         institutions, the judiciary and the civil society to fight fraud and corruption; (ii) assisting the
                         Government in increasing fiscal space through the modernization of tax and customs systems and the
                         improvement of collection capacities; and (iii) assisting the Government in strengthening the budget
                         preparation and execution processes, including the strengthening of the procurement system and the
                         implementation of the WAEMU PFM regulations, focusing on performance and service delivery.
                         The rationale for strengthening institutions and systems is that they are a necessary condition for
                         effectively implementing the government’s macro-fiscal and socioeconomic policies.

                         Complementing interventions of donor partners in the economic governance improvement is a key
                         theme of the proposed operation. The team will coordinate with all the Donors involved in the PFM
                         reform group to ensure greater impact on development objectives, and avoid overlaps and
                         duplications in their respective responses to the needed reforms.

                         Component 1: Strengthening Public Sector Accountability and Monitoring (US8.0 million)

                         Objective: The objective of this component is to improve public sector transparency and
                         accountability and strengthen civil society's capacities to monitor public sector performance and
                         service delivery. To achieve these objectives, the component will support a series of complementary
                         areas that are critical to strengthening the enabling environment for improved public transparency,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accountability and citizen engagement. These areas include: (i) improving analysis and disclosure of
                         budget information to enhance government accountability on public resource management; (ii)
                         enhancing citizens access to public information to foster demand for accountability on public policies
                         and services; (iii) strengthening citizens’ monitoring of the delivery of public services and (iv)
                         implementing the measures set out in the fraud and anti-corruption law, such as the preparation of
                         codes of conduct for public officials, the institution of the declaration of interest and assets and the
                         application of charges and penalties to promote integrity, accountability and transparency in the
                         management of public and private sectors.

                         More specifically, this component will be implemented through the following key sub-components:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Developing transparency and accountability mechanisms:
                         Theobjective of this sub-component is to support the development of mechanisms to facilitate and
                         foster transparency and accountability in government.

                         Activities to be financed: the project sub-component will finance capacity building efforts in budget
                         analysis and reporting. Such efforts will include: (a) operationalizing the provisions of the
                         transparency code and developing relevant government institutions’ skills and capacities for financial
                         information analysis and reporting; (b) developing and institutionalizing guidelines for systematic
                         budget analysis, reporting & dissemination; (c) supporting the Ministry of Finance to improve the
                         citizen’s budget by implementing a strategic plan to sustain its production and dissemination; (d)
                         closing the feedback loop by integrating citizens’ feedback into the budget process through specific
                         mechanisms and (e) strengthening the Ombudsman’s outreach and reporting functions and increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collaboration with citizens and civil society organizations. This is expected to make the institutions
                         more visible, accessible and enhance its ability to redress citizens’ complaints against injustice from
                         maladministration by government and public institutions. The sub-component will also provide the
                         requisite technical assistance for improved constructive engagement and collaboration between
                         public sector and civil society and media through, inter alia, (a) supporting the Ministry of Finance to
                         engage with the multi-stakeholder Platform of Civil Society Organizations for joint problem-solving
                         that can lead to tangible results; (b) promoting citizens’ access to public information through
                         government data platform, and (c) reviewing current methods of informing the media about
                         Government proceedings to enhance media relations.
                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the capacity of the civil society in monitoring public sector
                         service delivery

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the engagement and monitoring capacity of the
                         civil society in enhancing public sector service delivery outcomes.

                         Activities to be financed: These include, inter alia, (a) support to Multi-Stakeholder Platform of civil
                         society organizations (a) to improve coordination of citizens’ monitoring of government policies and
                         budget implementation, and (b) supporting citizen’s involvement in in monitoring a select number of
                         public services which have a direct interface with the population (filing tax returns, standards in
                         education and health care delivery services etc.); (b) provision of ‘small grants’ to civil society
                         organizations, through competitive basis, to finance civic engagement in public oversight; and (c)
                         provide some flexible funding to civil society groups for innovative engagement towards re-
                         establishing government credibility and (d) pilot citizen feedback mechanisms utilizing text
                         messaging technology to capture feedback on service delivery.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Consolidating mechanisms and capacity to fight against fraud and corruption
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this sub-component is to consolidate mechanisms and enhance the capacity for
                         fighting fraud and corruption in the public sector.

                         Activities to be financed: The sub-component will support the strengthening of the anti-corruption
                         institutions; improve civil society monitoring of implementation of the anti-corruption legislation as
                         well as tracking public perception of corruption; and operationalization of the anti-corruption
                         criminal branches of the Superior First Instance Courts of Bobo et Ouaga. These will be achieved
                         through: (i) improving the capacity of ASCE to comply with its anti-corruption mandates, including
                         monitoring and reporting and policy recommendations for continuous improvement of the legal and
                         institutional framework to fight fraud and corruption; (ii) strengthening ASCE’s capacities for greater
                         professionalization and expertise in the conduct of investigations and the effective implementation of
                         recommendations emanating from investigation missions.
                          (iii) designing and implementation of public awareness campaigns in coordination with civil society
                         organizations to improve the general understanding of the Anti-Corruption legislation, including the
                         provisions, processes, and the roles of ASCE and other relevant government agencies; (iv)
                         developing mechanisms for tracking and reporting how key institutions comply with the
                         anticorruption legislation; (v) operationalization of two anti-corruption criminal branches that the
                         Government will establish within the First Instance Courts of Bobo and Ouaga; and (vi) promoting a
                         stronger linkage between ACSE, the Prosecutor and the two tribunals handling corruption cases.
                         Component 2: Increasing fiscal space and domestic revenues collection (US10.0 million)

                         Objective: The objective of this component is to broaden, and enhance the reliability of the tax base
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to include the informal sector and instituting mechanisms to monitor and control tax gaps . It will
                         support the modernization of tax and customs administration including treasury through the effective
                         use of IT applications and tools designed to enhance the effective and transparent institutional
                         management, simplification of procedures and the revision of fiscal exemptions. Beyond the
                         technical improvements to be made, the purpose of this component would be i) to identify the
                         concrete problems which affect users of tax and customs services in order to strive for their
                         progressive resolution; and ii) to improve transparency relating to the concrete operation of tax and
                         customs services in order to stimulate voluntary tax compliance

                         More specifically, this component will be implemented through the following three sub-components:

                         Sub-component 2.1: Broadening and enhancing reliability of the tax base

                         The objective of this sub-component is to increase the tax to GDP ratio which currently stands at
                         15%.

                         Activities to be financed: The sub-component will support (i) the review of various sources of fiscal
                         information (Customs, Chamber of Commerce and Tax data bases) to reinforce the reliability of the
                         tax base, (ii) to study possibilities to broaden the tax base with the inclusion of the informal sector
                         and the reduction of tax evasion and (iii) the revision of tax exemptions and reforms of tax policy and
                         administration in line with the fiscal objectives.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Modernization of the tax and customs system

                         The modernization of the procedures of resource mobilization is key to improving the efficiency and
                         integrity of revenue administrations. The objective of this sub-component is to complement the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities undertaken by the GoBF in modernizing the Revenue administration IT Systems
                         (ASYCUDA++ and SINTAX) and supporting their rollout to cover the remaining locations.

                         Activities to be financed: the sub-component will finance the following key activities: (i) expansion
                         of the telecommunications network (Wide and Local Area Networks) coverage for systems rollout to
                         additional locations as well as enhancement of systems security; (ii) supporting the interfacing of the
                         systems with other systems; (iii) acquisition of hardware and additional software licenses for systems
                         rollout; (iv) implementation services as updated web site; (v) acquisition and implementation of a
                         statistical and performance management tools; and (vi) technical assistance and advisory services for
                         the implementation of the Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) system and implementation of RTGS,
                         widening ways for electronic payments.


                         Sub-component 2.3: Simplification of Customs clearance procedures and institution of mechanisms
                         to monitor and investigate tax noncompliance.

                         The objective of the sub-component is to strengthen revenue collections through reforms in the areas
                         of revenue policy formulation, and revenue administration procedures and processes.

                         Activities to be financed: These will include: (i) simp     lification of tax procedures, especially in
                         the area of VAT, so as to improve VAT refunds control and delivery; (ii) rationalization of customs
                         clearance procedures and an intensive tracking of risky taxpayers and (iii) coordinated control and
                         audit strategy between tax and customs administration and –iv) implementation of some of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recently adopted reforms such as the customs interconnection agreement with Cote d’Ivoire.

                         Component 3: Strengthening budget management systems and processes (US10.0 million)

                         Objective: The objective of this component is to improve budget preparation and execution
                         processes, including streamlined financial management and procurement procedures and the
                         performance of the internal control system and external oversight. It will support the implementation
                         of the new WAEMU regulations as well as the removal of the bottlenecks in the PFM system. In
                         particular, this component will support the on-going efforts of the Government of Burkina Faso to
                         modernize the budget execution processes by rendering them more efficient and transparent. The
                         component will be implemented through the following four sub-components.


                         Sub-component 3.1: Strengthening budget preparation and execution processes

                         The objective of this sub-component is to support the implementation of performance based
                         budgeting system, and, integrate procurement planning and execution as part of the budget
                         preparation and execution system.

                         Activities to be financed: The sub-component will finance, inter alia, the following key activities: (i)
                         assessment of the impact of the WAEMU directives, enhancement of the institutional configurations
                         and coherency of planning and budgeting processes and development of tools; (ii) updating and
                         disseminating multi-year budgeting documents and establishing program results indicators, in the
                         sector ministries, that are easily measurable each year and can serve as the basis for budget
                         arbitration and negotiations; (iii) conducting economic management studies to inform budget
                         preparation processes and sectoral analysis; (iv) capacity building for the staff of the contracting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         authorities to make appropriate procurement planning, ensuring linkages with the budget; (v)
                         developing and disseminating tools for the use of new procurement documents in particular contracts
                         under framework agreements and multi-year contracts, and training of the actors to be familiarized
                         with these tools; and (vi) developing an electronic systems, enabling (a) electronic transactions
                         between the contracting authorities and the procurement control body and regulatory body, (b) a
                         tracking system to monitor delays in the procurement processing, and (c) the establishment of a
                         database for statistical and archiving purpose.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Enhancing budget management information systems

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to enhance the existing IT systems developed by the MoF to
                         support the implementation of the overall PFM systems in Burkina Faso. This component will build
                         on the wo rk already done by the MoF and will support the upgrade and adaptation of the existing IT
                         systems and their underlying infrastructure to integrate the new WAEMU Directives, consistent with
                         the new budget preparation and execution framework, and enhance the fiscal reporting capabilities
                         and system capacity and performance. This will not entail any civil works and focus mainly on the
                         existing software product and it’s underlying infrastructure (servers and networking equipment).

                         The Government of Burkina Faso (GoBF) has made the strategic choice to internally develop and
                         maintain its Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS). While this choice
                         provides a high level of flexibility to the IFMIS, it puts the pressure of its maintenance and
                         adaptation solely on the DGSI which will require a strong and better internal organization to carry
                         out these functions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities to be financed: Under this sub-component, the project will finance, inter alia, the following
                         key activities: (i) network infrastructure capacity and performance enhancement; (ii) Primary Data
                         Center rehabilitation and Disaster Recovery Center setup; (iii) systems integration and data
                         management; (iv) technical assistance, implementation, and advisory services for IFMIS systems
                         adaptation and rollout; (v) capacity building for IT staff and users; (vi) hardware and software
                         enhancements. Advisory services will be required to provide technical assistance and quality control
                         during the entire process of systems adaptation to support mitigating the main risks related to the
                         overall systems development and deployment. Under the aforementioned (ii) there will be some
                         renovation (mainly painting) work in the existing Datacenter, but the bulk of the work will entail
                         installing CCTV, access control systems and fire protection equipment.

                         Sub-component 3.3: Cash and debt management

                         The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the management of cash and debt with a view to
                         minimizing net interest cost and ensuring cash is available to meet commitments and obligations for
                         service delivery –thereby reducing arrears).

                         Activities to be financed: Under this sub-component, the project will finance : (i) improvement of a
                         medium term debt management strategy and the management of operational risks; (ii) update and
                         dissemination of a manual of procedures for debt management; (iii) enhanced data coverage and
                         retrocession of guarantees, (iv) functional enhancement of the debt and cash management
                         information system; (v) technical assistance to assist the Government to improve its liquidity
                         management and the predictability of budget releases to line ministries, and (vi) capacity building of
                         the staff in key areas of debt and cash management, i.e. borrowing and related financing activities,
                         cash flow forecasting and debt sustainability analysis, Operational Risk Management, audit of public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         debt and periodic publication of financial information on public debt etc.

                         Sub-component 3.4: Enhancing performance of internal audit and control systems and the external
                         audit oversight

                         With the devolution of payment authorization and the adoption of a performance approach based on
                         the concepts of programs, objectives and results indicators, the internal controls and audits
                         procedures will be reoriented to achieve targeted results.

                         The objective of the sub-component is to support the Government of Burkina Faso in enhancing the
                         performance of the internal control systems, through an operational internal audit function within line
                         ministries as well as support the development of the Supreme Audit Institution’s capacity in
                         conducting performance and special audits and in clearing the backlog of audits and certifications.

                         Activities to be financed: The sub-component will finance the following activities: (i) orienting and
                         shifting the work programs of internal auditors towards risk-based audit methodologies and
                         reinforcing their capacities to focus on systemic issues as well as enable them to use IT-based
                         systems in their audit work; (ii) support the development of the Supreme Audit Institution’s capacity
                         in conducting performance and special audits as well as assist the SAI in completing the clearance of
                         the backlog of audits and certifications.
                           Component 4: Project Management Support (US$2 million) – The objective of this component is to
                           establish an effective and efficient project coordination and administration function during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of the project. The component will be implemented under two sub-components.

                           Sub-component 4.1 Project Management and Central Coordination

                           The objective of this sub-component is to provide leadership and management of the overall
                           governance program and to ensure the specific project objectives are met on time, on quality and in
                           line with the allocated funds.
                           Key activities to be implemented under the sub-component through technical assistance
                           consultancies, operational expenses, project coordination and procurement of goods and services,
                           financial management and audit.

                           Sub-component 4.1 Monitoring, Evaluation and Communication

                           The objective of this sub-component is to enhance the project performance through effective
                           monitoring and quality feedback to the Project institutional coordination mechanism and
                           stakeholders.

                           Activities to be financed under the sub-component will include sensitization and awareness,
                           preparation of a robust monitoring and evaluation strategy and overseeing its implementation,
                           communication and change management strategy.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is not expected to have an adverse social or environmental impacts. It will not entail any
                           civil works or prepare civil works, or other physical interventions, besides some minor renovations
                           (mainly painting), at the existing Datacenter, under component 3.2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Yacouba Konate (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         No             The project is not expected to have any adverse
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      environmental or social impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No             The project will not affect natural habitats.

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No             The project will not have any impact on forests.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No             The project does not entail any pest management.

                           Physical Cultural Resources      No             The project will not entail any movement of earth,
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             excavations or other civil works (besides some minor
                                                                                                                        interior renovations of the existing data center).
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no Indigenous Poples in the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         The project will not lead to involuntary resettlement.
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project does not involve construction of or
                                                                                                                        reliance on dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The projects does not impact on international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maimouna Mbow Fam
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 08-Jun-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Renaud Seligmann (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 10-Jun-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
