                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24614




                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category       Country
                                                             Support to Regional
                           P167357                                                        C - Not Required (C)         Africa
                                                             Knowledge Capacity
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                       Investment Project
                           Veronique Kabongo                                              GGOAW
                                                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                       1.60
                           Total Financing                                                                                                          1.60
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                          1.60
                                  Think Africa Partnership                                                                                         1.60


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to enhance the sustainability of the African Center for Economic
                           Transformation’s in delivering policy to action through core activities and strengthening its capacity to support
                           implementation of the G20 Compact with Africa.

                           C. Project Description
                                 1. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
                                       A. PDO
                                 2. The Project Development Objective is to enhance the sustainability of the African Center for
                                    Economic Transformation’s in delivering policy to action through core activities and strengthening its
                                    capacity to support implementation of the G20 Compact with Africa.

                           PDO Level Results Indicators



                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                                          Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                           The key results include:

                                   Produce a good practices policy engagement case study for African think tanks
                                   Engage with African policy makers to enhance the link between knowledge and policy
                                   Contribute to the implementation of the G20 Compact with Africa

                           PROJECT DESCRIPTION This project aims to support ACET in coordinating the G20 Compact with Africa
                           agenda; enhancing its capacity to deliver core policy dialogue activities while helping promote a model for
                           more boosting think tanks in Africa. By strengthening ACET’s strategic capacity to collaborate with other
                           institutions, the project will support the emulation of multiple Africa-based think tanks. This support will take
                           various forms including i) support to core activities for engagement with African governments, ii) technical
                           assistance for facilitating the implementation of the G20 Compact with Africa and iii) developing a case study
                           based on ACET’s policy engagement model that will serve as “good practice” for other institutions in Africa.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           By doing so, the project will promote knowledge generation, dissemination and implementation and
                           contribute to building long-term, relevant research and policy capacity in the region.



                           Project Components



                           Component 1 – Strengthening ACET’s core activities on policy design - $488,000

                           This component will provide support and technical assistance to strengthen ACET’s operational capacity in
                           delivering core products and services and with a financially sustainable business model. Strengthening a
                           leading think tank such as ACET will have a positive impact on its continuous capacity to engage African
                           governments in transformational policy dialogue while accelerating the transfer of good practices among
                           peers, especially related to the strategic planning and engagement with policymakers and the public.

                           Sub-component 1.1: Technical Assistance for an Institutional Policy Engagement Case Study - $50,000

                           The technical assistance will seek to broaden and deepen ACET’s proven policy engagement model to
                           boost a network of African think tanks. Through a case study it will seek to build upon ACET’s approach,
                           but also draw upon regional and global good practice, including from other think tanks and development
                           partners. It will assess key elements of policy enagement in Africa, to include focus on developing a
                           model for long term plans for think tanks with regards key components such as a) building strategic
                           partnerships; b) strengthening the organization; c) attaining financial sustainability; d) collaboration among
                           think-tanks; and e) convening abilities and modalities. A team will be tasked with establishing a diagnostic of
                           ACET’s policy engagement business model and provide recommendations on “good practices” for think
                           tanks. The process will actively engage other think tanks and this will be materialized into a case study.




                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                               Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                           Expected outputs: a case study based on ACET’s policy engagement model encompassing frameworks for
                           boosting a network of African think tanks:

                                   Strategic collaboration approaches for think tanks in Africa;
                                   Organizational effectiveness and sustainable financial models of policy engagement by think tanks in
                                    Africa;
                                   Strategies for enhancing technical and analytical capacity for think tanks in Africa.



                                    Sub-component 1.2. Assistance to ACET’s ongoing activities - $438,000
Public Disclosure Copy




                           This subcomponent provides support to ACET’s core business to inform and support policy design and
                           implementation. The Pan African Coalition for Transformation (PACT) is ACET’s primary policy dialogue
                           platform. It is an African government peer-learning initiative focused on key sectoral areas that leads to
                           country policy action plans on economic transformation. The PACT deliberations inform ACET’s Africa
                           Transformation Forum (ATF) – and promotes economic dialogue between government, development
                           partners, the private sector and civil society. Likewise, the Africa Transformation Report – ACET’s flagship
                           report – and ACET’s Africa Transformation Index are closely interrelated to the policy dialogue in the PACT
                           and are highlighted at the ATF. In partnership with other development organizations and think thanks, these
                           core programs and deliverables collectively help African governments and stakeholders to focus
                           policymaking that is innovative and transformational.



                           Expected outputs: Launch of new, or deepening the work of existing PACT sectoral chapters or policy
                           dialogue platforms; further dissemination of the African Transformation Report (ATR); African
                           Transformation Forum (ATF) and the updated African Transformation Index (ATI).



                           Component 2 – Supporting ACET’s role in implementing the G20 Compact with Africa (CwA) - $715,000



                           This component will provide technical assistance to support ACET’s role in supporting the implementation
                           of the G20 Compact with Africa (CWA). CWA was initiated by the German presidency in the Finance Track,
                           endorsed by the G-20 finance ministers and central bank governors in Baden-Baden in March 2017, to
                           promote private investment in Africa, including in infrastructure. In collaboration with the WBG, IMF and
                           other African institutions, ACET’s role is to support the CWA implementation through the facilitation of peer

                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                             Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                           learning, analysis and peer review interventions as well as by undertaking coordination role in CWA
                           implementation.[1]



                           Sub-component 2.1. Strengthening Compact Countries’ Capacity - $415,000



                           Technical assistance for CWA implementation support. ACET will work organizations such as h the UN
                           Economic Commission for Africa, the African Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
                           World Bank to support CWA implementation through consultations, workshops, and analytical studies. This
                           includes advisory services for periodic review of progress where country-led teams will include ACET and the
                           other technical partners, private sector representatives, officials from Compact countries and think tanks or
Public Disclosure Copy




                           non-governmental organizations from the Compact countries[2]. Activities includes: Organize consultations
                           and workshops Support countries’ communication and dissemination capacity Facilitate access to advisory
                           services



                           Expected outputs: multiple workshops, papers and technical events.



                           Technical assistance for peer-to-peer learning. Working with international partners, ACET will establish a
                           CWA Peer-to-Peer Learning Platform for African Compact countries, interested G20 countries, international
                           organizations and African institutions. The Bank will avail facilities, co-brand events and support
                           dissemination. Activities includes: Coordination of the agendas Prepare and disseminate studies, analysis and
                           reviews Facilitate high level sessions



                           Excepted outputs: multiple peer learning events, associated background papers and research inputs. Peer
                           learning website for knowledge exchange.



                           Sub-component 2.2 Bi-Annual Peer Review of CwA Self-Assessments– $100,000



                           Twice a year, ACET will present the consolidated CwA Peer Review report based on Countries’ CwA self-
                           assessments. The report will highlight key directional messages, gaps, and recommendations that will serve
                           as an input to the overall CwA Monitoring Report and the G20 Ministerial Report. The Bank will support the

                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                            Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                           development of a systematic methodology and support dissemination of the report. Activities include
                           technical assistance: Development of the review methodology and analysis of self-assessments; Preparation,
                           presentation and dissemination of reports;

                           Expected outputs: CwA Peer Review Report



                           Sub-component 2.3 Advocacy for Africa and the CwA - $200,000



                           As a member of the T20 Africa Standing Group[3](ASG) Steering Committee, ACETS serves as a liaison
                           between the Think20 platform and African think tanks. This network of research institutes and think tanks
Public Disclosure Copy




                           from the G20 countries provides research-based policy advice to the G20, facilitates interaction among its
                           members and the policy community, and communicates with the broader public about issues of global
                           importance. The goal is to build African think tanks’ capacity to more effectively influence ongoing policy
                           dialogue. The Bank will avail facilities and co-brand events. Activities include: Lead the development of G20
                           policy briefs in collaboration with think tank partners; Build collaboration with T20 members around existing
                           events on key priority themes for African Compact countries.

                           Excepted outputs: several brief papers, networking events and networking platform.



                           Technical assistance in establishing a CwA Advisory Panel [4] that will act as focal point and help guide the
                           overall work on the CwA. The Panel will be a key interface for new countries governments helping in
                           calibrating expectations, required commitments and overall process. The Bank will avail facilities. Activities
                           include:

                           Component 3 – ACET Transformational Fellow Program - $317,000



                           [1] Consensus statement CWA Ministerial Meeting, Accra, September 6th 2017

                           [2] There are 11 countries in scope: Senegal, Rwanda, Morocco, Guinea, Ghana, Ethiopia, Egypt, Cote
                           d’Ivoire, Benin, Tunisia, Togo.

                           [3] The ASG engages in cross-regional joint knowledge production and provide evidence based policy advice
                           related to cooperation between G20 and Africa. Governance mechanisms for Africa-G20 cooperation is a key
                           focus. https://www.die-gdi.de/press_release_africa_standing_group/




                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                             Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity




                           [4] The Panel will comprise about five individuals who have formerly served in positions such as Prime
                           Minister, Finance Minister, Central Bank Governor, senior Government advisor, or IFI senior official

                                 1. Convene and facilitate the Advisory Panel meetings;
                                 2. Provide substantive and logistic support to the Advisory Panel activities i.e. briefs, communication,
                                    logistic, etc.

                                    Expected outputs: technical and high-level engagements to support validation and implementation of
                                    agreed policy commitments.

                                 3. This component will finance a fellowship program including salaries, benefits and travel etc. for
                                    Fellows. A core aspect of improving knowledge to policy action is ensuring a pipeline of young African
                                    professionals with a robust understanding of policy design and implementation and the potential for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    think tanks and policy institutes to support Africa’s economic transformation. ACET Fellowship
                                    program will see members of the diaspora and young African professionals hosted by ACET working in
                                    the region on specific projects or policy challenges. This will promote knowledge generation and
                                    dissemination, as well as building research and policy capacity in the region. Candidates will be
                                    competitively selected and recruited by leveraging the WBG Fellowship program.



                                    Excepted outputs: Fellows on board and contributing to policy engagement in Africa.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          NA as none are relevant for safeguard analysis



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          NA in this case as no safeguard work is required



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team



                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                                Page 7 of 8
                                   The World Bank
                                   Support to Regional Knowledge Capacity



                          Abdelaziz Lagnaoui, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Charles Ankisiba, Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                          Triggered?                          Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                                      the project is limited to capacity building
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                           No
                                                                                                                      and policy dialogue
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                                       No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Veronique Kabongo

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Hanneke Van Tilburg                               07-Jun-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Alexandre Arrobbio                                07-Jun-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Jun 29, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
