Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2005 
Report No.:  AC1318
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Project ID:  P076884 
Project Name:  IR-NORTHERN CITIES WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION PROJECT
Task Team Leader:  Mohammed Benouahi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 31, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 2, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (60%);Water supply (30%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other financial 
and private sector development (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
230.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
40.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
90.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project development objectives are to:  
 
a) 
Enhance the quality of life in the four northern cities of Rasht, Anzali, Sari and 
Babol by:  
 
(i) 
improving the reliability of the water supply systems through rehabilitation and 
extension of the water supply networks,  
 
(ii) 
improving the health and urban environmental conditions by providing 
wastewater collection services and treatment facilities and  
 
(iii) 
contributing to the environmental protection of the natural resources of the 
provinces (especially the Anzali Lagoon, an internationally recognized wetland).  
 
b)
Strengthen and develop the capacity of Gilan and Mazandaran Water and 
Wastewater Companies (WWCs), to improve their operational efficiency and financial 
sustainability.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is based on feasibility studies carried out during 2002-2004. The 
proposed project cover the first phase (2005-2009) investment program identified in the 
feasibility studies which covered the long-term need projections for the study area. The 
total project costs are estimated at US$330 million (including all contingencies and costs 
of parallel activities undertaken by the WWCs). The Bank financing is estimated at 
US$230 million.  
 
Water supply in the Gilan Province:  
 
The cities of Rasht (half a million inhabitants) and Anzali (about 120,000 inhabitants) 
are provided from the Central & Eastern Gilan Water Supply Scheme (C&EGWSS), 
which provides water also to many other cities in east and central areas of Gilan. The 
C&EGWSS depends on the surface water of Sefidrood River, and the groundwater of 
Emamzadeh Hashem deep wells.  Sefidrood River water is treated at Sangar Water 
Treatment Plant (WTP) and the Emergency WTP using conventional treatment processes 
comprising of flocculation, sedimentation, filtration and chlorination. Sangar WTP 
presently provides 259,200 m3/day, which accounts for 74% of the total supply quantity, 
whereas Emamzadeh Hashem wells provide 64,800 m3/day.The Gilan Regional Water 
Authority (GRWA) is responsible for the bulk supply in the province.  
 
As part of the proposed project, the following water works will be implemented, for a 
total of US$50.7 million in Rasht and US$9.6 million in Anzali:  
 
Rasht:  
 
o
261 km extension of distribution piping and mains  
 
o
Rehabilitation of 440 km of distribution piping  
 
o
Construction of 30,000 m3 reservoir at Lakan  
 
o
Transmission line Saravan Lakan (financed by the GRWB)  
 
o
Rehabilitation of two existing 2,500 m3 capacity        elevated storage tank 
(financed by the WWC).  
 
o
Construction of two 40,000 m3 ground reservoirs and related facilities (financed 
by the WWC)  
 
o
Provision of control and instrumentation system  
 
o
Reduction of unaccounted for water (studies and purchase of equipment)  
 
Anzali  
 
o
Replacement  of 39 km of distribution mains  
 
o
59
km
extension of distribution piping and mains  
 
o
57
km
extension of laterals (financed by the WWC)  
 
o
Reservoir and pump station (financed by the GRWB)  
 
o
Provision of control and instrumentation system  
 
o
Reduction of unaccounted for water (studies and purchase of equipment)  
 
Water Supply in the Mazandaran Province  
 
Sari  
 
The current population of Sari is about 220,000 inhabitants. Most of the population is 
connected to the water supply network. The total water demand of the city is 51,800 m3/d 
and is supplied from 19 wells, which are scattered inside and around the city, tapping the 
Tajan river aquifer and Tajan alluvial cone. The total water production of these wells is 
1,060 l/s (91,584 m3/d). The water quality test results show that the water quality is safe 
Page  3
and complies with WHO standards.  As part of the proposed project, the following water 
works will be executed in the first phase, for a total of about US$4.8 million:  
 
o
Rehabilitation of some 50 km of pipelines (100 to 400mm)  
 
o
Extension of the network (65 km )  
 
o
New branches (85 km) in 50 to 90 mm Dia pipelines (financed by the WWC)  
 
o
Installation of 5,500 consumer water meters  
 
o
Reduction of Unaccounted for Water  
 
Babol  
 
The current population of Babol is estimated at 180,000 inhabitants. The total water 
demand of the city is 41,796 m3/d and is supplied from a well field located 38 km toward 
south west of Babol, near Amol town. The well field, called Amol well field, taps the 
aquifer of the Haraz River basin, wherein 12 wells provide a total water supply capacity 
of 1,080 l/s (93,000 m3/d). The well field also supplies three urban centers adjacent to 
Babol, which include Babolsar, Amir-Kula, and Freeydounkenar.  
 
Within the proposed project the following water works shall be implemented, for a total 
amount of about US$7.1 million:  
 
o
Equipment and collection network for five existing wells (to be financed by the 
Mazandaran Regional Water Board).  
 
o
Construction of a 20000 m3 reservoir and a pump station (to be financed by the 
MRWB)  
 
o
Rehabilitation of water supply network by replacing 40 km of pipelines having 
100 to 400mm diameters  
 
o
Extension of water supply network mains by execution of 32 km of pipelines  
 
o
Extension of water supply network branches (125 km of pipes 50 to 90 mm)  
 
o
Installation of 4,500 consumer water meters (to be financed by the WWC).  
 
o
Study and equipment for the reduction of UFW  
 
Wastewater in the Gilan Province  
 
Rasht  
 
Rasht city is divided into western, eastern, and central drainage zones. Currently, 85% 
of its population is connected to a combined wastewater and storm drainage collection 
network, which discharges into Zarjoub and Goharood rivers. The rivers are severely 
polluted and during the summer season, when their flows are minimal, they are 
transformed to open sewers. The wastewater management plan in Rasht city is to collect 
the wastewater generated in the three drainage zones of the city and convey them by 
gravity and pumping to a single wastewater treatment plant (under construction) located 
some 4 km to the northeast of the city. These flows will be treated to secondary treatment 
level with additional nutrient removal for control of nitrogen and phosphorus levels. The 
treated effluent of Rasht WWTP will be discharged to Zarjoub River, ultimately 
discharging to Anzali lagoon, which in turn discharges to the Caspian Sea.  
 
At present, some parts of the wastewater collection system in Rasht are under 
construction, with priority given to the central drainage area as it has the highest 
population density. Construction of the wastewater treatment plant (capacity of 80,000 
m3/day) is currently in progress. A full EA was not performed for the under construction 
WWTP. Consequently and as part of the EA study of the proposed Rasht and Anzali 
project, a post environmental review was undertaken with respect to siting, engineering 
design, technical and environmental performance as well as any potential risks related to 
Page  4
the operation of the WWTP. The costs of the proposed components (for the phase 2005 to 
2009) of the wastewater collection and treatment system in Rasht are estimated at US$86. 
7
million and include:  
 
o
Construction of about 70400 house connections  
 
o
Construction of some 560 km of pipe networks  
 
o
16
lift stations  
 
o
Upgrading of the Rasht WWTP by including Biological Nutrient Removal (BNR)  
 
o
Provision of emergency raw wastewater storage tank with 24 hour capacity for 
phase 1.  
 
o
The provision of septage management works  
 
Anzali  
 
Anzali city is divided by Anzali lagoon into two drainage zones; called Anzali and 
Ghazian. Currently, 70% of its population is connected to a combined wastewater and 
storm drainage collection network, which discharges into either Anzali lagoon, which is 
currently classified as eutrophic in many of its parts, or into the Caspian Sea, through 
eight existing sewer outfalls. The wastewater management plan in Anzali city is to collect 
the wastewater generated in each drainage zone and convey it by gravity and pumping to 
a
central WWTP serving that zone. Thus, there will be two WWTPs: one in Western 
Anzali (under construction) and one in Ghazian. It is forecasted that by end of phase 1, 
65% of the population will be connected to the collection system, generating 19,710 m3 
of effluents per day. These flows will be treated to secondary treatment level with 
additional nutrient removal for control of nitrogen and phosphorus levels. The treated 
effluent of West Anzali WWTP will be discharged to Anzali Lagoon, which in turn 
discharges to the Caspian Sea. The treated effluent of East Anzali WWTP will be 
discharged to Talebabad River, which discharges to the Caspian Sea. The target for year 
2027 is to serve 252,000 people with a total generated flow of 51,160 m3/day.  
 
As part of the proposed project, the following wastewater works will be executed in 
Anzali for a total amount of about US$46.1 million:  
 
o
Construction of 27,000 house connections  
 
o
A
total of 253 km of collection network  
 
o
14
lift stations  
 
o
Upgrading of the Anzali West WWTP by including biological nutrient removal.  
 
o
Provision of emergency raw wastewater storage tank with 24 hour capacity at 
Anzali WWTP.  
 
o
The provision of septage management works at Anzali West WWTP.  
 
o
Construction of the first module at East Anzali WWTP  
 
It should be noted that since the discharge of all treatment plants is eventually reaching 
the sensitive water body of Anzali lagoon, additional features have been incorporated in 
the design of the Rasht and Anzali WWTPs to increase their performance and reliability. 
These features include: (1) the provision of biological nutrient Removal (BNR) for 
controlling nitrogen and phosphorus to minimum levels achieved by biological treatment 
systems, (2) the provision of 24 hour emergency storage tank for raw sewage in case of 
upset in plant performance (3) the provision of UV disinfection in lieu of chlorine to 
eliminate the possibility of harmful chlorination by-products.  
Page  5
Sludge treatment for the Rasht WWTP (under construction) will be achieved through 
blending, thickening, and anaerobic digestion, and dewatering by belt filter presses to 
30% dry solids content. Sludge treatment for Anzali West and East WWTPs will be 
achieved through thickening and dewatering to 30% dry solids content. The projected 
sludge quantity from Rasht WWTP is 26 m3/day at year 2009, (reaching 111 m3/day at 
year by 2027). The projected sludge quantity from both West and East Anzali WWTP is 
28 m3/day for year 2027. The initial sludge disposal scheme proposed was incineration 
since sludge disposal by re-use in agriculture within Gilan province was rejected due at a) 
public opposition in application to agricultural fields (predominantly cultivated by rice), 
b) unfavorable weather conditions (high humidity and rain for most of the year which 
prevents sludge drying in open beds), and c) the higher cost of landfilling when compared 
to cost of incineration. However - and as concluded by the post environmental review - 
the proposed incineration system did not meet international accepted guidelines in terms 
of emission levels and other environmental criteria. Therefore after a re-analysis of the 
feasible options, it was decided to opt for the re-use of sludge from Rasht and Anzali in 
agriculture at the borders of the Gilan province with Qazwin province (after storage for 
up to one year to control for all infectious microorganisms); initial contacts were made 
with the authorities in Qazwin and the details of the site location are yet to be finalized. 
The agricultural and climatic conditions in the proposed zone have been identified as the 
more appropriate method for this project. The costs of the site purchase and preparation 
will be covered by the WWC (in lieu of the incinerator).  Given that the Rasht WWTP 
falls within the area of influence of the project, on site analyses and an environmental 
assessment will be conducted during project implementation for the proper handling and 
disposal of the sludge. The EA will also cover the sludge from the Ghazian WWTP to be 
financed under the project.  
 
Wastewater in the Mazandaran Province  
 
Sari  
 
There are no wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system in Sari. The common 
practice for wastewater disposal is through percolation pits. These wells have 1 to 1.2 m 
diameter and 8 to 10 m depth and normally require one time cleaning in about 1-to 2 year 
period.  
 
The wastewater is almost entirely of domestic origin. Only two industries that produce 
an effluent are located in the project area: a dairy factory and a soft drink factory. Both 
factories have activated sludge wastewater pre-treatment plants, which produce effluent 
compliant with Iranian standards for industrial effluent discharge to the sewer network.  
 
It is projected that by end of first phase of the project, about 30% of the population will 
be connected, generating flows of 15,595 m3/day. At year 2029, 100% of the population 
of Sari will be connected, generating 92,840 m3/day. The Sari WWTP will employ the 
activated sludge treatment process and shall include processes for nitrogen control and 
effluent disinfection by chlorination. The proposed WWTP is comprised of four modules, 
with a capacity of 23,240 m3/d per module. Treated effluent will be discharged to the 
Tajan River; whereas the generated sludge of the plant will be re-used as a fertilizer and 
soil conditioner after composting and storage for one year (land is made available on the 
site of the WWTP). While the use of sludge compost is not yet commonly known, the 
project will help promote its use among farmers. As a back-up option, the WWC has 
Page  6
entered into consultation with the Department of Forestry in Mazandaran which has 
indicated its interest in use over forested land.  
 
Under the proposed project, the following wastewater works will be executed in Sari for 
a
total amount of about US$40 million:  
 
o
Installation of 16,000 house connection using 120 km PVC pipes, dia. 150 mm. 
(financed by the WWC)  
 
o
Installation of 125 km laterals using polyethylene pipes with 200 mm diameter;  
 
o
Installation of 108 km of main pipes and interceptors;  
 
o
Installation of 4 km trunk mains using polyethylene pipes with 1200 mm 
diameter;  
 
o
Installation of two pumping stations with capacity;  
 
o
Construction of the first module of WWTP;  
 
o
Provision of septage receiving facility at Sari WWTP;  
 
o
Construction of 1.2 km outfall main with pipe diameter 1400 mm for discharging 
of treated effluent from the WWTP to Tajan River.  
 
The total land requirements for the development of the wastewater treatment plant for 
the target year of the project are 13 ha. This land and the right of way for the outfall main 
have been acquired by Mazandaran WWC. Pipelines will be laid within the right of way 
of public streets, and there is no need for land acquisition.  
 
The 1400 mm treated effluent outfall will run parallel to an exiting irrigation canal and 
shall discharge to the Tajan River at a point 30 km south of the Caspian Sea. The Tajan 
River water is restricted to irrigation use downstream of the effluent discharge point.  
 
Sludge treatment will be achieved through blending, thickening, aerobic digestion, 
mechanical dewatering, and composting. Following composting, the sludge will be stored 
so that the total curing and storage period is one year. Sludge compost produced from the 
treatment plant at the end of the first phase is estimated at 700 tons/yr and will reach 
4,600 tons/yr by year 2029. An area of 1.7 hectares has been allocated in the treatment 
plant for sludge composting. The sludge will be treated to achieve WHO guidelines of 
less than one nematode egg per 100 grams dry solids. The sludge compost will be 
transported to agricultural areas, where it will be used as a fertilizer and soil conditioner.  
 
In order to mitigate the effects of disposing non-compliant effluent (incase of plant 
breakdown), the treatment plant design includes for the provision of four emergency 
storage lagoons, which in total provide a volume of 93,000 m3. This volume is sufficient 
to store the treated effluent for one day at year 2029 flow.  
 
Babol  
 
The wastewater collection, treatment and disposal systems in Babol city is currently 
under construction. The common practice for wastewater disposal for the whole city is to 
utilize percolation pits, which are identical in size and operating method as those 
described for Sari.  
 
As there is no industry in the project area of Babol, the sewage is entirely of domestic 
origin. It is projected that by end of first phase of the project, 33% of the population will 
be connected, generating 18,913 m3/day.  
 
The Babol WWTP will employ the activated sludge process and shall include processes 
for nitrification with effluent disinfection by chlorination. The final effluent discharge to 
Babolroud River has been discarded in view of major difficulties faced in acquisition of 
the properties required for routing the outfall to this river. Therefore the treated effluent 
Page  7
will be discharged to Shazedroud River. The sludge generated from the Babol plant will 
be re-used as a fertilizer and soil conditioner after composting.  
 
Under the proposed project, the following wastewater works will be executed in first 
phase, for a total amount of about US$27.6 million:  
 
o
Installation 16,300 house connections (financed by the WWC);  
 
o
Installation of 90 km laterals using polyethylene pipes;  
 
o
Installation of 38 km main pipes and interceptors including 1.2 km by pipe 
jacking using polyethylene pipes with 250 to 1000 mm diameter;  
 
o
Installation of six lift stations;  
 
o
Completion of the first stream of module one of Babol WWTP;  
 
o
Provision of septage receiving facility at the Babol WWTP;  
 
o
Construction of 4 km outfall main with 1400 mm diameter for discharging treated 
effluent from the WWTP to Shazedroud River.  
 
The trunk main which conveys all the wastewater to the WWTP has already been 
constructed. The total land requirements for the development of the wastewater treatment 
plant for target year of the project are 10 ha. This land and the right of way for the outfall 
main have been acquired by the MWWC. Pipelines will be laid within the right of way of 
public streets, and there is no need for land acquisition.  
 
At present, trunk lines and part of mains and laterals are being laid in the city and the 
first stream of the wastewater treatment plant is under construction. A full EA was not 
performed prior to the construction of the wastewater treatment plant. Consequently and 
as part of the EA study of the proposed Sari and Babol water and sanitation project, a 
post environmental review was undertaken with respect to the engineering design, 
technical and environmental performance as well as any potential risks related to the 
operation of the WWTP.  
 
Shazedroud is a relatively small river, which runs dry in its upper reaches during the 
summer season. The river is strictly used for irrigation during the summer months and 
during the wet season it discharges to the Caspian Sea. During the summer, the effluent 
will be used for irrigation of the orange orchards surrounding the course of the river, and 
during the winter season the effluent will be used for augmenting the river?s flows.  
 
Sludge treatment will be achieved through blending, thickening, and anaerobic 
digestion, mechanical dewatering, composting followed by compost storage for one year. 
Sludge compost produced from the treatment plant in the first phase is estimated at 410 
tons/yr and will reach 3,550 tons/yr by year 2029. For composting the sludge, an area of 
1.3 hectares has been allocated in the treatment plant. The sludge compost will be 
transported to agricultural areas where it will be used as a fertilizer and soil conditioner. 
Similar to Sari, four emergency storage lagoons are provided to mitigate the effects of 
discharging non-compliant effluent.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The baseline conditions were investigated within this study area and for adjacent areas 
that could potentially be affected by the project. Baseline information has been quantified 
within three main topic areas - physical, biological and socio-economic.  
 
Gilan Province  
Page  8
The major source of water in Rasht and Anzali is surface water. There are two rivers 
flowing in Rasht; Zarjoob (Siahrood) River and Goharood River, which join to form a 
main river called Syghlanroodbar (Pirbazar), which discharges into Anzali Lagoon and 
eventually into the Caspian Sea. The two rivers are mostly used for irrigation purpose. 
Based on 25 years of records the annual average flow at the GRWA bridge in Zarjoob 
River is 5.73 m3/sec. As for Goharood the annual average of the flows measured at 
Lakan is 1.08 m3/sec based on 10 years of measurements. Both rivers are highly polluted 
as they receive considerable wastewater discharges and pollutants from other sources 
such as solid wastes, or agricultural runoff. The available data on the water quality of 
these rivers confirm the deteriorating quality of the rivers where the BOD5 levels in both 
rivers measured up to 30 mg/l when the normal level for clean rivers should be less than 
1
mg/l and DO levels measured as low as 1.8 mg/l when DO saturation concentration is 
around 10 mg/l.  
 
Anzali is characterized by numerous short rivers (Rogas), which eventually discharge to 
Anzali lagoon; among which is Pirbazar Roga, which originates from the two rivers of 
Rasht city. Some of these rivers convey domestic sewage originated by the communities 
discharging into them.  
 
The Anzali Lagoon, the most prominent environmental feature in the project area, is 
listed as a ?wetland of international importance? under the 1971 Ramsar Convention due 
to its importance as a natural wetland characteristic of the southern Caspian lowlands, 
and as such, supports an extremely diverse wetland flora and fauna. This Lagoon is 
located on the South West of the Caspian Sea and is connected to the sea through a 
channel called Ghazian. The current total area of the wet land, covering both lagoon and 
the marsh land is 193 km2. The lagoon itself is around 80 km2 with average of depth 
ranges of 1 to 3 m. The wet lands include two wildlife refuge areas, two protected areas, 
and four no hunting areas. The site has been placed on the Ramsar Montreux Record of 
priority sites for conservation action since December 1993, due to environmental 
degradation: the diminishing areas of the wetlands and the lagoon, the excessive growth 
of reed beds, decreased production of fish quantities, and the eutrophication, which is 
causing excessive water fern growth. According to a recent study by JICA of Japan on 
the integrated management of the lagoon?s ecosystem, the lake is eutrophic at several 
locations as confirmed by measurements of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total 
phosphorus (TP) in five locations of the lagoon. According to this study, the major 
adverse effects on the wetland are arising from the watershed, while other adverse effects 
were attributed to activities within the wetland.  Adverse effects from the watershed to 
the wetland are as follows: (1) inflow of polluted water; (2) inflow and dumping of 
garbage; (3) inflow of sediment; and (4) changes of the water level of the Caspian Sea. 
Of these factors, the inflow of polluted water is the most serious factor due to the 
discharge of organic loads, which causes oxygen depletion, and the discharge of nutrients 
(nitrogen and phosphorus) leading to excessive algal growth and thus eutrophic 
conditions. The main contribution of polluted water comes from urban domestic 
wastewater, of which the discharge of Rasht and Anzali cities represent 83% of the total. 
The long term level changes in the Caspian Sea are the main cause for salinity changes in 
Anzali Lagoon, which has adverse impacts on its aquatic ecosystem.  
 
There is one industrial city 25 km south of Rasht and two large industrial complexes 10 
km away from Anzali City. These industrial cities will include a number of industry types 
Page  9
and will produce different wastewater qualities. However, these industries will not be 
connected to the proposed sewerage system, but will have their own central treatment 
facility, which will be monitored by the DoE-Gilan. Nevertheless, there are scattered 
small size industries in both cities. These industries include soft drinks, canning, 
chemicals, dairy, and slaughterhouse. In Rasht there are 17 industries producing 355 
m3/day of wastewater, with only 7 industries generating more than 10 m3/day. Whereas 
in Anzali there are only four industries. According to current policy that limits the 
operation of industries to rural areas of the City, no further industrial development within 
the urban areas of the cities is expected. Furthermore, existing legislation provides for the 
control of industrial discharges which are monitored by the Department of Environment  
 
Agricultural areas are dispersed around Rasht and Anzali, with the majority located 
outside the urban areas. The total areas of cultivated lands in Rasht and Anzali amount to 
62,860 hectares and 42,849 hectares respectively. Rice cultivation is the predominant 
agricultural activity in the region, with over 90% of cultivated areas are used for rice 
growing. Other crops include cereals, fruits and tea crops. Present irrigation sources 
include natural rainfall, supplemented occasionally by river water.  
 
Although both Rasht and Anzali cities are among the oldest cities in north Iran, yet there 
are no structures or remains of any archeological or historical significance according to 
the Cultural and Heritage Department, Gilan.  
 
Mazandaran Province  
 
Both surface and ground water resources are used as a source for potable, industrial, and 
irrigation water in Sari and Babol regions. Presently, the major source of potable water 
supplying Sari and Babol is groundwater.  
 
One of the important problems in Sari and Babol is the threat to public health caused by 
improper disposal of untreated wastewater and septage. Agricultural areas are dispersed 
outside and around Sari and Babol. There are more than 100,000 hectares in Sari, and 
80,000 hectares in Babol of prime agricultural land cultivated mostly by rice and citrus 
orchards. Irrigation sources include river water, ground wells, and springs. Irrigation 
water is estimated at 610 million cubic meters per year in Sari and 644 million cubic 
meters per year in Babol. Chemical fertilizers are widely used in the region.  
 
Mazandaran Province is located in an active seismic region of Iran. There are at least 10 
faults in Mazandaran. Sari and Babol are located on the same fault line of Khazar, which 
passes through Lahijan to the west and Golastan to the east. In year 2004, there have been 
two main seismic activities in Mazandaran province, one of which resulted in 35 deaths 
and hundreds wounded.  
 
In Sari, Tajan is the major river that passes through the city. It originates from Niz-Abad 
Mountains and flows to the north to discharge in the Caspian Sea. The annual average 
flow of Tajan River measured at Soleyman station (40 km upstream of Sari city) is 6.55 
m3/sec and at Kordkheyl station (few km downstream of Sari) is 13.56 m3/sec. Tajan 
River is used to irrigate farms and orchards. During the past few years Tajan water 
quality, in Sari city and downstream of it, has deteriorated because of agriculture 
drainage, and untreated wastewater discharges. The fifteen water quality analyses that 
were made over a five month period demonstrate that the pollution level of the river is 
low to medium. Some measurements of fecal coliform levels exceeded the 400 
coliforms/100 ml limit set by Iranian standards for irrigation use. The average of the 
BOD5 measurements was 6 mg/l with highest recorded was 17 mg/l.  
Page  10
A
number of industrial facilities are located around Sari, however only one dairy and 
one soft drink industry are located within the project area. The volume of wastewater 
produced by these industrial facilities is about 800 m3/d and both have pre-treatment 
facilities, which are producing effluents that comply with Iranian standards for industrial 
discharge to public sewerage systems. According to current policy of the Iranian 
Government which limits the industries to rural areas, no further industrial development 
is expected within the City. Furthermore, existing legislation control and limit industrial 
discharges to set standards.  
 
The proposed wastewater treatment plant is located in the northern part of Sari city at 
distance of 1 km from the city. The plant surroundings comprise of agricultural areas 
with rice and citrus orchards, which are irrigated mainly by the Tajan River.  
 
Babol.  The main river crossing Babol is Babolroud. It originates from Savadkoh 
Mountains and flows to the north to discharge in the Caspian Sea. The annual average 
flow of Babolroud River measured at Babol station, in the city itself is 16 m3/sec.  
Babolroud River is used to irrigate farms and orchards. The river?s water quality has 
deteriorated because of agriculture drainage and untreated wastewater discharges.  The 
average of the BOD5 levels was 6 mg/l with highest recoded was 9 mg/l.  
 
Shazedroud flows to the north of Babol city and discharges in the Caspian Sea, at 
Babolsar city coastline. It is a relatively small river, which runs dry in its upper reaches 
during the summer season. On average the river has a flow of 1 m3/sec at its downstream 
end near the sea, and 200 to 300 l/sec at its upstream end, where the treated effluent 
outfall of Babol treatment plant is proposed to be discharged. The river water is strictly 
used for irrigation; wherein the area around it is comprised of agricultural fields. 
Presently, Shazedroud is polluted as it receives a considerable amount of raw wastewater 
and agriculture drainage as well as solid waste.  
 
Babol wastewater treatment plant, which is under construction, is located in the North of 
Babol city at of 5 km from the boundary of Babol city. The nearest residential area is 
Amir- Kola, located at 3 km distance from the treatment plant. The surroundings of the 
plant are mainly agricultural areas with rice fields and citrus orchards.  
 
Beneficiary attitudes to project.  
 
In all four cities, attitudes toward the project were broadly congruent.  In Anzali, the 
poor majority believe that the project will bring a positive benefit.However, the higher 
income groups are more skeptical about the level of improvements likely to accrue from 
the Project.  In all cities, it was recognized that the project would bring benefits.  
However, there was expressed across all cities the same skepticism and doubts as to 
whether the existing WWC management has the institutional capacity to deliver 
improvements or the means to interact effectively with the beneficiaries.  The public was, 
therefore, broadly skeptical that the companies would actually deliver the promised 
benefit, and this skepticism adversely affected willingness to pay.   This skepticism was 
reflected in the high non response rate to the questionnaire survey on willingness to pay, 
and reluctance to disclose information on private family matters such as incomes, their 
self-perceived class ranking.  
 
In all four cities, respondents expressed considerable scepticism about the management 
capacity of the companies, and in particular their ability to work effectively with 
beneficiaries.  There was a distinct feeling that community participation in monitoring of 
service delivery, through lane and neighbourhood committees with ability to make 
Page  11
representation to the WWW companies, should be complemented by a capacity 
developed in the companies to enable them to present essential information on water and 
sanitation issues in a user friendly way that the community can relate to.  The companies 
should each have a community liaison function. This in turn would require training and 
technical assistance.  
 
Willingness and ability to pay.  At present, households pay broadly from 16% to 22% of 
their incomes on all public services aggregated: water, solid waste, education health and 
transport, on clearly modest incomes for the poorer groups of $1 -$1.50 per person per 
day.   Water charges are estimated to comprise about 1-2 percent of incomes, which is 
low by global standards. Modelling scenarios suggested that a doubling of connection 
fees and usage tariffs might increase this combined utility component of household 
budgets by around 5%, which would certainly be felt significantly, particularly by the 
poorer sections of the population.  The willingness to pay component of the social 
assessment therefore led to the obvious conclusions: a) the poor are most willing to pay, 
because they suffer the most deplorable environmental health conditions; and b) people 
were unwilling to commit to a specific amount, yet reluctant to show unwillingness lest 
their refusal might prejudice their opportunity to gain a needed service. The operational 
consequences of this conclusion are spelt out in the recommendations for communication 
and public education.   
 
5. Environment & Social Specialist's Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental assessment indicated that the execution of the project will have long 
term positive environmental impacts in terms of reducing pollution of natural resources, 
generation of significant economical, social and public health benefits, and will enable 
the government to enforce existing environmental regulations and standards.  
 
Page  12
The project will extend and rehabilitate water networks to increase water supply 
coverage, provide good quality water on a continuous basis, and to reduce unaccounted 
for water. Moreover, the project will help improve health conditions of the population by 
providing them with adequate water quantity and quality from sustainable sources.  
 
The provision of wastewater collection and treatment facilities will have a clear long-
term positive effect on the overall environment and on public health conditions. There 
will be improvement in the water quality in the streams and rivers that flow throughout 
the project area. A major benefit of the project is the protection of groundwater resources 
from contamination by untreated sewage. As a result, economic benefits will occur in 
terms of increased water volume of good quality, increased tourism activities, and lower 
medical costs associated with treating water-borne diseases.  
 
A
major benefit of the project is the protection of groundwater resources from 
contamination by untreated sewage, and the elimination of direct sewage discharge to the 
Caspian Sea from Anzali City. Furthermore, by eliminating the direct discharge of raw 
sewage from Rasht and Anzali cities, the project will substantially reduce the current 
organic and nutrient loads that are originating from urban centers on Anzali Lagoon, and 
will thus address one of the major environmental problems affecting Anzali Lagoon 
today.  
 
The project will not cause any threat to the natural habitats of the project area. By 
implementing the project the ecological conditions of the surface water bodies in the 
project area will improve significantly. Therefore, the project will assist in the restoration 
of the degraded water quality of Anzali wetlands and hence contribute positively to the 
conservation of natural habitats. As a result of the project, economic benefits will occur 
in terms of increased water volume of good quality, increased tourism activities, and 
lower medical costs associated with treating water-borne diseases.  Finally, the 
wastewater treatment facilities will also provide an opportunity to better control industrial 
discharges through enforcing pretreatment and connection to the collection system as 
stipulated in the Iranian law.  
 
It is worth noting that the design of the treatment plants has taken into consideration the 
use of their by-products (treated effluent and generated sludge) with the aim of protecting 
the environment and the scarce water resources.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Drinking Water Quantity and Quality: treated water quantity and quality should meet 
water demand as well as allowable drinking water standards set by the Iranian 
Government and WHO. Among the parameters of concern are the bacteriological 
contamination of the water, the concentration level of nitrate, the presence of nitrite and 
the concentration of heavy metals. In order to safeguard public health, it is imperative 
that regular monitoring of raw and treated water at the treatment plants, storage reservoirs 
and in the distribution network be implemented to ensure that drinking water limits are 
not exceeded.  
Page  13
Treated Effluent Quality: the treated effluent should be of acceptable quality so that it 
can be safely discharged into water bodies.  This means that the effluent quality should 
meet the standards for discharge into water bodies. One major concern is the 
concentration level of nutrients such as ammonia, nitrate and phosphate which could 
result in algal growth in the receiving water bodies.  Regular monitoring of these 
variables will be required to ensure strict adherence to the prevailing standards.  
 
Sludge Quality: In the case of dried sludge re-use by farmers as soil conditioner or 
fertilizer, the sludge quality will have to comply with the WHO guidelines for the use of 
sludge in agriculture including the limit of less than one intestinal nematode egg per 100 
gm of dry solids and the limits on the concentration of heavy metals. The adopted 
treatment processes, the one year storage period, and the control of industrial discharges 
to the sewage system would have to ensure that the WHO nematode standard FAO 
guidelines on the level of toxic substances would not be exceeded for the use of sludge in 
agriculture.  
 
Other Impacts: Adverse environmental impacts during the construction phase might be 
significant, however they are only temporary. Typical impacts are those of dust, noise, 
traffic congestion, and disturbance to the residents of the area. Good construction 
practices would mitigate most of these temporary impacts to acceptable levels. Moreover, 
the project will have a positive impact on employment resulting from the increased 
construction activities.  
 
The project will have no significant long term negative impact on air quality, climate, 
biological environment, socio-economic conditions, or other development projects.  
 
In summary, once operational, most of the impacts of the Project are expected to be 
positive.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The option of continuing with the current water supply system and wastewater disposal 
methods, as well as alternative water supply schemes and other wastewater treatment 
processes have been explored and compared in terms of capital costs, operational costs, 
land requirements, length of transmission lines, consumed energy, environmental 
impacts, management needs, reliability of the process and local conditions.  
 
The ?no project? option would avoid the temporary environmental impacts of installing 
pipelines and constructing treatment plants; however, this option is rejected on the 
grounds of economic cost and adverse long-term environmental and social impacts.  It 
would mean a whole region with deficient water supply system and no wastewater 
collection and treatment.  Under such conditions severe adverse environmental impacts 
such as pollution, flooding, and poor health conditions would increase and the prevailing 
environmental conditions will further deteriorate.  
 
Moreover, the economic benefits of the proposed project are greater than the cost of not 
implementing it; taking into account increased revenues from tariffs from new 
Page  14
connections to water supply and wastewater, the cost of the degradation of surface and 
ground water resources; the cost of treating additional water quantities to compensate for 
the high unaccounted for water; the high maintenance cost for the aged water supply 
system; lost working days due to water related diseases; cost of medical treatment; costs 
of indiscriminate wastewater disposal by tankers, and the use of commercial fertilizer 
instead of treated sludge.  
 
With respect to wastewater collection and treatment, a number of alternatives have been 
considered including on-site sanitation, decentralized treatment and centralized treatment.  
On-site sanitation in Rasht, Anzali, Sari and Babol has proved to be difficult to achieve 
because of the high ground water level in most of the project area, management issues, 
treated effluent quality, as well as financial issues. People living in areas served with on-
site sanitation facilities face severe difficulties disposing their sewage, and in many 
instances there is no controlled disposal of septage from these facilities.  Furthermore, the 
government has already initiated the construction of Rasht and West Anzali wastewater 
treatment plants and various sections of the collection and conveyance networks are 
being implemented, which would offer a more feasible and reliable method for sewage 
disposal to house owners. Hence, the option of on-site sanitation is rejected.  
 
Taking into consideration the prohibition set by the Department of Environment on the 
construction of wastewater treatment plants within city limits, the option of decentralized 
treatment by having additional WWTPs serving sub-areas of the cities was also rejected 
based on cost, availability of land and potential adverse environmental impacts.  
 
The proposed activated sludge process and other processes (aerated lagoons, 
stabilization ponds, extended aeration-activated sludge, and oxidation ditch activated 
sludge) were also evaluated and compared.  In the Gilan Province, since the plots of land 
for Rasht and West Anzali WWTPs have already been acquired and since land 
availability in general is very limited in both cities, both the stabilization ponds and the 
aerated lagoons were rejected, as they would require larger areas.  The activated sludge 
system was selected in view of reliability and operational flexibility; furthermore, the 
activated sludge process was found to be most suitable for upgrading the plants under 
construction by including the BNR process, which is required for nitrogen and phosphate 
nutrients removal according to the revised designs of the plants.  For the Mazandaran 
Province, among all the processes considered, the activated sludge process with nitrogen 
control ranked first in terms of reliability to produce compliant effluent with required 
nutrient levels, and least area requirements. All of these factors are critical considering 
the groundwater and surface water situation in the area of influence as well as the limited 
land availability, particularly since 13 ha and 10 ha of land have already been acquired 
for both Sari and Babol. Therefore the activated sludge system is the most 
environmentally sound option and thus it was the selected alternative. The option of 
extended aeration was rejected due to higher construction and operation cost, and land 
acquisition costs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The EMP identifies feasible cost effective measures to mitigate any adverse 
environmental impacts that might occur during the construction and operation of the 
project. The EMP covers mitigation measures, monitoring and institutional strengthening.  
Page  15
Mitigation of Adverse Environmental Impacts in Gilan  
 
Mitigation measures have been identified to ensure that the defined objectives of the 
project are achieved whilst preventing and reducing any adverse environmental impacts.  
The mitigation measures are to be executed by the construction contractor (construction 
phase) and the treatment plant operators (operation phase) with supervision by the 
GWWC.  
 
Water Quality: The Project is expected to improve quality of water in the rivers, Anzali 
Lagoon and the Caspian Sea. The provision of a wastewater network for collecting and 
diverting the generated wastewater to treatment plants will certainly minimize potential 
bacteriological contamination of ground water.  Furthermore, the proposed project will 
finance the regular monitoring of water quality.During project implementation, a 
continuous monitoring program would be implemented to ensure that treated water would 
always meet the required standards.  The monitoring program will cover biological and 
physical parameters as well as heavy metals and pesticides residues.  
 
Effluent Quality: The proposed secondary treatment level is based on activated sludge 
process with provision for nutrient control by the BNR system, which would ensure a 
treated effluent of acceptable quality for discharge in receiving water bodies. This 
process will result in the reduction of BOD5, total nitrogen, total phosphorus and fecal 
coliforms, to levels that are in accordance with prevailing standards. Emergency storage 
of raw wastewater for 24 hours is also provided to provide further mitigation measure for 
the protection of Anzali Lagoon from any upset in the treatment process.  As soon as the 
wastewater treatment plants start operating, monitoring of BOD5, suspended solids, total 
phosphorus, total nitrogen, and fecal coliforms, in the influent and effluent will be 
conducted by the GWWC to ensure adherence to the required standard.  
 
In view of the treated effluent quality, which will be in compliance with the prevailing 
standards for discharge to water bodies, and the dilution effects of the rainy season, no 
adverse impacts are envisaged on the rivers of Zarjoob and Goharood in Rasht and on 
Anzali lagoon and Rogas in Anzali. In fact, the environmental state of the rivers is 
expected to improve in comparison to the base condition due to improved water quality 
of the discharging rivers.  
 
Sludge Quality:  The sludge treatment processes of the two treatment plants include: 
sludge blending, thickening, anaerobic digestion, and sludge dewatering.  These 
processes will ensure the elimination of toxics and pollutants in the sludge.  For the use 
of dried sludge in agriculture as soil conditioner or fertilizer, the project will ensure 
compliance with WHO applicable guidelines including the limit of less than one 
intestinal nematode egg per 100 gm of dry solids by monitoring the quality of treated 
sludge and ensuring a drying period of one year.  
 
Industrial Discharges: The discharge of untreated industrial effluents can affect the 
performance of the wastewater treatment plants, resulting in a lower quality treated 
effluent. The project will only provide connections to those industries that do not 
discharge toxics that affect the performance of the wastewater treatment plants.  The 
discharge of industrial effluents will be subject to the approval of both the Director of the 
treatment plant and the provincial director of the DoE.  For those industries for which 
their industrial effluents will not be pre-treated, and/or will not be connected to the 
network, the DOE will require that each polluting industrial establishment will prepare a 
compliance action plan (CAP), which will address the pollutants of concern, the type of 
Page  16
pre-treatment required and the investments and monitoring costs of the pre-treatment 
facility.  
 
Moreover, under the World Bank funded sewage project for Tehran, standards for 
industrial effluent discharged into sewage systems are being developed in close 
coordination with DOE and other concerned line ministries. These standards include the 
following industrial sectors: food, textiles, tanneries, pulp and paper, metal, 
pharmaceutical and electronic industries as well as general standards for the remaining 
industrial sector. Also, the DOE has promulgated standards for industrial discharges to 
surface waters. The project will ensure compliance with all these standards, where 
applicable, and with the planned future promulgation of a national law for the discharge 
of industrial effluents to sewage networks.  
 
Septage Handling: The project will include septage handling facilities at Rasht and West 
Anzali WWTP for receiving the septage from on-site disposal facilities. The septage will 
be co-treated with the wastewater that is discharged to the plant from the collection 
network. The need to adjust the plant design to accommodate the septage will be 
evaluated.  
 
Odors emissions from the wastewater treatment plants will be minimized by the 
provision of odor removal equipment at Rasht WWTP, and  by careful planning and 
implementation of the plant operation and maintenance procedures at all treatment plants. 
Regular Odor emissions monitoring from the wastewater treatment plants will be 
implemented to mitigate any non-compliance by taking appropriate operating measures.  
 
Mitigation of Adverse Environmental Impacts in Mazandaran  
 
Water Quality:  Careful monitoring of the water quality is required to verify compliance 
with prevailing standards and to detect any trend in adverse change in water quality. 
Ammonia and nitrite have high values, but are within the national standards. 
Bacteriological analyses of Sari and Babol groundwater supply indicate the absence of 
bacteriological contamination and confirm the efficiency of the chlorination system. The 
provision of a wastewater network for collecting and transmitting the generated 
wastewater to a treatment plant will certainly minimize potential bacteriological 
contamination of ground water. Furthermore, the proposed project will finance the 
regular monitoring of water quality. During project implementation, a continuous 
monitoring program would be implemented to ensure that treated water will always meet 
the required standards. The monitoring program will cover biological and physical 
parameters as well as heavy metals and pesticides residues.  
 
Effluent Quality: The proposed treatment level, which is based on the activated sludge 
process and chlorination, would ensure a treated effluent of acceptable quality for 
discharge in receiving surface water bodies. The wastewater treatment processes, include 
nitrification and de-nitrification processes in Sari?s WWTP. In Babol the current process 
design includes for nitrification only. These processes will result in the removal of 
organic materials and nutrients down to the required levels. Furthermore, effluent 
chlorination, (and filtration if needed for Babol?s WWTP), will insure the bacteriological 
quality of effluent. As soon as the wastewater treatment plants start operating, monitoring 
of wastewater quality in the influent and effluent will be conducted to ensure adherence 
to the required standards.  
Page  17
In view of the treated effluent quality of Sari WWTP, which will be in compliance with 
the prevailing standards for discharge to surface water resources, the impacts on Tajan 
River is insignificant and will be localized to the discharge point. In fact, the 
environmental state of the river is expected to improve in comparison to the base 
condition due to elimination of direct wastewater discharge to the river once the WWTP 
will be put in operation.  
 
The treated effluent of Babol WWTP, which will be in compliance with national 
standards for discharge to surface water bodies, will have only limited impact on 
Shazedroud River. Since the treatment plant does not include de-nitrification, the nitrate 
effluent concentrations will be 20 mg/l, thus exceeding the national standard of 11 mg/l 
for discharge to surface water bodies. However, as Shazedroud River is used as an 
irrigation source only, the additional nitrate concentration will not be causing significant 
impact on this river or on the environment.  
 
In the summer season the effluent will be used in agriculture.  The treatment process at 
Babol WWTP will result in the removal of nematodes to less than one percent of the 
concentration in the raw wastewater entering the treatment plant.  Therefore the presence 
of nematodes in the treated effluent will be directly related to their concentration in the 
raw wastewater.  As soon as the wastewater treatment plants start operating, monitoring 
of nematodes in the effluent will be conducted to ensure adherence to the required 
standard. In the winter season, the effluent of Babol WWTP will be mixing with the river 
water to discharge in the Caspian Sea. The project is expected to improve the Caspian 
Sea general environmental state by preventing the untreated wastewater to the Caspian 
Sea via the surface water bodies of Tajan and Babolroud. Regular monitoring will be 
required to ensure treated effluent adherence with the Iranian discharge standards.  
 
Sludge Quality:  The sludge treatment processes of Sari and Babol treatment plants 
include sludge blending, thickening, aerobic digestion for Sari and anaerobic digestion 
for Babol, sludge dewatering, and composting. These processes will ensure the 
elimination of toxics and pollutants in the sludge. For the use of composted sludge in 
agriculture as soil conditioner or fertilizer, the project will ensure compliance with 
applicable guidelines through sufficient compost curing and storage period of one year.  
 
Septage Handling: The project will include septage handling facilities at Sari and Babol 
WWTP for receiving the septage from on-site disposal facilities. The septage will be co-
treated with the wastewater that is discharged to the plant from the collection network. 
The project includes a study to evaluate the extent to which this septage can be 
incorporated into the WWTP and the need for additional facilities to receive the septage. 
Moreover, the issue of septage from the remaining cesspits will be taken up by the 
proposed Basin Council (under the World Bank-financed Alborz Land and Water 
Management Project) which will be responsible for coordination of all water and 
wastewater management at the basin level.  
 
At both treatment plants, regular odors emissions monitoring from the wastewater 
treatment plants will be implemented to mitigate any non-compliance by taking 
appropriate operating measures. Furthermore, space and electro-mechanical provisions 
for the installation of odor control equipment shall be made at Sari WWTP, main lift 
station of Babol and the remaining lift stations located in Babol city center. Following 
commissioning of the relevant works, the need to provide odor control equipment shall be 
verified, and installation shall be implemented if necessary.  
Page  18
Other environmental mitigation actions in both Gilan and Mazandaran  
 
The general disruption during construction will be mitigated by coordinated planning of 
construction activities. This will include coordination with all concerned authorities prior 
to the start of the construction activities. Other adverse impacts due to construction 
activities will be mitigated through the adoption of good environmental practice 
procedures. For instance, noisy construction activities can be limited to normal working 
hours and providing muffler to minimize noise nuisance. Dust emissions can be avoided 
by using dust suppression measures, such as periodically sprinkling water in certain 
areas, providing appropriate covers, and removal of excess material from the site. 
Dangerous activities in public areas will be controlled to reduce risk to the public, traffic 
and warning signs will be placed at construction sites, trenches will be provided with 
fences, or railings. The construction contract document will incorporate all requirements 
to minimize disturbance from construction activities, which will be monitored by the 
Supervision Engineer and the Environment Officer of the WWCs to ensure compliance 
and implementation of the required provisions by the contractors.  
 
Impacts arising from the potential occurrence of earthquakes will be mitigated through 
(i) following the Iranian and International seismic design requirements as well as (ii) 
developing and implementing emergency preparedness plans which would cover 
activities to be implemented before, during and after earthquake occurrence.  
 
The final design process will detail and finalize construction drawings and tender 
documents of the project components. This process has incorporated final review of the 
designs by environmental specialists to ensure that all required environmental issues are 
properly addressed and tender documents include specific provisions concerning 
environment, health, and safety.  
 
Furthermore, pre-tender conferences will be held to brief pre-qualified contractors on 
the effective implementation of mitigation measures. All pre-qualified contractors will be 
called to a pre-tender conference at which environmental, health and safety issues will be 
outlined  
 
Liaison arrangements will be established between the public, contractors, and the 
Project Management Unit. A procedure will be established to allow the general public to 
lodge complaints at the Project Management Unit about excessive disturbance.  
 
The contractors will provide suitable and reliable equipment for construction, with a 
formal maintenance program to ensure efficient operations. The WWCs will develop and 
establish appropriate safety procedures for the operation and maintenance of the water 
and wastewater treatment plants. All employees of the contractors and the WWCs will 
get suitable training in occupational health, safety, and emergency preparedness 
procedures for earthquakes. Safety equipment will also be provided.  
 
The WWCs will develop and implement monitoring programs for raw water, treated 
water, surface water, raw wastewater, treated effluent and sludge and industrial 
discharges to the sewage network.  
 
The DOE will establish formal programs for monitoring discharges to the environment 
from the wastewater treatment plants and industries, treated sludge, surface water, and 
soil including actions to be taken in case of non-compliance. It will develop a system of 
controls on discharges to Tajan and Shazedroud Rivers. DOE will also develop a system 
for the enforcement of standards related to industrial discharges.  
Page  19
The Ministry of Health and Medical Education will establish a program for monitoring 
drinking water quality and the occurrence of water-borne diseases. A public hygiene 
education campaign will also be conducted by the Ministry and will include video tapes, 
TV programs, and distribution of leaflets.  
 
The Ministry of Agriculture Jihad will establish and implement formal programs for 
monitoring the quality of soil and agricultural products on a pilot area located in around 
Sari and Babol and include actions to be taken in case of deterioration in quality. The 
Ministry will develop educational programs and will develop awareness campaigns on 
best agricultural and irrigation practices.  
 
Social Considerations  
 
Implications for project design and sequencing.  In view of the fact that the poor areas 
will show more marked benefits from the project, that the residents are aware of it, while 
the better-off areas tend to be more skeptical of the benefits, where technically possible 
measurable benefits, the sequencing of connections should begin in the poorer areas, and 
where financially possible the recovery of the connection fee and the application of the 
new tariff structure should only begin after connection, or at the earliest after visible 
physical works have commenced.  
 
Communications, awareness and education (timing of measurable benefits).  There is 
need to use appropriate channels and education; need for consumer relations and 
education. There is a relatively high degree of literacy, but public information travels 
through trusted channels. Therefore there is need for user-friendly information systems, 
and training of WWC officials. The key informants recommended the project should 
adopt a Community-WWC participation approach by which the residents should be able 
to monitor the implementation and service delivery. The lane/neighborhood water and 
wastewater committees (NWCs) under this approach should look after the local issues 
and their elected representatives participate in the decision-making process. The 
Community Development Unit at the WWC should act as the liaison between the WWC 
and the NWCs.  However, to avoid mistrust of officialdom, appropriate use should be 
made of trusted local channels and opinion leaders.  
 
Beneficiary participation.  The project should make explicit provision for the informed 
participation of beneficiaries that will help to develop a culture of civic responsibility in 
relation to water use, wastewater disposal, monitoring of delivery and service standards, 
and reduce the ?free rider? problem.  Such a partnership could be implemented through 
lane/neighborhood water and wastewater committees with elected representatives, 
liaising with the Community Development Unit at the WWC.  
 
Tariff and connection fees for the poor.  Connection fees (both the cost and the 
connection right) should be smoothed out by a mechanism such as spreading it over the 
regular monthly payments; cross subsidy may be needed, and intervention of charitable 
institutions for the most indigent.  The stakeholders suggested i) training and support to 
the WWC in efficiency in organizational management and O&M of the systems, ii) 
develop effective mechanism for beneficiary participation, (monitoring service quality, 
information systems that are sensitive to client needs so they understand).  
 
Recruitment of part-time project social development specialist. In order to ensure the 
above community actions and facilitate liaison between the communities and the 
company, the project will employ a part-time project social development specialist to 
cover the four cities.  
Page  20
Monitoring Plan  
 
Monitoring of construction activities will have to ensure that mitigation measures of 
construction impacts are being implemented properly, while monitoring of operation 
activities is to ensure that no unforeseen negative impacts are arising.  
 
During construction, the monitoring program will include dust and noise. Monitoring of 
the water supply will include biological, physical and chemical parameters as well as 
heavy metals and pesticides residues. During the operation of the wastewater system, 
monitoring will include data on BOD, COD, suspended solids, phosphates, nitrates, 
salinity, heavy metals, fecal coliform and nematodes eggs.Water quality monitoring in 
Tajan, Shazedroud, Zarjoob, Goharood and Anzali lagoon will include data on BOD, 
COD, suspended solids, pH, phosphates, nitrates, salinity, and heavy metals.  Soil and 
agricultural products will be monitored for significant pollutant levels.  
 
The Ministry of Health will monitor the occurrence of water borne diseases and the 
Ministry of Agriculture Jihad will monitor soil and agricultural products.  The DOE will 
develop and implement its own monitoring program for Quality Assurance and Quality 
Control and will generate and issue periodic review reports.  
 
A
project monitoring report will be prepared on the effectiveness of the EMP once every 
6
months and will be sent to the World Bank after review and approval of DOE.  
 
Monitoring of Social Outcome indicators  
 
The social assessment did not address how social development outcome indicators could 
be derived and measured.  Local knowledge indicates that it is feasible and desirable to 
develop in consultation with local communities one or more very simple but reliable 
indicators that respond to their vividly desired outcomes, and that could be used for 
participatory baseline and evaluation.  Such pragmatic indicators for discussion and 
piloting at project inception could include: length of streets and alleys in residential areas 
subject to regular standing sewage problems; percentage of school-going children who 
have to pass through polluted streets to get to school; number of households within 100 
meters of stagnant polluted ponds; annual cost to households of cleaning/pumping septic 
tanks and absorption wells.  
 
Measuring and reporting on such indicators in a participatory way, would demonstrate 
to the communities the value of the project and greatly increase willingness to pay for 
improvements, and should form part of a community education and awareness campaign.  
 
Institutional Strengthening  
 
The institutional arrangement and capacities of the organizations in-charge with the 
implementation and management of the proposed project were reviewed with the 
intention of providing technical assistance and proposing reinforcement of these 
organizations as required.  
 
Training programs will be designed and implemented with the assistance of local and 
international experts and will include:  
 
o
GWWC, MWWC, Treatment Plant Operators, Rasht, Anzali, Sari and Babol 
Municipalities and the Mazandaran and Gilan DoE: At the initiation of the project, a 
training workshop will be provided to the staff of the MWWC, GWWC, the 
Municipalities of Rasht, Anzali, Sari and Babol and the DOE to raise environmental 
Page  21
awareness and to clarify the specific environmental requirements related to the 
project.The workshop will cover the following topics:  
 
-
Effective implementation of mitigation measures  
 
-
Project supervision  
 
-
Sampling and analysis  
 
-
Monitoring and evaluation  
 
o
MWWC, GWWC, Municipalities, DOE and Line Ministries: A two day 
workshop will be provided to the staff of MWWC, GWWC, Municipality, and 
representatives of line ministries to strengthen capacities in the application of treated 
effluent.  
 
o
Laboratory Staff of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants: A one week training 
workshop will be provided to strengthen capacities in sampling and analysis methods, 
environmental monitoring, quality assurance and quality control as well as safety 
procedures.  
 
o
Staff at Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants: A one day training workshop on 
occupational health, safety and earthquake emergency preparedness procedures will be 
provided.  
 
In coordination with the Bank-financed Alborz Integrated Land and Water Management 
Project, workshops and awareness campaigns will be also implemented to raise 
awareness of farmers, NGOs and residents of Sari and Babol; these would include:  
 
o
Local NGOs, communities and farmers: Training would be provided through 1 or 
2
days workshop for local NGOs, communities and farmers, focusing on public 
awareness and on re-use of treated sludge for agricultural purposes.  
 
o
Awareness campaign and pamphlets: two awareness campaigns will be 
conducted; pamphlets in Farsi will be distributed to all farmers highlighting the adverse 
health and public safety impacts resulting from the use of untreated effluents; and 
measures to be taken when using treated sludge. A public hygiene education campaign 
will be also conducted by the Ministry of Education.  
 
Laboratory Equipment. An assessment of analytical capacities of the laboratories at the 
GWWC, MWWC and at the wastewater treatment plants has been conducted; additional 
required equipment was also identified and will be supplied as part of the proposed 
project. For the Anzali East Wastewater Treatment Plant and Sari WWTP, a fully 
equipped laboratory will be provided as part of the construction contract. For Babol the 
existing contract for the WWTP include the supply of a fully equipped laboratory.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Numerous governmental and non-governmental organizations were consulted at various 
stages of project preparation. At the initiation of the project, technical, financial, 
environmental and social issues associated with the project were discussed in meetings 
attended by the design consultants, representative of the City councils, Rasht, Anzali, Sari 
and Babol municipalities, Gilan Regional Water Board, the Mazandaran and Golestan 
Regional Water Board and various other stakeholders. The Terms of Reference for the 
EIA and social assessment studies were developed and shared with the key stakeholders 
Page  22
in scoping meetings, which were held as of August and December 2002 for the 
Mazandaran and Gilan Provinces respectively.  
 
The preparation process for the environmental assessment included public consultations 
which were carried out at various stages. The consultations involved line ministries, city 
authorities, provincial departments of environment, operating water and wastewater 
companies, local communities, NGOs and the public.  
 
Upon the completion of the draft EA report, the executive summary was translated to 
Farsi and a public hearing was held on the 12th and 13th of January 2005 for the Gilan 
Province and on January 4th, 2005 for the Mazandaran Province. In Gilan, the meeting 
was attended by more than 250 participants from various organizations including 
representatives of GWWC, local health authorities, local law enforcement authorities, 
Gilan Regional Water Board, NGOs, Rasht municipality, Anzali municipality, DOE of 
Gilan, members of the press, experts and professionals from the community of Rasht and 
Anzali. In Mazandaran, the meeting was attended by more than 120 participants from 
various organizations including representatives of MWWC, local health authorities, local 
law enforcement authorities, Mazandaran and Golestan Regional Water Board, NGOs, 
Sari municipality, Babol municipality, DOE of Mazandaran, members of the press, 
experts and professionals from the community of Sari and Babol.  
 
Invitation letters were prepared in Farsi and were accompanied with the draft Executive 
Summary for each province. Announcements about the meeting were also made through 
the local newspapers and public bulletin boards. The meeting was covered by the local 
newspapers, television and radio. The meeting consisted of an opening session, a 
presentation of the project financial arrangements and the current cooperation between 
the World Bank and the Gilan and Mazandaran WWCs. The presentation was followed 
by a short documentary film which showed the current status of the water and wastewater 
services in the project cities and the ongoing works of these facilities. The film was 
followed by a presentation of the project?s major components and the environmental 
aspect of each component. The common view held was that the project should be 
implemented as soon as possible as it would result in improved health and welfare 
benefits not only to the project cities but for the whole region.  
 
In Gilan, the main concerns expressed by some of the stakeholders were the 
environmental impacts of the project, particularly the effluent and sludge from the 
wastewater treatment plants. A university professor requested clarification on how the 
project will impact environmental state of the local rivers and Anzali Lagoon, as well as 
the Caspian Sea. It was clarified that adequate design provisions have been incorporated 
to include biological nutrient removal (BNR) systems within the wastewater treatment 
plants. This, together with the proper collection and treatment of wastewater in the two 
cities, will improve the quality of the local rivers, and the lagoon, and will have a positive 
impact on the environment. A concern was raised regarding the proposed disposal of the 
sludge from the wastewater treatment plants and the reuse of treated sludge in agriculture 
considering the constraints and the health quality limits required by various standards. It 
was clarified that the design took into account sludge application rates, sludge and soil 
monitoring to address all the requirements of the national and international standards.  
 
In Mazandaran, the main concern was expressed by the NGOs and MOE representatives 
concerning the impact of noise, dust, traffic congestion, and disturbance of utility 
services during construction stage of the project. Also the potential impacts of odor 
Page  23
emissions during the operation stage. The consultants clarified that odor emissions will 
be minimized by proper design and operation of the works.  The environmental 
monitoring program will include odor monitoring to ensure compliance with standards. 
As for the short term impacts caused during the construction stage, mitigation measures 
and monitoring will be included to minimize their effect. Clarifications were requested on 
how the project will address the reuse of treated sludge in agriculture considering the 
constraints and the health quality limits required by various standards. It was clarified 
that adequate design provisions have been incorporated in the sludge treatment process, 
sludge application, sludge and soil monitoring to address all the requirements of national 
and international standards.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/25/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
No 
Page  24
acceptable to the Bank? 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  25
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed Benouahi 
03/24/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alexander E. Bakalian 
03/24/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
03/24/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
