INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC16157
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Iraq                       Project ID:   P158492
Project Name:     SWIFT Iraq CSO
Team Leader(s): Nandini Krishnan,Sergio Daniel Olivieri
Estimated Date    31-Jan-2016
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GPV05                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Central government administration (30%), General public administration
sector (30%), Other social services (40%)
Theme(s):         Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (30%), Poverty strategy,
analysis and monitoring (50%), Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems
(10%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (10%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.2                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                    0.2
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO of this grant is to support the Central Statistics Office of the Government of Iraq in
collecting and analyzing a SWIFT survey for poverty monitoring in 2016. SWIFT is a short, tablet
based survey that estimates poverty headcount rates based on a modeling exercise using most
recently available household survey data. This survey will likely exclude the three governorates
currently under the influence of Islamic State, unless the security situation improves significantly.
Currently, the Central Statistical Office (CSO) is implementing a SWIFT pilot for Baghdad, and have
secured some resources for the full survey. This grant to the CSO will co-finance the survey. A
separate smaller grant for the Kurdistan region statistics office will support the survey in the three
governorates of Iraqi Kurdistan.
C. Project Description
Iraq implemented two large household surveys (IHSES) in 2007 and 2012. In 2014, an annual survey
was implemented on a sub-sample with comparable questionnaire design but fieldwork was


﻿interrupted due to the rapidly deteriorating security situation. The ongoing security and budget crisis
imply that large household surveys are not feasible in the near future. The next IHSES planned for
2017 is unlikely to take place on time. At the same time, it is more important than ever to monitor
poverty and key socio-economic indicators, given the scale of the crises, and the high concentration
U       of the population close to the poverty line. Iraq has made both large household surveys (IHSES)
publicly available through the LSMS survey database.
This grant will provide complementary financing for a SWIFT survey for poverty monitoring during
this crisis situation. SWIFT is a new household survey instrument that projects consumption based
on collecting 10 to 15 simple questions on poverty correlates such as education of the household
head, ownership of consumer durables, household head's employment status, among others. The
identification of these correlates is based on estimates obtained from implementing a model using the
latest available household survey in the country. The main advantages of using SWIFT are saving
time and reducing survey implementation costs. Additionally, SWIFT has adopted recent innovations
in data collection, like Computer Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) and data cloud. 18 SWIFT
surveys have been successfully completed or are ongoing in 14 countries across all regions.
This survey will likely exclude the three governorates currently under the influence of the Islamic
State, unless the security situation improves significantly. Currently, the Central Statistical Office
(CSO) is implementing a SWIFT pilot for Baghdad, and have secured some resources for the full
survey. However this is inadequate, and in particular, the Kurdistan region statistical office (KRSO)
has no resources for implementing SWIFT. Both CSO and KRSO have demonstrated ability to
collect high quality data, and will be ready to complete fieldwork as soon as resources are made
available.
For more details please see the technical concept note attached to this package.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The survey will most likely exclude Anbar, Nineveh and Salahadin, and depending on the security
situation, Diyala and Kirkuk as well. The security situation will determine the geographic scope of
the survey. However, the pilot, which has been completed, tested the modalities in the relatively
insecure parts of rural Baghdad, with considerable success.
As with the CHS 2014, the security of the field teams will not be compromised. The CSO and KRSO
face security risks on a daily basis and have developed protocols over the last decades to accurately
judge and mitigate these risks. These and more abundant precautions will be followed with safety
and security being the most important element in the decision to undertake fieldwork in any area.
SWIFT significantly reduces the risk of exposure to an insecure situation as each interview takes no
more than 10 to 15 minutes relative to the IHSES surveys that take 4 visits of an hour each over three
months.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The security of the field teams will not be compromised. The CSO and KRSO face security risks on
a daily basis and have developed protocols over the last decades to accurately judge and mitigate
these risks. These and more abundant precautions will be followed with safety and security being the
most important element in the decision to undertake fieldwork in any area. SWIFT significantly
reduces the risk of exposure to an insecure situation as each interview takes no more than 10 to 15
minutes relative to the IHSES surveys that take 4 visits of an hour each over three months.


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
S
afeguard Policies          Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No           This activity comprises solely of training for,
BP 4.01                                    piloting and implementation of a household
survey. This involves in person interactions of
roughly 10 minutes per household to complete
the survey. The data is immediately uploaded to
a cloud. Given the nature of this task, OP/BP
4.01 is not triggered - there are no adverse
environmental consequences of any element of
this activity
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No        The survey will not enter any areas that are
7.60                                       insecure or pose risks to fieldworkers or
households, including disputed areas. the
security of the field teams will not be
compromised. The CSO and KRSO face
security risks on a daily basis and have
developed protocols over the last decades to
accurately judge and mitigate these risks. These
and more abundant precautions will be followed
with safety and security being the most
important element in the decision to undertake
fieldwork in any area. SWIFT significantly
reduces the risk of exposure to an insecure
situation as each interview takes no more than
10 to 15 minutes relative to the IHSES surveys
that take 4 visits of an hour each over three
months.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


﻿Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):          Name: Nandini Krishnan,Sergio Daniel Olivieri
U
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)                  Date: 11-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Benu Bidani (PMGR)                            Date: 11-Dec-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


