                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                            Report No.: 105748
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:            05-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Iraq                 Project ID:               P155221
 Project Name:                  Promoting the Inclusion of Vulnerable Iraq Youth
 Task Team Leader:              Gloria La Cava
 Estimated Board Date:          No board approval required
 Managing Unit:                 GSU05
 Sector(s):                     Health and other social services (100%)
 Theme(s):                      Social inclusion (70%); Participation and civic engagement (30%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       3.00                      Total Bank Financing:       0.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     Borrower                                                                                       0.00
     Special Financing - JSDF                                                                       2.73
     Total                                                                                          2.73
 Environmental Category         B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          Yes
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 To promote social inclusion and increase the incomes of vulnerable young people (ages 15-29)
 through engagement in entrepreneurship and youth-driven development activities. The project
 will make special efforts to include IDP youth.

 C. Project Description

 CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
 Iraq continues to experience a great deal of conflict: prolonged sectarian warfare, recurring terrorism,
regional fragmentation, and spillover effects from conflicts in neighboring countries. The 2014 ISIS-led
offensive left vast sections of the north outside Iraqi government control and led to massive internal
displacements from Ninewa, Salahaddine, Diyala, and Anbar provinces and geographic polarization
along sectarian lines. As of August 2015, 8.2 million people needed humanitarian aid, including four
million children and adolescents. An estimated 2.3 million Iraqis live in areas occupied or controlled by
ISIS, including 1.1 million children and adolescents (OCHA 2015).
Youth are disproportionately affected. A pre-ISIS poverty assessment reported that among youth aged
18–27, about 60 percent have only a primary education. Iraqis aged 18 years are less likely to have
completed primary school than their counterparts in their 30s. Seventy-two percent of women aged 15–
29 and 18 percent of men were neither in education nor in employment or training (NEETs). Youth
exclusion (lack of education, employment, trauma, discrimination, and neglect) coupled with mistrust of
government authorities has fostered radicalization and facilitated recruitment for extremist groups,
especially among male youth aged 15–19 without a secondary school degreei and among internally
displaced youth. In the long-term, young people who are now excluded will also have difficulties
supporting a family, and their children will also be more vulnerable to poverty and exclusion. The
proposed project aims to address the issue of exclusion at its roots by fostering collaboration between
different social groups and by providing young people with the skills and resources to make a
sustainable living in the present and the future.
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS:
Project activities will be implemented through three components, as described below.
Component I: Youth-driven development and peacebuilding (USD 900,000) will support activities
that engage youth in local decision-making and provide opportunities for reconciliation and social
collaboration, with a focus on young IDPs and their communities. The project will support a process for
youth of diverse backgrounds to: (a) negotiate with one another about what activities are needed in
specific communities; (b) develop a plan to advocate for these activities, which would then be prioritized
in the governorate; and (c) implement smaller-scale initiatives, such as small improvements of public
spaces, and skill-building activities. The component will specifically support: (i) small infrastructure
improvements, (ii) youth-led initiatives and projects backed by a peace-building approach, (iii) support
to youth spaces (currently under Ministry of Youth and Sports) so as to enhance their outreach capacity
and relevance of youth services.
The first activity under this youth-led community driven development component will be to carry out an
in-depth assessment within local neighborhoods where excluded and vulnerable social groups are
located. This information will then be used to develop a targeting mechanism that will aim to involve
about 100 young people in the selection and implementation of youth-led activities. At least 80% of
these selected young people will be part of groups that are socially excluded or will come from
low-income or women-headed households. These 100 young people will communicate through
project-organized meetings and through social media, and will select a group of 15 young leaders to
become the key organizing committee for group activities. Most of these young leaders will also come
from excluded and vulnerable social groups, thereby preventing elite capture. The leadership group will
be responsible for making sure that the activities are implemented according to the priorities of the
larger group of young people, and will communicate both to the implementing agency and to other
young people on the progress and quality of activities. This youth-led monitoring process will help the
stakeholders understand both the responsibilities of leadership as well as the challenges in ensuring high
quality implementation in a sensitive context. Youth will be encouraged to communicate their
experiences via social media in view of creating positive messages, countering the violent recruitment
narratives. Each young leader will have a mentor that can advise him/her both on group leadership as
well as on other self-development issues.
Each group of youth will be expected to complete two sub-projects. This is because of evidence pointing
out that the maximal results of community driven development activities are only seen after the second
intervention. As a first project, young people will be encouraged to select a non-infrastructure activity
that brings different social groups together. This can include the organization of events, skill-building
seminars, clean-up campaigns, or the development of online platforms, activities or seminars. The group
will be led through a process of learning from the experience of the first project before selecting and
implementing a second project. For the second project, youth will be able to repair small-scale
infrastructure or to rehabilitation public spaces, including but not limited to repair of youth centers,
parks, classrooms, youth-friendly spaces in health centers, business and innovation centers, and
libraries. The selection of both sub-projects will be done in a way that is participatory and inclusive of all
youth participants (not just the leadership groups) and that has demonstrable impacts for other young
people or for communities at large.
Sustainability of sub-projects will be built in to the project design. Young people will develop a plan to
determine how non-infrastructure activities will be sustainable either by: (1) finding ways of
encouraging communication between event participants on online platforms; or (2) developing plans for
fundraising for small ongoing activities. For infrastructure sub-projects, the project will build young
people’s capacity to interact with service providers or project ‘owners’ (local government officials) and
together with them to determine an ongoing operations and maintenance plan.
Component II: Micro-entrepreneurship (USD 1.13 million) will provide immediate assistance to
less educated, disadvantaged young people to set up independent micro-businesses. While component I
focuses on social inclusion, this component will focus on economic inclusion. Activities under
component 2 will take place in the same locations as activities under component 1 to maximize the
overall impact of the project while reducing implementation costs.
The first activity under Component II will be the selection of youth beneficiaries. The information
gathered about vulnerability for the first component will be used to prioritize young beneficiaries.
Beneficiaries for this component will also be expected to not have an existing reliable source of income,
to have time to attend all project activities, and to not have benefitted from similar activities in the past.
Once beneficiaries are selected, the next activity under this component will be a participatory market
assessment. Young beneficiaries will be led through a process whereby they explore the businesses in
their communities by interviewing business owners and workers. Young people’s aim will be to
understand the kind of businesses that do well and the skills required to do well in those businesses, as
well as to develop potentially useful networks for the future. Young people will share the results of their
assessment with each other, and complete a map of the market in their neighborhoods.
Based on the youth’s market assessment, an assessment of the youth’s needs, and based on the
experience of other successful micro-entrepreneurship support activities carried out in Iraq and
elsewhere in MENA, the project will develop a business development curriculum for young
entrepreneurs. The key to this activity is that this curriculum will be tailored to the very specific needs of
the locations identified by this project and to the skills and interests of the selected young people. The
curriculum will be based on experiential learning principles and efforts will be made so that experienced
entrepreneurs are invited to present their experiences, advise young people, and to eventually mentor
them.
Start-up capital would be available to young people through seed grants. Young people would be paired
with mentors and coaches that would make sure businesses are as successful as possible given the
difficulties of the environment. Support, including mentoring and coaching, would continue for one year
from business start-up. Similar activities in the Southern Iraq Youth Livelihood Development Project
resulted in 89.6 percent of beneficiaries being employed or self-employed one year after participating in
 the project.
 Component III: Project Management and M&E (USD 700,000) will finance the monitoring and
 evaluation (M&E) system, communication efforts, and project management costs, including an
 integrated M&E framework, and an outreach campaign to develop knowledge and capacity to inform
 future government efforts to support youth and inform investments by the Bank and other development
 partners.
 Participatory M&E systems will be used to ensure that activities address the needs of the target
 population. In the selected areas, a Youth M&E Committee will be set up that will monitor:
        For component 1: the beneficiary targeting mechanism, the effectiveness of sub-project
         implementation, of youth communications efforts, and of the overall results of the component.
        For component 2: the beneficiary targeting mechanism, the effectiveness of skills development
         activities, and the use of seed grants.
 The Youth M&E Committee will be made of a mix of project beneficiaries and young people who have
 experience as beneficiaries of similar projects. The young people who have previously benefitted from
 such projects can bring in a more informed perspective about the changes expected in such activities,
 and can serve as mentors for the rest of committee members.
     UNICEF will be contracted to carry out several activities as part of this component. First, UNICEF
     will provide capacity building to the Ministry of Youth and Sport in the implementation of activities
     under Components 1 and 2. In addition, UNICEF will be engaged as a Third Party Monitoring
     agency which will ensure ongoing oversight, giving the fluid security situation in project areas.
     UNICEF will be responsible for assessing project outcomes, but will also monitor the use of funds
     and overall efficiency of project implementation.


 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Tracy Hart, Senior Environmental Specialist (GENDR)
 Michelle Rebosio, Senior Social Development Specialist (GSURR)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP                 Y         The ESMF will include provisions for
 4.01                                                     screening sub-projects and rejecting any that
                                                          would have a negative impact on the
                                                          environment or would trigger any
                                                          environmental safeguards policy (other than
                                                          OP 4.01). A list of eligible sub-projects to be
                                                          included in the ESMF is expected to run in
                                                          sub-projects with generally positive health and
                                                          environmental impacts. Additionally, due to
                                                          the small-scale nature of the investments, no
                                                          significant or irreversible impacts are
                                                          anticipated. Negative impacts, if any, will be
                                                          minor and mitigated effectively by
                                                          implementing the ESMF.
                                             Environmental impacts may include the
                                             following: construction-related air, noise, and
                                             water quality issues; temporary foot and
                                             vehicular traffic diversion; and worker
                                             occupational health and safety. Preparation
                                             will continue to focus the menu of possible
                                             sub-projects. An ESMF will be prepared to
                                             cover the proposed technical interventions.
                                             The ESMF will need to be disclosed in-country
                                             and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             N   The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude
                                             any sub-project which involves natural
                                             habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                      N   The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude
                                             any sub-project which involves forests.
 Pest Management OP 4.09                 N   The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude
                                             any sub-project which involves forests.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP       N   The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude
 4.11                                        any sub-project with potential impact on
                                             known physical cultural resources. Chance
                                             find procedures will be included in the ESMF
                                             in the case that physical cultural resources are
                                             discovered during sub-project implementation.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           N   There are no indigenous peoples in the service
                                             area.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     N   Any land requirements (temporary or
                                             permanent) for investments to be financed
                                             under the projects will be met through lands
                                             that are state owned or owned by private
                                             companies. Therefore, any projects that may
                                             trigger the World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will be
                                             excluded: including that involve relocation of
                                             households, temporary or permanent land take,
                                             and impacts on livelihoods which that may
                                             occur through restriction of access to
                                             resources. To screen out for these exclusions,
                                             the projects will rely on guidelines in the
                                             ESMF, which will include a rigorous
                                             sub-project screening.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               N   This policy is not triggered.
 Projects on International Waterways     N   This policy is not triggered.
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   N   This policy is not triggered.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
    A.       Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
             30-Apr-2016
    B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
             The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
             Launch of ESMF will be in March 2016.

    IV. APPROVALS
     Task Team Leader:                        Name: Gloria La Cava
     Approved By:
     Regional Safeguards                      Name: Nina Chee                                               Date: 04/13/2016
     Coordinator:
     Practice Manager/Manager:                Name: Ayat Soliman                                            Date: 03/11/2016



         1
       Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
     InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
     affected persons.


i
 As of today, ISIL offers young recruits a monthly stipend of US$100 a month; the monthly salary of a Shia militia can reach as much as US$600.
Overall findings of drivers of radicalization and recruitment among young people are based on a recent assessment by the International Crisis
Group, commissioned by the World Bank.
