Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1813 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/29/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P096234 
Project Name: Iraq Third Emergency Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Francis Peter Buckland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2005 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The principal objective of the Project is to (a) improve conditions of learning in primary and 
secondary schools through school construction, equipment and furnishing, and (b) strengthen 
institutional capacity to design and implement a national capital development and maintenance 
program, and (c) support policy and system development for reform and reconstruction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 will finance school construction, equipping and furnishing.  Component 2 will 
finance capacity building activities for MOE officials and relevant stakeholders for system 
development and reform. Component 3 will finance project management support, including the 
provision of furniture, equipment, technical assistance and training necessary for the 
management of the project, as well as operating costs of the Project Management Team (PMT).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover all governorates in Iraq.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  2
The day-to-day operations of the project will be the responsibility of the existing Project 
Management Team (PMT) in Baghdad and the project focal points in each governorate. The 
implementation of safeguards requirements will be included under the Monitoring and 
Evaluation activities. The environmental training will be carried out under the project 
implementation phase.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project is an emergency project in accordance with OP 8.50, hence the environmental 
mitigating measures (if any) will be carried out during project implementation under provisions 
incorporated in the construction contracts. Project appraisal will highlight possible 
environmental issues that the MOE would need to address.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The ESSAF is the guiding document of this project. Pest management issues will be 
addressed in the technical annex.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/23/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
The Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been 
disclosed in the Country and InfosShop and is the guiding document of this Project.  
 
The Project falls into the Environmental Category B.  However the requirement to carry out 
limited Environmental Analysis as part of project preparation will be waived, but for sub-
projects with adverse impacts, a limited Environmental Analysis should be done during 
project implementation but before the sub-project approval.  
 
The implementing agency agreed to apply the following minimum standards during 
implementation: inclusion of standard environmental codes of practice (ECOP) in the 
construction bid documents of all sub-projects; review and oversight of any major 
reconstruction works by specialists; implementation of environmentally and socially sound 
options for disposal of debris; and provisions for adequate budget and satisfactory 
institutional arrangements to monitor effective implementation and adequately maintain 
sanitary facilities after completion.  
 
OP 4.09 has been triggered. No pesticides will be procured under the project, however 
pesticides will be used against termites (spraying of foundations with pesticide). The use of 
chemicals to destroy termites would not include pesticides on the negative list, which 
includes all POPs and Chemicals, in WHO classes Ia and Ib. A list with pesticides will be 
sent to the Bank and guidelines for safe handling will be developed during project 
implementation.  
 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will not be triggered because the GOI has given 
assurances that the proposed sites are existing schools/public land designated for schools 
which are not occupied by anyone who might be displaced by project activity.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Peter Buckland 
09/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
09/27/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
09/23/2005 
Comments:   
