Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1521 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/25/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P087734 
Project Name: IQ-EMERGENCY ELECTRICITY 
Task Team Leader: Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2005 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
75.00
75.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this project is to enhance MoEs capacity to manage and prepare rehabilitation 
and new investment projects, strengthen its operation and maintenance capacities and improve 
service delivery. This will be done through the provision of technical assistance, capacity 
building, training, as well as supply of urgently needed equipment, material and spare parts. A 
secondary objective of this project is to prepare the ground for much needed institutional and 
regulatory reforms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project addresses the urgent reconstruction needs of the power sector and provides support 
to MoE to better manage projects at the design, supervision, operation and maintenance stages by 
building the much needed capacity of its staff. It also consists of including improvement of 
accounting, billing and metering, and institutional development.  
 
Discussion on the proposed project started well over a year ago in the context of a larger multi 
sector infrastructure project to be financed from the Trust Fund for Iraq. However, no donor 
funding was available from the Trust Fund and the Government requested that this project be 
Page  2
funded from IDA resources.  The project that was initially prepared by the Bank and MoE was 
for an amount of about US$110 million. However, in light of the limited IDA funds, the 
Government of Iraq has recently proposed that a US$35million project be prepared to meet the 
above-mentioned objectives.  
 
In light of the uncertainty of funds to be allocated, this section will outline the scope of both 
possible operations in the amounts of US$35million and US$110million. Project costs outlined 
below include a combined physical and price contingency of 15% to mitigate against increases in 
the cost of doing business in Iraq and the prevailing security situation. While the technical 
assistance and the capacity building components will remain the same, investments will differ 
significantly in both options.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Various locations across Iraq   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Each project component will be carried out  in accordance with the Environmental and Social 
Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF) for Iraq, which should be disclosed by the Borrower 
before appraisal. This framework entails that: (a) all components be screened by the Borrower 
through a checklist attached in the ESSAF (b) that a code of practice be included as part of civil 
work contracts as well as for purchase and installation of equipment contracts (c) and that 
capacity building is undertaken on the environmental issues and on corrective environmental 
measures in order to enable the Borrower, and particularly the Ministry of Environment, to 
address any potential aspects that may arise during screening and implementation.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project will be processed as an Emergency Recovery . The Project is rated as category B, 
because it is expected to have limited environmental impacts. Each project component will be 
carried out in accordance with the Environmental and social Screening Assessment Framework 
for Iraq.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies are expected to be needed. Final decision will be taken once project scope is 
finalized.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
