Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/03/2005 
Report No.:  AC1829
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Iraq 
Project ID:  P096234 
Project Name:  Iraq Third Emergency Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Francis Peter Buckland 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 27, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the project is to alleviate overcrowding in primary and secondary 
schools through school construction and provision of furniture and equipment. The 
project will also lay the groundwork for broader education reform and system 
reconstruction.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 will finance school construction, equipping and furnishing.  Component 2 
will finance capacity building activities for MOE officials and relevant stakeholders for 
system development and reform. Component 3 will finance project management support, 
including the provision of furniture, equipment, technical assistance and training 
necessary for the management of the project, as well as operating costs of the Project 
Management Team (PMT).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover all governorates in Iraq.   
 
Page  2
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Safeguards: The Project is rated as category B as it will be limited to 
school construction. Impacts would be those associated mainly with: (i) construction 
works (e.g. safety, dust, noise, waste material, traffic) (ii) provision of sanitary services, 
water supply and waste management; and (iii) maintenance of facilities. Because of the 
emergency conditions, the requirement to carry out limited Environmental Analysis as 
part of project preparation will be waived. The project will be processed according to the 
ESSAF. However, for sub-projects with adverse environmental impacts, a limited 
environmental analysis will be done during project implementation but before the sub-
project approval. The Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework 
(ESSAF) has been disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop on September 19, 2005. 
Based on the ESSAF, the following standards will be applied during implementation: (i) 
inclusion of standard environmental codes of practice (ECOP) in the repair and 
reconstruction bid documents of all sub-projects; (ii) use of Safeguard Procedures for 
Inclusion in the Technical Specifications of Contracts; (iii) use of the Checklist of likely 
Environmental and Social Impacts of Subproject; (iv) review and oversight of any major 
reconstruction works by specialists; (v) implementation of environmentally and socially 
sound options for civil works; and (vi) provision for adequate budget and satisfactory 
institutional arrangements to monitor effective implementation and adequately maintain 
sanitary facilities after completion.  
 
Pest Management. OP 4.09 has been triggered. No pesticides will be procured under the 
project, however pesticides will be used against termites (spraying of foundations with 
pesticide). Utilization of chemicals to destroy termites would not include pesticides on 
the list that include persistent organic pesticides (POPs) and Chemicals in WHO class Ia 
and Ib. A list of pesticides will be sent to the Bank.  Guidelines for safe handling will be 
Page  3
developed during project implementation and all precautionary measures are taken before 
school children use the facilities where pesticides were used. A separate PMP will be 
prepared during the project's implementation and other pest management requirements 
will be fulfilled.  
 
Resettlement and Land Acquisition: OP 4.12 should not be triggered since there will not 
be any displacement of populations nor new land acquisition. The GOI has given 
assurances that the proposed sites are existing schools/public land designated for schools 
which are not occupied by anyone who might be displaced by project activity.  However, 
the Bank approved Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework, 
specifically elaborated for due diligence in the case of Iraq should be used to ensure that 
this is indeed the case and should there be any need for land acquisition, the same 
guidelines will be followed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The day-to-day operations of the Project will be the responsibility of the existing Project 
Management Team (PMT) in Baghdad and the project focal points in each governorate.  
Responsibility for site identification, procurement and project supervision, including 
environmental and social safeguard requirements has been decentralized to the project 
focal points in each governorate, operating under the authority of the PMT. PMT 
functions will be led by assigned MOE staff or, where necessary, by Iraqi consultants 
selected on a competitive basis. The PMT will serve as the main point of communication 
with the Bank.  
 
Capacity building on Safeguards and on the implementation of the ESSAF has been 
already undertaken with the Ministry of Environment and other line Ministries. During 
the Project Pre-Launch Workshop in November/December special training on safeguards 
and on the ESSAF for school construction will be carried out through a Safeguard 
Specialist. Capacity building on safeguards will continue during project implementation 
especially for the project focal points and designated staff, who will receive training on 
safeguard requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/19/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The ESSAF is the guiding document of this project. Pest management issues have been 
addressed in the Technical Annex.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  5
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Peter Buckland 
10/28/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
10/31/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo 
10/31/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
11/01/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
11/03/2005 
Comments:   
