The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2017| Report No: ISDSR23562




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                              Country Director:
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Jan Weetjens
                            Task Team Leader:      Nicolas Perrin
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation
    P148013
                                                                Industries
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Nicolas Perrin                                              Jamaica
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    18-Jul-2014                                                 Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU04

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    20,000,000.00                                               20,000,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                      20,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                             20,000,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Proposed Development Objective for this operation is to support youth employment in the digital and animation
    industries in Jamaica



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

As a result of the slow progress of several components of the project and the request of the GoJ to support the new
national Housing, Opportunity, Production and Employment (HOPE) Program, it is proposed that the restructuring address
both the initial design flaw and implementation bottlenecks and the strategic support to HOPE.

The changes in components include:

Component 1: Skills and capacity enhancement of the animation industry (USD 9 M): Component 1: Skills and capacity
enhancement of the animation industry (USD 9 M): This component will build capacity and skills of Jamaican youths to
improve their employability in the growing animation industry and in the global online labor market, and provide critical
skills to young tech entrepreneurs to bring ideas to market. Given that the main barriers to the animation industry’s growth
are twofold: the lack of skilled workforce and the limited capacity of the industry, this component will focus on
strengthening the animation training in Jamaica and on enhancing the animation industry business capacity. The
subcomponents are:

Sub-Component 1 –Strengthening Animation Training. The specific activities include:

a) expanding the existing Animation Training Program at selected vocational, secondary and tertiary educational
institutions with a shift from single training events to more continuous (yearlong) programs.;

b) developing a training program to increase the quantity and quality of software programmers and product designers;

c) organizing competitions (eg. KingstOOn) to identify youth with the best talents in the digital and animation fields,
publicize Jamaica’s production and attract potential investors will continue to be provided under this component; and

d) facilitating youth from lower-income families, and vulnerable communities to participate in the training activities
provided by the Project through the provision of lunch, transportation, etc.;

Sub-Component 2 – Enhancing the Animation Industry, to be implemented by the Jamaica Promotions Corporation
(JAMPRO), which is Jamaica’s national investment and export promotion agency mandated to promote inv estments in
Jamaica. The activities include: a) the development of specific services to enhance the industry’s business capacity (for
example support to develop bibles, trailers, script, financing plans, licensing plans, merchandising and digital strategies
(VOD and interactive videogames) to improve the capacity of studios to secure co-production deals with established
international studios. In addition, financing the participation of the animation studios and key stakeholders in
international events and facilitating support for professional networking) and b) developing a policy note to enhance the
framework and strategic plan for the animation industry to engage in a longer-term policy dialogue.
         The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



Component 2: Establishment of Startup Jamaica (USD0.275 M). Establishing Startup Jamaica, a technology hub, to host
the Acceleration Program and other training initiatives for startup companies in partnership with private sector companies
through:

                      i. carrying out communication and outreach campaigns to target youth with business ideas to join
                         the Acceleration Program;
                     ii. designing and providing in-depth technical and business training to selected youth, including
                         hands-on service provider support and external speakers/faculty training;
                    iii. designing and implementing the Acceleration Program for tech startups; and
                    iv. recruiting relevant technical staff to manage the Acceleration Program and other training
                         initiatives; all through provision of goods, works, consulting services, non-consulting services,
                         Training Costs and Operating Costs.

GOJ decided to reallocate the remaining balance as at September 26, 2017 to Component 3. This component 2 will be
kept to account for expenditures of approximately USD275K. While, Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ) will continue to
facilitate public and private sector entities in the tech entrepreneurship ecosystem to foster further development, through
its existing programs, no additional activity will be financed under the project and the indicators will be kept until the date
of the restructuring but not reported after the restructuring. Following the changes in the ecosystem and the lack of
demonstrated activities under SUJ, this activity will not be carried forward in the restructuring. Since the establishment
of SUJ, several incubators / accelerators have emerged in the entrepreneurship eco-system in Jamaica. Some of these
entities such as the Technology Innovation Centre, Branson Centre and the Mona Business Support Services, provide
support to tech entrepreneurs. SUJ CEO left in October 2016, the remaining staff left in June 2017 at which time the
physical location was closed to entrepreneurs.

Component 3: Digital and technical skills development for youth (USD8.2 M). This component will support the document
management and digitization cohort under the national Housing, Opportunity, Production and Employment (HOPE)
Programme to provide training and apprenticeship for "Not in Education, Employment, or Training" (NEET) youths
between 18 and 24 years old to improve their employability skills. Support of the HOPE activities has a greater potential
for youth employment, because approximately twenty-five (25) percent of youth in Jamaica (200,000 people) are NEET
according to the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM). All HOPE program participants or interns will participate in a
mandatory core training program inclusive of life skills, cultural awareness, ethics, discipline, volunteerism and
entrepreneurship skills. After this, they will participate in a specific technical skills training (provided by HEART), upon
completion of which they will receive a certification and be placed in an apprenticeship program where they will be
allowed to work in a specific skill. Provision will be made for lunch and transportation. After this engagement, which will
be for a minimum one year, it is the intent that these interns will transition into the workforce, or go on to further training
with improved attitudes and skills, and a foundation on which he or she can build for further employment, training or
education. The Sub-components are:
Sub-component 1 – This component will focus on the refurbishing / upgrading community and youth centers for the
delivery of training courses. OPM will execute these activities in collaboration with the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Information and will be formalized by way of an MOU. The activities include:

(i) The provision of training and mentorship services on basic computer skills. Human Employment and Resource Training
Trust, National Training Agency (Heart Trust / NTA) will deliver training. To leverage existing training providers and
programs in the country to reach the targeted number of trainees, partnership will be established with private training
providers already offering training in online work for accessing online work opportunities via job platforms and national
            The World Bank                                                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



programs; PIU to discuss with HOPE and update based on implementation plan which describe the number of people
trained and how activities will be implemented (pilot phase, extension both including rehabilitation and training, TAs and
support) and

(ii) the purchase and installation of necessary equipment (such as computers, networks, scanners and internet access) and
works (refurbishing and upgrade) to support the operationalization of youth and community centers as digital/tech
centers. The existing network of youth and community centers already operating will be used to deliver those services.
MOUs will be signed to ensure the smooth implementation of the activities. A pilot will be implemented in four community
centers and five youth centers already in operation to learn and refine the approach prior to scaling up to other parishes.

Sub-Component 2 – This component will provide technical assistance and advisory services through the hiring of
consultants to:

(i) Assess of the first cohort graduates (including the review the methodology for the selection of participants, curriculum,
delivery of the training and results) with the aim of improving the program before it is scaled up to additional communities
and parishes;

(ii) Improve the quality of traditional apprenticeship, in order to increase the productivity and employability of
apprentices, through by designing the apprenticeship program, mechanism for certification and strategy to facilitate
employment of the graduates. The overall institutional framework will also elaborate technical and pedagogical practical
tools to improve trainers’ competencies. Similarly, apprentices typically need to complement the technical skills acquired
from master artisans with a broad set of business skills to effectively launch their own activity (basic management,
accounting, reading, and behavioral skills). Because traditional apprenticeship is most impactful when youth are able to
start their own activity (see section on economic analysis), this component also places emphasis on supporting this
transition, by referring apprentices, upon completion, to employment services. This allows them to identify options to
further increase their productivity, organize in groups, or get support to establish their own activities.

(iii) Develop the operations manual for the Component 2 activities and

(iv) Develop a monitoring system to track the employment and earnings of youth to better understand the potential for
digital and online work in Jamaica.

Social inclusion and targeting: Youth at risk will be the main beneficiaries of the activities under the Housing, Opportunity
Production and Employment (HOPE) Program (component 3). This component will provide training and apprenticeship
opportunities for youth aged 18-24 years who are unattached or ‘Not in Education, Employment or Training’ (NEET).
Approximately 130,0001 Jamaican youth are defined as NEET. The digital and technical skills development for youth
component will provide training to HOPE interns in digitization and documentation management. The project will also
support the apprenticeship stage of the Digitization and Documentation Corps through the provision of transportation
and lunch for the participants. The HOPE Program will work with other partners to assist interns graduating from the
program into further training, entrepreneurship or becoming a part of the labor force. At least 50% of the NEET youth
benefiting from the apprenticeship program supported by the project will be female.




1
  According to the HEART Trust/NTA’s (2009) estimate, of the 145,000 youth who fit this unattached definition, 63 percent are f emale, 41 percent have never worked,
and 70 percent possess no academic qualifications or skills training.? (Source: “How Do Jamaica’s Unattached Youth View Their Career Prospects and Life Skills??
Saxon, T., et al (2012), Comparative Education Review, Vol. 56, No. 3, p. 422.
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



Component 3: Support to Science, Technology and Innovation (US$0.8M): This component will focus on building the STI
framework in Jamaica through:

(i) the support for Digital Jam which is a digital market and job fair. The event will connect Jamaica’s youth with national
and international companies and investors operating in the global virtual space, exploring new employment
entrepreneurship and business development opportunities. the event which includes seminars, a market place, a job fair,
software training sessions, hands-on exercises for people on how to use online job platforms, a 24h hours hackathon (a
24h marathon from idea to finish to generate mobile apps for the sports industry) and an applications contest;

(ii) Strengthening the existing young Inventor/Innovator competition in Jamaica, hosted by the Scientific Research Council
(SRC), which aims to identify, produce and commercialize products and services. The activities will include (a) capacity
building workshops for teachers and students in technology driven innovations (robotics, apps etc) and entrepreneurship
(b) ideation competitions to develop new products and identify available products for scale up (c) intellectual property
(IP) support to young inventors/innovators as the products move from prototype to commercialization and (d) post
competition resources (mentorship, prototyping, marketing etc.) to facilitate and accelerate commercialization of
inventions; and

(iii) the development of a STI policy will be led by the National Commission on Science and Technology (NCST). Support
will be given to (i) the hiring of consultants (ii) conducting of national consultations with the private sector, public sector
and civil society and (iii) preparing documents for submission to Cabinet and to Parliament.

Component 4. Project Administration (USD 2 M). This component will remain unchanged but the capacity of the PIU will
be strengthened by additional recruitment of technical specialists in charge of the different components. The PIU will
report to the Office of the Prime Minister. Support will be given to ensure that there is a simplified approval process which
allows the Project Manager to have the requisite authority and the autonomy to make decisions that are consistent with
the approved budget and procurement plan. PIU to describe what will be covered in the budget and procurement plan,
including M&E Specialist and operational manual preparation.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Because of the nature of the project, most of the activities will have no foreseeable relevant social or
    environmental risks. All physical infrastructures for the project will be either made available for free to the
    Government of Jamaica or is already the property of the Government of Jamaica. No additional structural
    works will be needed, nor acquisition or requisition of land or property. No involuntary resettlement will be
    generated through this operation.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Fabio Pittaluga, Social Safeguards Specialist
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered             Explanation
                                                                  Safeguard policy is no longer being triggered at
                                                                  appraisal stage, and the previous EA Category C will
                                                                  be maintained, with the update of the ISDS in order
                                                                  to reflect the proposed changes for the
                                                                  restructuring phase.
                                                                  The new proposed component (Comp 2: Digital and
                                                                  technical skills development for youth) includes
                                                                  mainly training activities, mentorship services and
                                                                  the purchase and installation of necessary
                                                                  equipment; and, also activities related to
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No                       refurbishing/upgrading of existent community and
                                                                  youth centers to support the operationalization as
                                                                  digital/tech centers, mostly light rehabilitation to
                                                                  accommodate the computer equipment, not
                                                                  including new constructions.
                                                                  As previously defined, all physical infrastructures
                                                                  for the project will be either made available for free
                                                                  to the Government of Jamaica or is already the
                                                                  property of the Government of Jamaica. No
                                                                  additional structural works will be needed, nor
                                                                  acquisition or requisition of land or property.
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             No

 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      No

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No

 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No
                                                                  No involuntary resettlement will be generated
                                                                  through this operation. No additional structural
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No
                                                                  works will be needed, nor acquisition or requisition
                                                                  of land or property.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      There are no safeguard issues or impacts foreseen as a result of this operation.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      There are no potential safeguard concerns ( through direct and long term impacts) foreseen as a result of this
      operation.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

      Not Applicable.


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      No safeguard policies were triggered for the preparation and implementation of this project.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      Not applicable. No safeguard policies have been triggered through this operation.



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
 B.    COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      NA
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                        NA
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            JM Youth Employment in Digital and Animation Industries (P148013)



    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       NA
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       NA
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       NA
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Nicolas Perrin
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Karlene Collette Francis

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
