Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC864 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 8, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Jordan 
Project ID: P070958 
Project Name: JO-REGIONAL & 
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader: Stephen Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 24, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2005 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government 
administration (50%);Solid waste 
management (30%);Roads and highways 
(10%);Central government administration 
(10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Municipal 
finance (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (P);Pollution 
management and environmental health 
(S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Dalia Lotayef (Environment), 
Concepcion Del Castillo (Social Safeguards) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 35 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
15 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The development objective of the project is to assist the government of Jordan to stabilize and 
develop the municipal sector by (a) improving the equity and adequacy of central-local resource 
transfers; (b) restructuring CVDB to improve its efficiency and diversify its financial products 
and service offerings to municipalities; (c) strengthening municipal financial management and 
service delivery capacity; and (d) improving regional planning and inter-municipal coordination 
to take advantage of economies of scale and strategic development opportunities.  To this end, 
the project will be implemented within a governance framework of increased participation and 
downward/upward accountability, coupled with increased coverage and quality of municipal 
service provision particularly in underserved areas.  
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Page  2
This project is conceptualized as the first stage in a long-term collaboration aimed at 
strengthening the municipal sector in Jordan. As such, the project will focus on a limited number 
of realistic objectives which are considered achievable within the span of the project life, while 
taking into consideration the long-term nature of the key underlying objectives. In doing so, the 
project will also aim at the concurrent creation of a knowledge and institutional basis for the 
further conceptualization of future programmatic sector interventions.  
The proposed components of the project, to be further detailed during project preparation, are: 
 
Component 1:  Strengthening National Level Institutions Involved in the Municipal Sector
.
In 
particular, this component will focus on the Ministry of Municipal Affairs (MOMA) and the City 
and Village Development Bank (CVDB). In the case of MOMA, it will support the ministry to 
develop rules-based policies regarding budget review processes, municipal classification system, 
revenue/expenditure assignments at local government level, and streamline/rationalize regulatory 
procedures (e.g. procurement). It would provide also technical assistance to restructure the 
transfer formula and to support the establishment of a Municipal Sector M&E database which 
would include both sector and project-specific baseline indicators and performance benchmarks. 
With regard to CVDB, the project will focus on issues of governance and organizational 
enhancement by supporting this institution to implement its business plan. Support to CVDB will 
also aim to strengthen and further develop analytical tools, forms, documentation system and 
procedures, support development of curriculum, trainer certification and training of trainers, and 
establish regulatory environment to strengthen oversight and monitoring. 
Component 2:  Municipal Infrastructure and Services.
 This component would focus on 
municipalities and aim to provide basic infrastructure and services (e.g. solid waste equipment, 
water/wastewater network rehabilitation/extension, water catchments systems, roads 
rehab/extension, street lighting; retaining walls, etc.) with a particular focus on under-
served/poor areas to be selected on the basis of agreed priority criteria. These criteria will be 
identified and applied to a restructured municipal classification system with new physical, socio-
economic and performance-based dimensions. This component would also develop municipal 
assets that provide services while generating revenue streams (e.g. slaughterhouses, vegetable 
markets, bus/transport terminals, small-scale manufacturing areas, etc.). The use of municipal 
asset management strategies/plans will be supported, together with methodologies for 
participatory planning, budgeting and implementation at local level. 
Component 3:  Municipal Capacity Building
.
At the municipal level, technical expertise would 
be provided, amongst others, to strengthen municipal budgeting, asset management, revenue 
generation, human resource capacity, investment project analysis and feasibility study 
preparation, and to develop and pilot mechanism for participatory governance.  
Component 4: Regional Economic Development Strategy & Investment Planning. 
This 
component would include technical assistance intended to strengthen regional planning and 
ensure effective linkage and coordination among municipalities in their development planning 
efforts. It will support and expand upon ongoing work of the Local Development Department of 
Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) and explore current institutional 
arrangements to develop options for consideration to realign and improve regional and local 
government coordination. 
Page  3
D.  Project location  
 
The Project will be developing a framework within which all of the 99 municipalities (excluding 
Amman) would be eligible to participate.  However, with other donor involvement in the sector, 
it is likely that regional coverage in terms of financing infrastructure investments and provision 
of capacity building would be coordinated and designated to different donors.  This will be 
reviewed and agreed during project preparation.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
To be Determined. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable
 
Safeguard Policy 
 
[YES ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[TBD ] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[NO ] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[TBD ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[NO ] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[N.A. ] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[N.A. ] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[TBD ] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[N.A. ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[N.A. ] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
Only small-scale infrastructure is likely to be implemented against a list of pre-approved sub-
project types.  These financing options will be further reviewed and clarified during the project 
preparation stage. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   January 15, 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N.A. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. TBD 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Stephen Karam 
September 8, 
2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Sherif Arif 
 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Hedi Larbi 
 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
