Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/07/2005 
Report No.:  AC1702
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P095155 
Project Name:  Kazakhstan - North-South Electricity Transmission Project 
Task Team Leader:  Istvan Dobozi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
4.55 
 
EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 13.14 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
43.40 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
61.09 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary development objective of the proposed North-South (N/S) Electricity 
Transmission Project is to ensure that business enterprises and households in southern 
Kazakhstan have access to reliable, cost effective and high quality supply of electricity. 
In addition, the project supports regional integration with respect to optimizing the use of 
energy resources through international electricity trade.  The project aims to promote 
competition both on the national and regional levels by allowing low cost producers in 
Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to compete on the broader regional market.  The 
project is a step towards regional power market liberalization to eventually involve all 
five Central Asian countries.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. Construction of a 475 km long, 500 kV overhead transmission line from Ekibastuz 
substation to Agadyr substation, including a Fiber Optic Communication Line.  
 
2. Extension/modernization of Ekibastuz substation through substation automation and 
protective relaying (SAPR) and installation of Power Line Carrier (PLC).  
Page  2
3. Extension/modernization of Agadyr substation through SAPR and installation of 
PLC.  
 
4. Technical assistance for project management for construction of the Ekibastuz-
Agadyr transmission line and transmission sector reforms (establishment of real time 
balancing market and adoption of zonal tariffs).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Ekibastuz substation (1,150/500 kV) is located at a distance of 33 km to the north-
west from the city of Ekibastuz in the Pavlodar region.  
 
The nearest populated localities and industrial objects are:  
 
-
13
km
eastward ? GRES-1 power station  
 
-
30
km
northward ? GRES-2 power station with adjacent infrastructure  
 
-
1
km
southward ? sheep-breeding farm ?Baitemir?  
 
The region includes neither protected areas nor areas of cultural, historical and 
religious interest.  
 
The Agadyr substation (500 kV) is located in the Shetsk district of Karaganda region.  
No lands under farming, small industry or cultural, historical and religious properties are 
within 800 m of the substation.  At 1 km from the substation there is the Agadyr town 
with population over 10,000 people.  
 
The overhead transmission line route will be on state-owned land of no or low 
agricultural value.  None of the land to be utilized includes protected areas or proven 
mineral deposits.  Furthermore, it is far removed from populated areas, hence no 
resettlement is required.  Almost the entire length of the line is pastureland (or steppe). 
The route passes through two regions, Pavlodar and Karaganda, within the existing right-
of-way of an abandoned corridor of a 1,150 kV transmission line (which was largely 
dismantled after the breakup of the USSR).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (QAG) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The only safeguard issue identified by the Bank for the project is environmental 
assessment.  
 
The chief environmental issues associated with project during construction are: 
management of topsoil (transmission line), dust and noise associated with the movement 
of people, material and machines, potential impacts from access road construction, 
clearance of vegetative cover (transmission line), management of construction wastes and 
prohibition of purchasing any equipment containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs, in 
substations).  During operation, issues at the substations are limited to oil leaks, noise 
generation and electromagnetic field strength.  Along the transmission line route, the 
chief issues are electromagnetic field strength, and interference with migratory bird 
routes.  All these issues are well known and can easily be mitigated with sound 
engineering design and standard environmental management practices.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative routes or substation locations were investigated and the routes/locations 
selected offered minimal environmental impact.    
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is in full compliance with environmental requirements of both the 
Government of Kazakhstan and the Bank.  The Ministry of Environment (MOE) 
reviewed the final feasibility study for the overall N/S project and approved it as a 
preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).  Prior to starting construction, the 
Page  4
MOE will require a final EIA, based on the detailed project design, prepared by an 
organization holding a license issued by the MOE.  The final EIA should also 
accommodate MOE comments and recommendations made on the feasibility study.  
 
In accordance with World Bank Environmental Assessment (EA) procedures, the 
project was classified as Category B indicating limited impacts that can be readily 
managed through sound engineering design and construction.  Consistent with a category 
B
rating, KEGOC prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in accordance 
with Bank requirements, including a detailed description of the expected environmental 
impacts, proposed mitigation measures, monitoring plan and environmental capacity 
improvements in KEGOC.  
 
Project specific environmental management plans (EMPs) were prepared by the 
borrower for both the substation and overhead line components. These EMPs include 
both mitigation and monitoring programs to address the environmental issues.  They were 
agreed with the World Bank.  The borrower has the required capacity to implement the 
EMP.  KEGOC will be second-time borrower from the Bank. Under the ongoing Bank-
supported Electricity Transmission Rehabilitation Project, KEGOC has shown highly 
satisfactory environmental performance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The borrower has already engaged a number of stakeholders along the proposed N/S line.  
A
media campaign has been launched to sensitize potentially affected stakeholders to the 
project.  Public consultation was conducted with affected stakeholders and NGOs on June 
28, 2005 in Astana and the Russian language EMP (agreed with the Bank) was posted on 
KEGOC?s website on July 7, 2005.  The Bank received the English version of the EMP 
on July 6, 2005, which was deposited in InfoShop on July 7, 2005.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/06/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Istvan Dobozi 
07/07/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
07/07/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
07/07/2005 
Comments:  The RSC delegated the project to the task team and Sector Manager in the Safeguards 
Consultation Meeting held at the PCN stage, hence no approval by the RSC is required. 
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
