Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/01/2005 
Report No.:  31971
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P049721 
Project Name:  Agricultural Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maurizio Guadagni 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 10, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (60%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(40%) 
Theme:  Technology diffusion (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
24.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
46.80 
 LOCAL: 
BENEFICIARIES 
12.30
59.10 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to increase the competitiveness of the agricultural 
sector in Kazakhstan.  To achieve this objective, the project would facilitate access to 
markets by supporting measures to improve the quality and safety of agricultural 
products, enhance access to information, and harmonize standards.  It will also help to 
increase the quality, quantity, and relevance of applied agricultural research and facilitate 
transfer of knowledge to farmers.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components: (1) quality and safety management of 
agricultural products, (2) agricultural marketing, (3) applied agricultural research and 
extension, and (4) institutional development and agricultural policy  
 
Component 1: Quality and Safety Management of Agricultural Products.  This 
component will enhance the management of food safety controls and quality certification 
along the value chain.  It comprises two subcomponents: harmonization and development 
of standards, and quality and safety monitoring.  
 
Page  2
Component 2: Agricultural Marketing.  This component will help to enhance 
agricultural producers? and processors? understanding of markets, improve marketing 
infrastructure, and facilitate equal access to market information.  It comprises two 
subcomponents: strengthening market information systems, and developing market-
oriented infrastructure.  
 
Component 3: Applied Agricultural Research and Extension.  This component aims to 
increase the effectiveness of agricultural research and extension services in Kazakhstan.  
It will facilitate the adoption of innovations that increase the productivity of farmers and 
agroprocessors.  It comprises two subcomponents: applied research, and agricultural 
extension.  
 
Component 4.  Institutional and Agricultural Policy Development.  This component will 
create the institutional structure to implement project activities and will help the Ministry 
of Agriculture to establish the policy and institutional framework to improve the 
competitiveness of the country?s agricultural sector.  It comprises three subcomponents: 
institutional structure, project evaluation, and agricultural policy development.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance activities, most of which with a demand-driven nature, along the 
agricultural areas of Kazakhstan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni (ECSSD) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment. The project will finance (a) laboratories to monitor quality and safety of 
agricultural products, (b) demand-driven investments of different types; and (c) 
institutional development investments in extension and policy making.  
 
No potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are envisaged 
under the proposed project. The project could cause the following impact (a) increased 
intensity of soil cultivation, increased use of mineral fertilizers and agro-chemicals, (b) 
use of chemicals in laboratories for testing quality and safety of agricultural products, (c) 
waste management at farms and processing facilities, (c) increased adoption of minimum 
tillage technology which will reduce land erosion but increase the use of agro-chemicals; 
(d) improved knowledge on crop rotation and other soil fertility enhancing technologies 
(e) increased number of livestock (f) improvement of pasture management.  
 
?
Because of the demand-driven nature of the large technology adoption 
component, it is impossible at this moment to identify the risk of specific investments. As 
required for projects of environmental assessment category financial intermediaries, an 
environmental review (Environment Sector Review, June 2004) was conducted by a local 
consultant.  Its main findings include:  
 
?
No potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are likely 
under the proposed project.  
 
?
The food safety component will have a direct positive impact on the environment, 
particularly because of the development and enforcement of food safety legislation and 
improved quarantine which will reduce the risk posed by invasive alien species.  
However rehabilitation and management of laboratories could potentially have a negative 
impact because of their use of chemicals and reagents.  Nonetheless the planned supply 
of incinerators to dispose of laboratory waste will benefit the environment.  
 
?
National legislation aimed at protecting the environment is significantly 
developed in Kazakhstan.  However, by-laws and regulations are still under development, 
and enforcement is weak.  
 
?
Marketing, applied research, and extension subprojects supported through the 
CGS may have negative environmental consequences. Although some subprojects may 
have positive environmental impacts?natural resources management, organic agriculture, 
crop rotation, and integrated pest management?most will involve agricultural 
intensification, which may generate negative environmental impacts. A primary example 
is increased use of pesticides.  Thus the pest management safeguard policy has been 
triggered.  Other subprojects that will require a careful environmental review include 
food processing subprojects, such as slaughterhouses.  
 
Social. A social assessment was completed as part of project preparation to help project 
managers develop the project to fit the needs of local rural residents in the project area, 
thereby increasing returns on investment and enhancing sustainability.  The social 
Page  4
assessment aimed to understand and express the needs, aspirations, and social and 
economic constraints and opportunities of rural people, including levels and sources of 
income, living standards, consumption patterns, access to goods and services, as well as 
standard social and demographic characteristics.  The study took place in four oblasts 
which are representative of the geographic, ethnic, and structure of farms in Kazakhstan: 
Almaty; Akmola; Pavlodar; and West Kazakhstan.  The method used included; (a) 
background review of the existing data and information regarding land and land use and 
review of different reports, including the background reports prepared for this project as 
well as the findings of the study on farm restructuring; (b) key informant interviews; and 
(c) focus group discussions.  
 
The project is targeted to farmers with potential to be competitive. These may not 
necessarily be the poorest ones; however largest farms may not necessarily be the more 
competitive ones. In fact it is proven that large farms tend to be less effective than 
smaller farms. The case of North Kazakhstan may be an exception to this, since the 
special climatic conditions (where cereals are to sowed and harvested in an extremely 
short period of time) do demand a high level of mechanization which requires larger 
farms. One of the project objectives, differentiation from cereal production, would reduce 
the comparative advantage of large farms, and thus benefit smaller farms.  
 
There is an emerging new type of farms, in between large agricultural enterprises 
(average size 1,400 ha) and small household plots (average size 0.2 ha). These are the 
family farms, with an average size of 50 ha. The project would target this intermediary 
size of farm type.  
 
The project is expected to have a positive effect disseminating useful information and 
crucial knowledge, building capacity in communities to generate knowledge, contributing 
to change to improve interaction. No negative impacts, including resettlement policy, is 
envisaged.  
 
The social assessment will also comprise an institutional analysis to identify losers and 
winners. It will be key to assure that project design will be effective to provide its 
services to small and medium producers who face difficulties in making their voices 
heard.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term negative impacts are anticipated due to future project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The uncertainty of the final investments financed under the project will require an 
Operational Manual. This will contain an environmental section which will include 
guidelines for subproject environmental evaluation, a description of institutional 
arrangements for environmental review and approval, and an assessment of institutional 
capacity for performing the environmental review and approval.  
 
After World Bank no-objection, the Operational Manual will be disclosed in Kazakhstan 
in national language and it will be available in the Infoshop.  The institutional capacity 
will be reviewed as well within the section as it will include the description of 
institutional arrangements and assessment of capacity for environmental review and 
approval. The project team considers that there are sufficient institutional resource within 
the Ministry of Agriculture to perform the environmental review and monitoring 
functions.  
 
Pest Management. Some project financed investments will finance the purchase of 
Chemical Control Agents (CCAs) and chemicals for the testing laboratories. Farm input 
use will be the farmers' responsibility; nonetheless the project will assist farmers to use 
these inputs in a more safe and responsible way.  The Government of Kazakhstan has 
recently upgraded it management of the control and oversight regarding use of pesticides 
with the help of FAO (FAO/TCP/KAZ 0065) and a new Department of Plant Protection 
and Quarantine (DPPQ) was established in the Ministry of Agriculture. The project will 
build on this development.  As a mitigation measure, farmers that use or will use CCA on 
their lands will be trained in the storage, handling and use of these chemicals as well as 
with respect to the careful disposal of the containers. The use of appropriate clothing will 
be encouraged through demonstration. The approved chemicals are all class III 
chemicals.  
 
A
Pesticide Management Plan will be prepared, and disclosed in Kazakhstan in national 
language and after being sent to the Bank for review and ECSSD approval, it will be 
available in the Infoshop. The project will also propose alternative methods to chemicals, 
such as disease-resistant varieties and integrated pest management (IPM).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders under the project include:  
 
(i) 
private sector: individual farmers, farmers associations, agricultural enterprises, 
agro-processors, state owned enterprises, and other actors of the private sector; and  
 
(ii) 
Institutional stakeholders: Ministry of Agriculture, Research Institutes, 
Universities, Regional Institutions, Laboratories, NGOs.  
 
Representatives of the above stakeholders have been consulted during initial project 
preparation, and will continue to contribute to project design.  A working group with 
representatives of public and private institutions meets regularly to address issues on 
project design.  Consultations will be an ongoing activity throughout the project's lifetime 
as part of the monitoring and evaluation.  
Page  6
Some representatives of project beneficiaries have been already involved in project 
design, and will continue their involvement during the remaining of preparation, and 
implementation.  Farmers and farmers associations are also potential providers of the 
subprojects financed under the Competitive Grant Scheme. It is expected that these 
subprojects will significantly benefit small and medium-sized farmers. This will increase 
farms' productivity and therefore the income level of the vulnerable people.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/30/2004 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Maurizio Guadagni 
 
Comments:  This ISDS had already been previously approved. This is just a new web-based  form. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph R. Goldberg 
 
Comments:   
