                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                         Report No: AC635
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16/02/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: KAZAKHSTAN                                     Project ID: P049721
Project: Agricultural Competitiveness Project           Task Team Leader: Maurizio Guadagni
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 10, 2004          IBRD Amount ($m): 25.00
Bank Approval: February 15, 2005                        IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: ECSSD                                    Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)      Agricultural marketing and trade (40%)
Status: Lending                                         Theme: Technology diffusion (P); Rural services and
                                                        infrastructure (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to increase the competitiveness of the agricultural sector in
Kazakhstan. To achieve this objective, the project would (i) increase the quality, quantity, and
relevance of public and private investment in applied agricultural research and technology transfer,
and (ii) improve the capacity of the public and private sectors to monitor food quality, certify
standards, and grade agricultural products.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project will consist of four components: (a) improvement of agricultural products quality; (b)
agricultural applied research and technology validation; (c) agricultural knowledge transfer and
market-information system, and (d) institutional development. The implementing agency will be
the Ministry of Agriculture.

(a) Improvement of Agricultural Products Quality

This component will contribute to improving the capacity of the public and private sectors to
monitor food quality, certify agricultural products and working procedures in accordance with the
international grade and standards. The strategy will follow the requirements of World Trade
Organization accession in agriculture and food industry, particularly in the WTO requirements on
sanitary and phytosanitary measures.

The resources of this component will be used to build capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture and
the private sector to enable them to monitor and certify the quality of agricultural products. The
proposed unit on standardization will be in charge of harmonizing standards from the Soviet
period (called GOST standards) with the existing international standards.

The component will modernize laboratories and support those laboratories which need to get
international certification in accordance with ISO 17025 system. The component also will pilot
introducing international quality systems as the Good Agricultural Practices (GAP), Good
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP).

                                                   2
                                                                                                  ISDS


(b) Agricultural Applied Research and Technology Validation

The component will establish an institution to finance small demand-driven investment in
technology adoption and validation. The institution will establish a competitive process for
funding of problem-oriented and market-driven adaptive research that will result in a rapid impact.
Applied research and technology validation will be carried out with a demand-driven approach,
mostly on farm or with agro-processors, and will emphasize strong involvement of users in all
phases, from setting priorities to uptake of results. The institution would encourage private
sector firms and producer organizations to submit proposals and/or be active collaborators in the
R&D activity. The mechanism is based on a scheme similar to Competitive Grant Schemes
experimented in Latin America and in some ECA countries and characterized by: (i) introduction
of a demand-driven element to increase the links with final clients (users); (ii) public financing
though a multiplicity of competing executors; (iii) separation between the management of the
institution and the technical review panel which will review proposals to guarantee a transparent
selection.

The Institution will complement, not replace the core funding of the agricultural knowledge
system. It will finance priority activities in technology adaptation, validation, and dissemination.
This should not be seen as the solution to the overall funding needs of the agricultural knowledge
system complex. Because of this, the project will create a framework of incentives for the
agricultural research system to reform and it will provide technical assistance to help improve the
efficiency of the existing agricultural research system.

The component will develop the institutional structure comprising: (i) a governing board, (ii) a
secretariat, and (iii) an independent technical review panel. Subprojects will be financed on a
demand-driven basis, and therefore it is not possible to know ex-ante the specific type of
subprojects. It will finance two main types of subprojects:
· technology adaptation and validation in the areas of crop and livestock production,
    post-harvest operations, inputs (such as seeds), natural resource management, processing,
    storage, and marketing; and
· technology transfer, including demonstration plots, validation of economic or social validity of
    some technologies, use of media, etc.

(c) Agricultural Knowledge Transfer and Market Information System

This component will provide advisory services on agricultural technologies and knowledge. It
would disseminate knowledge and information to small and medium rural producers, and
agro-processors. Knowledge would cover technology, business management, agricultural
economics, market information, accounting, and legal issues. The component would also carry
out targeted training and fellowships abroad.

The market information system will improve (i) the transfer of market information to small and
medium agricultural stakeholders, (ii) the capacity of agricultural businesses to access markets
and export, and (iii) the efficiency of distributing channels from farms to processors.

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


(d) Institutional Development

This component will support the Ministry of Agriculture's ability to: (i) manage, monitor, and
evaluate project activities; (ii) design and monitor policies which affect agricultural
competitiveness; (iii) provide technical assistance to design a plan to reorganize the existing
agricultural research system in an effort to improve its effectiveness and its links with users; (iv)
provide training to staff on different aspects such as policy analysis, management, and economics,
and technical aspects such as agricultural trade and WTO accession, agricultural knowledge and
information systems, participation in regional agricultural fairs and conference, (v) formulation
and evaluation of budgeted programs and (vi) development of GMO system in Kazakhstan.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will finance activities, most of which with a demand-driven nature, throughout the
agricultural areas of Kazakhstan.


B. Check Environmental Classification: F (Financial Intermediary Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 Environment. The project will finance (i) laboratories to monitor quality and safety of
 agricultural products, (ii) demand-driven investments in agricultural technology adoption and
 dissemination; and (iii) institutional development investments in extension and policy making.

                                                    4
                                                                                                 ISDS


 No potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are envisaged under the
 proposed project. The project could cause the following impact (a) increased intensity of soil
 cultivation, increased use of mineral fertilizers and agro-chemicals, (b) use of chemicals in
 laboratories for testing quality and safety of agricultural products, (c) waste management at
 farms and processing facilities, (c) increased adoption of minimum tillage technology which will
 reduce land erosion but increase the use of agro-chemicals; (d) improved knowledge on crop
 rotation and other soil fertility enhancing technologies (e) increased number of livestock (f)
 improvement of pasture management.

 Because of the demand-driven nature of the large technology adoption component, it is
 impossible at this moment to identify the risk of specific investments. Therefore the
 environmental assessment will review the capacity of the implementing agency to screen
 subproject proposals, implement mitigation plans, and monitor environmental conditions during
 project implementation.
Financed by the project preparation grant, a consultant with environmental expertise will:
· assess the legal and regulatory framework, institutions, administrative procedures, and
     enforcement capacity for environmental management in Kazakhstan
· identify the types of rural investment activities that could be financed under the project, their
     potential environmental impacts and mitigation measures, and
· ensure that the project operational manual complies with World Bank environmental
     safeguard requirements and develop procedures for the environmental screening and
     monitoring of demand-driven investments applications under the project.

Social. During project preparation a social assessment will be carried out. This assessment will
contribute to design the system to guarantee access to needed and relevant information by
different stakeholders. Experience from competitive grant scheme proves that access to
information about availability and rules of the game is key to its success. Similar considerations
could be made about (i) access to extension and advisory services, and (ii) access to testing
laboratories. The social assessment will therefore help design a communication campaign to target
less informed and more isolated rural businesses.

The project is targeted to farmers with potential to be competitive. These may not necessarily be
the poorest ones; however largest farms may not necessarily be the more competitive ones. In fact
it is proven that large farms tend to be less effective than smaller farms. The case of North
Kazakhstan may be an exception to this, since the special climatic conditions (where cereals are
sown and harvested in an extremely short period of time) do demand a high level of
mechanization which requires larger farms. One of the project objectives, diversification from
cereal production, would reduce the comparative advantage of large farms, and thus benefit
smaller farms.

There is an emerging new type of farms, in between large agricultural enterprises (average size
1,400 ha) and small household plots (average size 0.2 ha). These are the family farms, with an
average size of 50 ha. The project would target this intermediary size of farm type.

The project is expected to have a positive effect disseminating useful information and crucial

                                                       5
                                                                                                          ISDS


knowledge, building capacity in communities to generate knowledge, contributing to change to
improve interaction. No negative impacts, including resettlement policy, are envisaged.

The social assessment will also comprise an institutional analysis to identify losers and winners. It
will be key to assure that project design will be effective to provide its services to small and
medium producers who face difficulties in making their voices heard.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No long-term negative impacts are anticipated due to future project activities.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No long-term negative impacts are anticipated due to future project activities.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The uncertainty of the final investments financed under the project will require an Operational
Manual. This will contain an environmental section which will include guidelines for subproject
environmental evaluation, a description of institutional arrangements for environmental review
and approval, and an assessment of institutional capacity for performing the environmental review
and approval.

After World Bank no-objection, the Operational Manual will be disclosed in Kazakhstan in
national language and it will be available in the Infoshop. The institutional capacity will be
reviewed as well within the section as it will include the description of institutional arrangements
and assessment of capacity for environmental review and approval. The project team considers
that there are sufficient institutional resources within the Ministry of Agriculture to perform the
environmental review and monitoring functions.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders under the project include:
(i)      private sector: individual farmers, farmers associations, agricultural enterprises,
agro-processors, and other actors of the private sector; and
(ii)     Institutional stakeholders: Ministry of Agriculture, Research Institutes, Universities,
Regional Institutions, Laboratories, NGOs.

Representatives of the above stakeholders have been consulted during initial project preparation,
and will continue to contribute to project design. A working group with representatives of public
and private institutions meets regularly to address issues on project design. Consultations will be
an ongoing activity throughout the project's lifetime as part of the monitoring and evaluation.
Some representatives of project beneficiaries have been already involved in project design, and
will continue their involvement during remaining preparation and implementation. Farmers and

                                                      6
                                                                                                           ISDS


farmers associations are also potential providers of the subprojects financed under the
Competitive Grant Scheme. It is expected that these subprojects will significantly benefit small
and medium-sized farmers. This will increase farms' productivity and therefore the income level of
the vulnerable people.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[X] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               16/02/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           30.04.2004
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date

                                                 7
                                                                      ISDS


Task Team Leader:                 Maurizio Guadagni
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Helen Shahriari
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: Galina Zubkova
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                      Name                    Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Marjory-Anne Bromhead    February 13, 2004
Sector Manager/Director           Joseph Goldberg         February 11, 2004

