                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

Date prepared/updated: November 2, 2018

I. Basic Information

 1. Basic Project Data
 Country: Kenya                                            Project ID: P160157
                                                           Additional Project ID (if any):
 Project Name: KTDA Small Hydro Programme Of Activities
 Task Team Leader: Juha Seppala, Jose Andreu (co-TTL)
 Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                             Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit: GCCFM                                      Lending Instrument: IPF
 Sector: Hydropower (100%)
 Theme: Climate Change (100%)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):
 IDA Amount (US$m.):
 GEF Amount (US$m.):
 PCF Amount (US$m.):
 Other financing amounts by source: [Withheld due to third party confidential information]

 Environmental Category: B – Partial Assessment
 Is this a transferred project                              Yes [ ]                     No [X ]
 Simplified Processing                                      Simple [ ]                  Repeater [ ]
 Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  Yes [ ]        No [ X]
 Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

Monetize and transact GHG reductions from renewable energy produced by small hydropower
benefiting smallholder tea farmers in rural Kenya.

3. Project Description:

The KTDA Small Hydro Programme of Activities (the “Project?) developed by KTDA Power
Company Limited (KTDA Power) aims to generate and sell Certified Emission Reductions (CERs)
from a planned group of 10 small scale run-of-river hydropower plants (“SHP? or “Sub-Project?)
at various locations in Kenya. The Project is implemented under a Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) Program of Activities (PoA) titled “KTDA Small Hydro Programme of Activities?, which was
registered with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
secretariat in September, 2012.

The International Finance Corporation (IFC), in December 2015, considering carbon finance
revenues, committed US$ 25 million in debt to KTDA Power to finance the total cost of US$85.6
million for the construction of seven of the 10 SHPs with total aggregate capacity of 16.2MW. IFC
will thus be co-financing seven of the planned 10 SHPs, with other investors having provided
funding for the three other SHPs. These 10 SHPs build the foundation for the proposed carbon
finance operation. The Bank will not invest in the SHPs themselves, but through an Emission
Reductions Purchase Agreement (ERPA), provide results-based carbon finance to KTDA Power tied
to CER deliveries after the SHPs become operational and start generating renewable electricity.




                                                    1
The SHPS will generate captive electricity to enhance access to reliable electricity much needed
by Kenya Tea Development Agency Holdings (KTDA)’s tea factories. Regional Power Companies
(RPCs) are being set up for this purpose and are owned by the small-scale tea farmers’ co-
operatives, themselves members of KTDA. The project will, ultimately, increase the productivity,
and hence, the bottom line of the smallholder tea businesses allowing these savings to be passed
on to the tea farmers themselves. Second, surplus electricity will be sold to the state-owned utility
company, Kenya Power (KPLC) by supplying electricity to the national grid, which will contribute
towards addressing electricity reliability issues in the country and responding to the efforts by the
Ministry of Energy aiming to increase installed small hydro capacity. The SHPs will serve captive
power to 39 tea factories, contributing to increase income for over 350,000 small-holder tea
farmers, and will contribute to an increased share of energy from small SHPs in the total energy
mix of the grid, which currently represents under one percent.

KTDA Power plans to develop a portfolio of SHPs with an aggregate generation capacity of 31.3
megawatts (MW) across 10 proposed sites, as currently planned, in and around the Central
Highlands. These 10 SHPs will consist of 7-10 Component Project Activities (CPAs) under the CDM-
PoA framework. The main barrier for the expansion/replication of KTDA Power’s business model
has been difficulty in obtaining external commercial debt financing. This is due to high project cost
per MW derived from project site constraints and KTDA Power’s policy to ensure high quality of
electro mechanical equipment. In order to overcome this challenge, KTDA Power first developed
a pilot project consisting of three SHPs with total capacity of 12.4MW, obtaining concessional
financing from Agence Française de Développement (AFD). All the three SHPs of the pilot project
started construction, of which two SHPs (Chania and Gura) have completed construction in August
2016 and October 2016, respectively. The third pilot, North Mathioya, is expected to complete
construction in December 2018.

Once the pilot project of three SHPs demonstrated a certain level of track record, KTDA Power
planned for commercial expansion/replication via development of an additional 7 SHPs through
partnership with IFC. KTDA Power aimed to obtain commercial debt financing for the
expansion/replication of projects in order to demonstrate the commercial viability of its
innovative business model. Of the seven SHPs to be financed by the IFC, four have started
construction.

All of the projects are run-of-river types and consist of an intake weir between 2.5 and 3.0 m high,
headrace water channel, forebay, penstock and surface power house connected to the tea factory
and the national grid by medium-voltage transmission lines (11 kV). Generating capacities range
from 1.0 to 6.5 MW. The length of the headrace channel varies, but can be up to several
kilometers. The lengths of transmission lines vary as well, from about 7 to 22 km. The
infrastructure is located on private lands, which have either been bought or leased (willing buyer
– willing seller) from local farmers –mostly tea farmers, but in some cases coffee farmers (South
Mara and Lower Nyamindi are in coffee growing regions).

However, revenue from electricity alone does not generate sufficient cash flow for the debt
servicing. That is why carbon finance is being considered as results-based financing via the World
Bank as trustee of Carbon Initiative for Development (Ci-Dev), which would make the underlying
project viable. The carbon finance will not pay for the construction of the SHPs, but will be made
available after the SHPs are commissioned and start generating renewable electricity to help KTDA
Power with the loan payments to the IFC.


                                                 2
The project would target a number of development challenges, including providing access to
clean, renewable energy; providing climate change mitigation benefits and improving livelihoods
for the tea growers. These are all supporting the World Bank Group’s twin goals of eradicating
extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the assessment of environmental
and social risks and impacts:

The KTDA factories are distributed both throughout the East and West of the Great Rift Valley.
The proposed1 SHP locations are given in the table below (Projects 1-3-- externally financed,
Projects 4-10 – IFC financed sites).

    Project         Capacity   River       County      Owner RPC      Financier   Construction   Land
                    (MW)                                                          completion     acquisition
    1. Gura           5.8      Gura        Nyeri       Gura RPC       External    Complete       Complete
    2. Chania         1.0      Chania      Kiambu      Mataara        External    Complete       Complete
                                                       RPC
    3.North           5.6      N.          Muranga     Metumi         External    Jun 2019       Complete
    Mathioya                   Mathioya                RPC
    4.Lower           1.8      Nyamindi    Kirinyaga   Kirinyaga      IFC         Jun 2019       In process
    Nyamindi                                           RPC
    5.      South     2.0      S. Mara     Tharaka     Greater        IFC         Jun 2019       In process
    Mara                                   Nithi       Menu RPC
    6. Iraru          1.5      Iraru       Meru        Greater        IFC         Jun 2019       In process
                                                       Menu RPC
    7. Kipsonoi I   2.6-3.6    Kipsonoi    Bomet       Settet RPC     IFC         Jun 2021       In process
    8.                2.0      Gucha       Kisii       Nyakuwana      IFC         Jun 2019       In process
    Nyambunde                                          RPC
    9. Kiringa        1.5      Kiringa     Kirinyaga   Kirinyaga      IFC         Dec 2021       Not yet due
                                                       RPC
    10.               6.5      Gucha       Kisii       Nyakuwana      IFC         Dec 2021       In process
    Nyamasege                                          RPC




5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

James Chacha Maroa (GEN01)
Margaret Ombai (GSU07)
Thomas Walton (Environmental Consultant)




1
    As per current plans. Ultimate composition of the portfolio may be subject to change.


                                                       3
 6. Applicable Performance Standards                                       Yes            No
 PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and                       X
 Social Risks and Impacts
 PS 1 is applicable because individual hydropower projects and associated facilities such
 as transmission lines are expected to have environmental and social impacts.
 PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                         X
 Workplace safety and labor conditions are important concerns during construction and
 operation.
 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                         X
 The SHPs are renewable energy sources that will reduce fossil fuel consumption at the
 tea factories.
 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                               X
 The projects sites are typically located within 100m of farm plots and/or households.
 There will be civil works, which could have impacts on community health and safety.
 Drowning risk posed by headrace canals was a concern raised by community members
 during ESIA consultations.
 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                                       X
 All land acquisition is through willing-buyer willing-seller transactions. KTDA has
 developed a Land Acquisition Policy that establishes the procedures to be followed and
 the requirements for documentation of the transactions. KTDA will share with the Bank
 the land acquisition report with details of each subproject to ensure they conform to the
 Bank’s standards for willing-seller-willing-buyer transactions as specified in PS5 and G
 PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                 X
 of Living Natural Resources
 Hydropower projects can have significant impacts on the river flow, thereby leading to
 reduced biodiversity; hydro projects can also impact aquatic system connectivity and
 migration of fish species.
 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                  X
 There are no indigenous peoples in the project-affected area.
 PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                                   X
 The land in the project-affected area is almost entirely agricultural. Cultural heritage
 features are not anticipated.

7. If PS 1 and PS 2 are NOT applicable, provide a brief explanation why:

---

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
See attached Environmental and Social Review Summary, which is also available at the following website:
https://hubs.worldbank.org/docs/imagebank/pages/docprofile.aspx?nodeid=30223721
https://disclosures.ifc.org/#/projectDetail/ESRS/36402

The proposed project’s overall risk rating is substantial and the project’s EA category is B.
Vegetation clearing for canals, powerhouses, and transmission lines, modification of the natural
flow of the rivers, and the presence of the weirs are identified as the main activities that could
cause adverse environmental impacts, including impeding fish migration, soil erosion and air
pollution from vegetation burning, changes in stream ecology, and impairment of downstream
uses. Impacts on surface water quality, air quality, noise, and solid waste management will be


                                                   4
local and of short duration, and the ESIAs for each subproject require adherence to good
construction practices and include measures to minimize clearing and prompting re-vegetation of
disturbed sites, equipment and materials storage areas and borrow pits, upon completion of
activities.

Downstream and upstream users were taken into account and were consulted in preparation of
the ESIAs. However, aquatic ecology, migratory fish species, ambient water quality, minimum
environmental flows, environmental characteristics of transmission line corridors and potential
impacts of line construction and operation were not adequately addressed in many of the ESIAs.
Cumulative impacts are not an issue in any of the three non-IFC SHPs, but there is potential for
cumulative impacts on the Gucha River from two IFC-financed SHPs there – Nyambunde and
Nyamasege. Those cumulative impacts will be addressed in the ESIA for Nyamasege, which has
not yet been prepared, as specified in the ESRS. The aquatic biodiversity and water quality
baseline studies and monitoring programs required in the ESAP will result in measures to better
address the in-stream impacts, including improved calculation of environmental flows and the
introduction of fish ladders where needed and not already part of sub-project design. The ESRS
specifies that baseline surveys and impact assessments of transmission line corridors will be
conducted in parallel with or prior to the surveys of the alignments. All of the foregoing studies
will be used to update the respective ESIAs and are preconditions for the signing of the sub-ERPAs
for the individual SHPs.

As per the Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) prepared for the seven IFC-financed
SHPs, and the related Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP), KTDA Power has on a
corporate level designed and implemented an Environmental and Social Management System;
developed TORs for future Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA); developed
Environmental Health and Safety Standards, prepared a Land Acquisition Policy and developed
TORs for an aquatic biodiversity baseline and monitoring programs at the sites. These similarly
apply to the three separately financed SHPs. A land acquisition and compensation report
summarizing the details of the land parcels and compensation paid to all land owners for all
project sites is required and is currently still a living document for North Mathioya. The final land
reports will be expected to demonstrate that the willing-buyer-willing-seller model that has been
applied to the project conforms to the Bank’s PS5 and GN5. A total of 38 hectares has been
acquired for the intake, canal, penstock and powerhouse as well as for the transmission lines for
the first six projects. The project footprint has been altered where possible to avoid acquisition
and compensation paid to permanently affected land owners.

Broad community support exists for the project, which is seen as beneficial in improving the
incomes of local tea farmers (who, by being members of KTDA, also have a direct stake in the
project). Stakeholder consultations have been carried out as part of the ESIA process. The scenario
for community engagement is unique as a significant majority of the affected community
members are KTDA farmers. PS 7 on Indigenous Peoples and PS8 on Cultural Heritage were not
triggered, as no IPs were identified in the project area (which are agricultural tea landscapes) and
the project sites are situated in agricultural landscapes (mainly tea farmers), thus cultural heritage
sites are not anticipated to be encountered.

In reviewing for possible cumulative impacts, it was noted that none of the three non-IFC-funded
SHPs have cumulative impact. They are on separate rivers, and there are no other SHPs from
outside this proposed project on those rivers according to the World Small Hydropower


                                                  5
Development Report of 2013 (UNIDO, ICSHP). As specified in the ESRS, an environmental and
social audit will be carried out for the three non-IFC funded SHPs as a precondition for no-
objection to the signing of the individual plant sub-ERPAs. Cumulative impacts are possible for
two of the IFC-funded SHPs that are located on the Gucha River, Nymabunde and Nyamasege,
and these will be addressed in the ESIA for Nyamasege, which has not yet been prepared.

KTDA Power with IFC support has engaged competent contractors, project engineers, and
consultants with a track record of impact management that can be evaluated from ongoing and
nearly finished projects and has been satisfactory overall and KTDA Power has been enthusiastic
and dedicated in its uptake of performance standards requirements. Also, KTDA Group is an
existing IFC client and the IFC conducted Integrity Due Diligence on KTDA Group and KTDA Power
and found no major issues. KTDA Power is led by an experienced management team and has hired
appropriate in-house technical experts. It has been confirmed that there are no technical
constraints in connecting SHPs to the grid. The Project has also obtained all the necessary
regulatory approvals.


 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 Environmental and Social Review Summary:
    Dates of "in-country" disclosure                                                      October 19 2018
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                         June 25, 2018
    For Category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
                                                                                               N/A
    client’s ESIA to the Executive Directors
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
by the project decision meeting)

 Client’s Environment and Social Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone Environmental and Social             Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
 Assessment (including EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager            Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
 (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Client’s Environmental and Social Management System
 Has the client developed an appropriately detailed ESMS, and does           Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
 the client have the technical and organizational capacity to
 implement it?
 Labor and Working Conditions
 Does the client have a written human resources policy available to          Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
 all employees that describes labor and working conditions?
 Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management
 If PS 6 is applicable, would the project result in any significant          Yes [ ]     No [ x ]    N/A [ ]
 conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of     Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
 other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
 mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
 If the project entails use of living natural resources, has certification   Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
 been obtained or a time-bound plan established to obtain
 certification?



                                                       6
Physical Cultural Resources
If PS 8 is applicable, does the project design include adequate          Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [x ]
measures related to physical cultural resources?
Indigenous Peoples
If PS 7 applicable,have Indigenous Peoples communities been              Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
consulted in accordance with requirements of PS 7?
Have the requirements for Free Prior Informed Consent been met,          Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
and is there reasonable evidence of broad community support by the
affected Indigenous Peoples communities?
Involuntary Resettlement
If PS 5 is applicable, have the requirements been complied with by       Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
the client?
Pollution Prevention and Efficient Use of Resources
Does the project comply with good international industry practice as     Yes [x ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
presented in the WBG EHSGs or a similar internationally
recognized benchmark?
Is the project designed for energy efficiency and waste                  Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
minimization?
Community Health and Safety
Has the assessment determined that local communities could face          Yes [ ]     No [ x ]    N/A [ ]
significant adverse impacts in event of an accident or emergency
situation associated with the project?
If so, has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified by the Bank of the project?       Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                  Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ x ]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared by the Bank?
Disclosure
If Category A or B, has the ESRS been sent to the World Bank's           Yes [x ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
Infoshop?
Have relevant assessment documents prepared by the client been           Yes [x ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
Monitoring and Reporting
Has the client agreed to submit an Annual Monitoring Report to the       Yes [ x ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
Bank to report on the management of environmental and social risks
and impacts, and does the Legal Agreement contain this provision?
Has the client agreed to report at least annually to local affected      Yes [x ]     No [ ]     N/A [ ]
communities on how the project is performing with respect to
environmental and social risks and impacts of concern to those
communities?




                                                    7
      D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                    Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Juha Seppala                             October 19, 2018
Environmental Specialist:           James Chacha Maroa                       November 2, 2018
Social Development Specialist:      Margaret Ombai                           November 2, 2018
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Nathalie Munzberg                        November 12, 2018
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Claudia Croce (acting for Marc Sadler)   November 14, 2018
  Comments:




                                                        8
