Initial Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I - Basic Infornation
Date ISDS Prrparedl Updtrdt September 7, 2004                          Reorf No.: AC1066
A. BASIC PROJECT DAtA 
A.1. Project Statistics
GContoy. Kiribati                               Project ID: P078290
Pject KIRIBATI ADAPTATION PROGRAM -              TL' Sofia Bettencourt
Pilot Implementation Phase (KAP ID
Total psject cost (by component): US$3.07 million
Component 1. Priority National Adaptation Investments  US$1.50 million
Component 2. Pilot Island Adaptation                US$0.20 million
Component 3. National Consultation and Mainstreaming  US$0.40 million
Component 4. Program Management and Capacity Building US$0.69 million
Contingencies                                       US50.28 million
Total Estimated Costs:                              US$3.07 million
Apprap r l Date: July 1, 2005                   Loan/Credit amonl($m): GEF US$1.54 million
Board Date:  September 30, 2005
Otberfinancin amounts b somwr: (estimated)      Government of Kiribati      US$0.86 million
PHRD Clirnate Change Initiative US$0.68 million
Co-Financiers (e.g. EC)     TBD
Managin, Unit E-ASRD                            Sectors. General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(40%); General water, sanitation and flood protection
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ sector (40%e); General public sector (20%)
Lenaini Instremen:: Sector Investment Loan (SIL. .                  ____
Is thisprojectprvressed under OP 5.50 (Emerengy rreove?       Yes?   [ I        No?   IX]
En'ironmental Catrtgo:  B
A.2. Project Objective
The key goal of the Kiribati Adaptation Program is to reduce Kiribad's vulnerability to climate change,
climate variability, and sea level rise.
The first Phase of the Program (Preparation, KAP 1) is on-going, and funding the initial mainstreaming of
climate change adaptation into national economic planning, as well as preparation for the Investment
Phase (KAP II).
The objective of the proposed Pilot Implementation Phase of KAP (KAP II) is to implement pilot
adaptation measures, and consolidate mnainstreaniing of adaptation into national economic planning.



IA3. Project Description
The project is expected to include the following components:
*    Component 1. Pdoriy NationalAdaptation Investments JSU.S5 million). This component would finance
pub/ic adaptation investments in key vulnerable sectors, identified as national priorities and mainstreamed
into sectoral Ministries' Operational Plans. Its objective would be to progressively reinforce
adaptation investments across the Government's budget and sectoral plans, making the national
economy less vulnerable to climate change impacts. The goods, works and services funded by the
component will be relatively modest during KAP II, and focus on public sector programs in
Tarawa. They are likely to include: information materialr on early climate warning and climate change;
improved water management to protect wells and reduce piping leakage; coastal management and protection,
including mangrove replantation and protection of public infrastructure; strenthened regulations,
particularly on coastal aggregates removal, infrastructure zonation, and fisheries; population settlement
planning, and waste management in vulnerable areas. The process for prioritization of these investments
is on-going and is expected to be concluded by January 2005.
*    Component 2.    Pilot Island Adaptation (US$0.2 mil/en). This component would fund communi4y
adaptation invetments in two selected outer islands, in order to engage local communities in the
adaptation process, and test a whole-island approach to adaptation planning. It would fimd small
grants provided directly to communities for integrated activities which they could do themselves
with little outside help, identified through participatory planning.
*    Component 3.    National Consultation and Mainstrraming (US$0.4 mi/kon)j  This component would
consolidate the mainstreaniirg and adaptation process initiated under KAP I and prepare the
expansion phase (KAP III) of the program. It is expected to include: technical assistance for
continued mainstreaming of adaptation priorities into national and sectoral planning processes; local
consultations on outet islands not included in Component 2, to prepare for the expansion phase;
national consultations and workshops to continue to inform the mainstreaming of adaptation priorities
into government operations; and awareness campaigns.
*    Componett 4. Program Management and Capaciy Building (US$0.7 milion). This component would
provide overall support to the project. It would include: workshops and traiing to raise capacity in
adaptation-related areas; studies on the technical, social and economic analysis of vulnerability and
adaptation options in ptiority sectors and islands (to advise the adaptation process and prepare for
the expansion phase); and prject management support, including technical assistance, facilitators for the
island pilots, and incremental operating costs.
Through the exerience acquired in the pilot investments, and the awareness, consultation, and
mainstrearning processes of Component 2, the project is expected to help modify adaptation practices and
behaviors in two key ways: (a) directly, by helping people cope more effectively with vulnerability and
change; and (O) indirectly, through a process that is expected to contribute to further inclusiveness of
traditional govemance structures into national economic planning.



A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project would take place in the Republic of Kiribai, an extremely isolated nation of 93,000
inhabitants spread over 33 islands covering an area of ocean 2,000 km north to south and 4,000 km east
to west. As a country consisting primarily of small coral atolls, Kiribati is one of the countries most
threatened by rising sea levels and climate change. In the absence of adaptation measures, a recent Bank-
funded study estirnated that Kiribati could suffer damages equivalent to 17 to 34 percent of the 1998
GDP. The main impacts are likely to be periodic inundation of atoll islands due to rising sea lcvels
(compounded by storm surges), health and agriculture impacts due to more intense droughts and floods,
and loss of revenue from offshore fisheries as tuna stocks move westward. The proposed project would
help the Government of Kiribati in adopting risk minimization strategies and prioritizing adaptation
options to handle climate change impacts.
There are no particular critical natural habitats in Kiribati; however, the atoll systems are naturally fragile.
Given the extreme isolation of the outer islands, traditional systems of decision making remain
important. The lack of freshwater in rnany outer islands and job opportunities is exacerbating problems of
overcrowding in the main islands of Tarawa and Kiritimati (Christrnas).
B. Check Environmental Category A I 1, B [X 1, C [n, Fl I I
Comments:  The project is not expected to have significant environmental impacts, as it favors 'no
regrets' environmental management measures to diminish island vulnerability. However, there may
be cases where the best adaptation option may be structural solutons or infrastructure set-backs
away from the coast to minimize exposure to storms. The environmental analysis would identify
potential impacts and propose appropriate mitigation measures.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes                  No
Environmenta Assessment (QB/li2/CE 4.01)                JXJ                   [I
Natural Habitats (L:QP/BP 4.04)                   v                        _         _I
Pest Manmgmrn (OP 4.09)                                   [1                 [x
Cultural Property(draftOP4.11 -O  M1JiQ -)                .
Involuntary Resettlement (QP/D.P 4.12)                   EXI                  [ I
Indigenous Peoples (QD4.20)                      __I_     [                   [X]
Foresh (suQ/BP 4.36=                                      [H                 pX
Safety ofLDams (OP/BE 4.37)                               i 1I]
Projects in Disputed Areas O/U/QE 7.60)'                  [ ]                 [ ]
Pro jects on Intetnatonal Waterways (QP/2/GP 7.50) [_                         [ C
By sppering the proiaredprojeat, the Bank ioes not inttnd to pfjvaice the fial determination of the pares' cfimr on the dispseed arear



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summan of Key Safeguard Issues
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associatcd with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts
Environmental impacts of the project are expected to be small, as the main intent is to mitigate potential
negative impacts resulting from climate change. There may be some small scale construction associated
with the project, but this is not expected to have major negative environmental consequences.
The major social issue that Kiribati will need to consider in the long term is whether sea level rise warrants
population evacuation or shifts in settlement patterns for speciEic atolls or areas that might become
partially or fully submerged as a result of climate change. At present, the Government is considering
incentives to attract population settlement to Kiritirnati Island (where all land belongs to the
Government). Such settlement would be voluntary and dependent on the attractiveness of Kiritimati as a
new growth center - an issue which wil] be studied under a proposed Technical Assistance Grant from
the Asian Development Bank.
Population telocation within Kiribati (and possible migration to neighboring countries) is a long term
solution, and will very likely fall outside the lifetime and scope of KAP II - however, the project would
help identify areas of high vulnerability to coastal populations, strengthen population policies, and
stimulate a national debate on adaptation options which would include relocation or emigration of parns
of the population. In the unlikely case that population relocation would need to be considered during the
project (due to a major disaster), the provisions of a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
Framework, to be developed under the project, would apply.
Within the life of the project, the main social issues include possible land acquisition and resettlement
concerns arising from the need to relocate infrastructure or housing away from vulnerable areas and
conflicts which mnight arise when communities adopt adaptation options affecting others. These would
similarly be addressed through the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework.
In cases where public programs funded under the project duting the implementation phase night cause
social inpacts, they would be assessed and appropriate mitigation measures deternined and implemented.
The process of decision-raking in adaptation has already progressed considerably under the preparation
phase of the project through a series of comprehensive national and local consultations and the
achievement of a national consensus on the prioritization of adaptation options. A social assessment has
been conducted which has identified the major areas of vulnerability on different kinds of islands (atoll
and non-atoll, islands in different climatic zones, etc.) and potential adaptive strategies to address those
vulnerabilities. The social assessment has also identified decisionmaking mechanisms at the local, island
and national levels which can be used to address, inter alia, safeguards issues.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area.
No negative impacts antcipated



D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
The nain alternative scenario considered was to work exclusively with the Ministry of Environment, Land
and Agrculture Development. However, this was rejected as it would not ptomote mainstrearning of
adaptation strategies into overall development planning in the country. Instead, the project is expected to
be coordinated by the Office of the President, and involve key sectoral Ministries involved in adaptation
(Environment, Lands and Agriculture Development; Public Works and Utilities; Fisheries and Marine
Resources Development; Internal and Social Affairs; and Ministry of Line and Phoenix Islands
Development).
DA4. Desctibe measures taken by the bofrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A.        Environmental Assessment
An Environmental Analysis will be conducted during preparation which will i identify the potential
environmental impacts of the national adaptation investments and propose appropriate nuitigation
solutions; (ii) identify the procedures for conducting an environmental screening of sub-grants under the
Pilot Adaptation Componcnt; (iii) describe the monitoring system to be put in place to evaluate the
potential environmental itnpact of the investmcnts; and (iv) identify and describe the capacity building
efforts to allow for proper environmental monitoring in compince with Govermnent of Kiribati (GOK)
and World Bank's EA requirements and procedures. Criteria for adaptation investments to be funded
during KAP II would exclude those with significant envitontmental impacts (as this is a leading cause of
island vulnerability).
B.        Involuntary Resettlement
A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework will be drafted which will form the basis of
agreement with govemment concerning approaches to be taken in the event land acquisition and/or
resettlement becomes necessary during the project implementation. The approach taken during the
preparation phase of the project has ensured that the safeguard approaches are developed in the context of
an oerall adaptaton strate,gy which make sense within the Kiribati context, are genuinely "owned" by the I-
Kiribati, while at the same time meeting Bank requirements.
D.5. Identfy the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the people of Kiribati, including those at the commnunity level on individual
islands (the unimanwe, or councils of elders, church groups, women's groups, youth groups, etc.), island-
level bodies such as Island Councils and councils of churches, and national level bodies including
government, civil society, the private sector. The Adaptation Steering Committee includes the Chairman
of the Kiribati Association of NGOs (KANGO), the Chamber of Conmnerce (representing the private
sector), as well as government officials from key ministties and agencies. The preparation phase of the
project included an iterative process of national and local workshops in key islands designed to stit
national debate and consensus on adaptation options, and how to best mainstream them into national
programs, including Ministry Operational Plans (MOPs) and the National Development Strategy. This
process has institutionalized expectations of regular exchanges of information, opinions and concerns
among all levels of Kiribati society.
The EA and Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework will detail mechanisms for dealing
with environmental or social impacts of the project, including ongoing consultation strategies, grievance
procedures, and participation in decisiontnaking processes.



F. Disclosure Requirements                       Date
I erironomni!a/Anaysis:
Date of receipt by the Bauk                     03/30/2005
Date of"in-country" disclosure                  05/30/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                  06/15/2005
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
.../... /...  Not Applicable
Rsett/ement Pog Framework-
Date of receipt by the Bank                     03/30/2005
Date of "in-country' disclosure                 05/30/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                  06/15/2005
In&enoms Peoplcs Development PlanIFramework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     ../. ....   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 ... .....  Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                  ... /.../    Not Aplicable
Pee: Mana.gement Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     ... /...    Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 .../../ .   Not Applicable
Date of subnmission to InfoShop                  ... J/ .   Not Applicable
Dam Safefy Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     ...f. ./...  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     ...     Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                  . .. .. /...  Not Applicable
If in-country diclosvre of any of the abowv docunents is not expeted, p/ease cxplain why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision mecting)
OP/EP 4.01 - Environment AssMso ment:                                            YM        No
Does the project require a stand-alone RA (including EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats:                                                    Ycs       Na
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-criticas)
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09- Pest Management:                                                        YU        No
Does the E-A adequately address the pest management issues?
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirernents included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Prpert:                                               N
Does the EA include adequate measures?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse irnpacts
on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Ind&genous Peoples:                                                    Ye        No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with
the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved
by the Regional Social Development Unit?



OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resetdlement:                                           Xc        No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan J
policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests:                                                                       N Na
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried
out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does th'e project finance comnercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for
certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                      t        12s
Have darn safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independcnt Panel of Experts (POE) been
reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangernents been made
for public awareness and training?
OP ZS0 - Projects on International Waterways:                                    Yes       Na
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project fals under onc of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has
this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Azeas                                             Yi        NLa
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recorrmnendations for dealing
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: .YM                                                          N
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant docurnents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                           Xci      Na
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?
Will the safeguard measures costs bc funded as part of project implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the mnonitoring of
safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implcmentation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the
same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Signed and rsbmiuhd by:                              NatcC
Task Team Leader:                 Sofia Bettencourt                                               I e0c41  1   $  eoq
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Bruce Harris   '                                    I t, O /
Project Safeguards Specialst 2:
Project Safeguards Spccialist 3:
Approvwd byf
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  GAP n S. mei   i a         -
Conunents :0N£w;                                              j                t   qZ0
Setr  aaer                                       ;=_E9,Mq



