Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1271 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 28, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID: P088671 
Project Name: WATER MANAGEMENT 
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (WMIP) 
Task Team Leader: Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Credit 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%); 
Central government administration (40%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P); 
Water resource management (P); Rural 
services and infrastructure (P); 
Participation and civic engagement (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Agnes Kiss  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 15 
–
20  
Other financing amounts by source:  
TBD  
B.  Project Objective  
The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed Water Management Improvement 
Project (WMIP) is to improve irrigation service delivery and water management for the benefit 
of increased productivity of irrigated agriculture.   
The preliminary key performance indicators include: (i) number of fully costed operation and 
maintenance plans developed for the irrigation and drainage systems that have received project 
assistance (the Systems), that are approved by the water users; (ii) collection rates at least 90 
percent of estimated tariff within two years after completion of the Systems’ rehabilitation 
works; (iii) at least 80 percent of the Systems judged to be properly operated and maintained 
following completion of rehabilitation works; (iv) water supply and distribution within the 
Systems in a timely manner, in line with water rights and long-term contracts; (v) evidence of 
high satisfaction rates among water users with the performance of the bulk water supply agency 
(Department of Water Resources (DWR)); and (vi) increase in crop yields by at least 20 percent 
within two years after rehabilitation of Systems.  
 
Page  2
2
C.  Project Description  
 
WMIP is expected to provide assistance under three major components, with a fourth smaller 
component providing project management support. 
 
Component 1: Rehabilitation and Modernization of Irrigation Infrastructure (US $25.0 
million) 
This component would focus on the rehabilitation and modernization of conveyance and 
distribution systems commanding about 60,000 ha, including headworks, sediment and stilling 
basins, concrete and earthen canals, drainage channels, and hydraulic structures.  Dam safety 
measures would be considered, as necessary, if one or more of the Systems are within dam 
command areas.  After rehabilitation, DWR as irrigation service provider would be able to 
increase system efficiency, thereby generating water savings and reliable water supply to the 
users. 
 
Component 2: Organization of Beneficiaries (US $2.0 million) 
This component would support several water users associations (WUA), which have already 
benefited from assistance under the On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP), grouped in a few Systems 
with the task to organize the WUAs in federations or other suitable organizations at the higher 
distribution system level.  As part of the reform to reduce DWR’s operation and management 
activities in secondary (or even primary) distribution systems, these would be transferred on a 
pilot basis to groups of WUAs that have shown the capability to operate and manage the lower 
order systems well.  The WUAs would receive the necessary support and training, as well as 
some equipment to be able to maintain the Systems under their management.  The component 
would also ensure that all the WUA support functions developed under OIP would be fully 
institutionalized within the structure of the bulk water service provider. 
 
Component 3: Management of Resources (US $5.0 million) 
This component would assist in achieving sustainable and efficient water resources management, 
including assistance in the implementation of the Water Code that was passed in Parliament in 
December 2004.  The component would assist with the establishment and capacity building of 
various new institutions that would be set up as per Water Code, such as the National Water 
Council (responsible for the coordination of all bodies involved in the management of water 
resources) and the State Water Administration (overall responsibility for water resources 
management and the implementation of the Water Code).  It would also support restructuring, 
institutional changes, and capacity building of DWR, to bring its functions in line with the Water 
Code.  This would include improvements of the technical and financial performance of DWR, 
with due regard to accountability and transparency, to turn it into an efficient and client-oriented 
water supply and management organization.  The component would also support the 
improvement of hydro-meteorological data collection and analysis.  There would be some focus 
on minimum flows and the mitigation of their negative environmental impacts, among others on 
geomorphology, flora, and fauna along rivers and streams used for irrigation water abstraction. 
 
Page  3
3
Component 4: Project Management (US$ 1.0 million) 
This component would support the Government in implementing the project, including 
assistance in contract administration, procurement, and financial management.       
 
D.  Project location 
Geographically, main emphasis would be given to the Ferghana Valley, comprising the three 
Oblasts of Batken, Jalal-
Abad, and Osh (as they are located in the project area of the Bank’s 
Ferghana Valley Water Management Initiative that includes support to Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
and Uzbekistan).  Taking into account, however, the urgent rehabilitation needs elsewhere, and 
particularly in Talas Oblast that also has trans-boundary issues, other parts of the country would 
receive some assistance as well.  Clear scheme selection criteria would be drawn up during 
project preparation.      
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Kyrgyzstan has adequate environmental legislation and mechanisms, which include an 
environmental permit procedure for physical activities, and an environmental impact assessment, 
including a State Environmental Expertise Review.  Rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure 
under ongoing projects (Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (IRP) and OIP) has not resulted in 
significant environmental concerns.  Implementation of mitigation measures (e.g. pollution 
prevention, protection of natural resources, and worker and public safety) would be required 
from contractors who would have to follow guidelines for environmentally sound construction 
practices.  These requirements would be included in bidding documents and meeting them would 
be a contractual requirement of the works, to be supervised by construction supervision 
consultants.  Under IRP and OIP, staff of the Ministry of Ecology and Emergencies regularly 
visits project sites to monitor the performance of the contractor with regard to environmental 
conditions.  This kind of monitoring would take place under WMIP as well. 
 
The rehabilitation and modernization of infrastructure and improvements in water management 
should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby generating water savings and reliable 
water supply to the users.  The ability of government agencies such as DWR to measure water 
flow and quality would be strengthened under WMIP, while regulation would be enforced better 
under the new Water Code. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
An Environmental Assessment (EA) will be prepared for the project.  The EA 
will include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  For those sub-projects 
to be determined during the course of project implementation an analysis of the 
potential impacts of the proposed interventions will be made and a site-specific 
EMP will be prepared, following guidelines to be developed in the EA.   
[N] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
Page  4
4
[N] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[N] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
There will be no land acquisition or resettlement associated with the project 
activities.  Hence OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement does not apply.   
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[N] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[Y] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
It is likely that some of the systems that will be rehabilitated are under the 
command of irrigation dams.  During the preparation of the IRP in 1997 a dam 
safety assessment of all 14 irrigation dams in the country was carried out.  As the 
project will follow a program approach, with most of the irrigation systems to be 
selected during project implementation, it is not yet known which dams would be 
in the immediate project area.  During preparation, an engineer will visit dams 
that are in the potential project area to assess the current status.  If one or more 
dams need further assessment during project implementation, a consultant team 
with the necessary expertise would carry out a detailed safety assessment and 
design the necessary interventions.  Project funds would be made available to 
implement any needed measures 
[N] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[Y] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Several of the rivers that are used for irrigation in the project area are international 
waterways.  Potential changes in water flow or deterioration in water quality 
during the construction works would be mitigated through implementation of the 
EMP.  As there would not be any enlargement of existing irrigation systems or 
development of new irrigation area, it is considered that the project interventions 
would not materially affect the quality or quantity of water flows to downstream 
riparian states.  The task team will work with LEGEC and LEGEN to determine 
the actions to be taken, either requesting the Kyrgyz authorities to notify the 
riparian countries or to seek exemption through a memo to the RVP.   
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   
 
The preparation studies will start in April 2005 and the target date for the QER, if deemed 
necessary, is early August 2005. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
 
Not Applicable. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The EA is expected to be completed in draft form in early August 2005.  
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Joop Stoutjesdijk 
02/28/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer 
02/28/2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Joseph Goldberg 
02/28/2005 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
6
