Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/20/2005 
Report No.:  34000
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P084977 
Project Name:  Health & Social Protection SWAp Project 
Task Team Leader:  Peyvand Khaleghian 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 19, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (60%);Other social services (20%);Compulsory health finance (20%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Other social protection and risk management 
(S);Child health (S);Other communicable diseases (S);HIV/AIDS (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
440.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)13.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
20.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
164.00
637.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the implementation of the Manas Taalimi 
Program. The objective of the Manas Taalimi Program is, broadly, to "improve health 
status through the creation of an effective, comprehensive and integrated delivery system 
of individual and public health services, and through increased responsibility of every 
citizen, family, society, and public administration bodies for the health of each person 
and for society as a whole."  It encompasses a range of activities designed to improve 
access, financial protection, efficiency, equity, transparency, responsiveness and 
fiduciary performance in the Kyrgyz health sector.  The Bank is in agreement with the 
main goals, objectives and priorities of the Manas Taalimi Program and the 
corresponding Program of Work (POW).  
 
Monitoring & Evaluation:  A panel of "dashboard" indicators will be used to monitor 
sector performance under the SWAp.  The panel consists of indicators under the 
Page  2
following headings: health status, access and equity, financial protection, efficiency, 
quality, responsiveness/transparency, and sector financing.  For each dashboard indicator 
MOH will record the baseline value, confirm the frequency of monitoring and the 
institutions responsible for doing so, and set general targets for achievement by 2010.  
 
The proposed project is included in the FY02-04 CAS, which sets as one of its 
objectives the improvement of delivery of health services. This is one of the targeted 
poverty interventions identified in the CAS to address inequity of access to basic social 
services across regions and for vulnerable groups.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two components as follows:  
 
Component 1.  Support for the Manas Taalimi Health Reform Program and its 
associated Program of Work.  This Component (US$13 million) would support 
implementation of the Manas Taalimi Program of Work through a Sector-Wide 
Approach.  Expenditures for the five-year implementation period will not be defined in 
detail ex ante as in a traditional World Bank investment operation; instead, funds would 
be used to finance a combination of investment and recurrent expenditures for priority 
areas of Manas Taalimi not financed by other donors -both for policy development and 
operational activities, and for both on-going service delivery and new initiatives - with 
the level and distribution of funds being adjusted annually based on sector performance, 
absorptive capacity, identified needs, and the availability of parallel financing for 
selected program expenditures.  The basis for these decisions will include the Manas 
Taalimi Program of Work; detailed annual work programs, budgets and procurement 
plans; progress against agreed sector monitoring indicators including MTBF targets; and 
results of biannual "Health Summits" at which all these inputs will be discussed between 
the government and healthdonors.  A similar approach is expected to be taken by KfW 
and other donors contemplating joint funding of the Manas Taalimi Program of Work; 
others will continue with a projectized approach to supporting specific parts of the 
Program of Work, e.g. training of health workers.  IDA will provide a baseline of US$ 
2.0 million per year in each of 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010; a US$ 3 million 
unallocated component is set aside to allow for adjustment of the annual IDA allocation 
during implementation of the POW, with preference being given to financing of justified 
requirements for international technical assistance where such assistance can not be 
provided through parallel sources, including financing of annual procurement and 
financial audits conducted by independent qualified firms.  Should these funds not be 
required for international TA, they will be progressively reallocated for funding the 
Program of Work.  
 
Component 2:  Improving the Targeting of Benefits.  This Component ($2 million) 
would help implement policy reforms and strengthen administrative systems to enable the 
social protection and health systems to more effectively target assistance and subsidies to 
poor or disadvantaged households.  It would streamline coordination between the health 
and social protection systems by clarifying through the social protection system those 
households eligible for reduced co-payments when they need health care.  The Ministry 
Page  3
of Labor and Social Protection (MOLSP), supported by the social protection component 
of a PRSG now in preparation and a related PHRD grant, is developing proposals to (a) 
consolidate and restructure cash social assistance benefits, (b) specify refined eligibility 
conditions for the consolidated benefit structure based on a more comprehensive 
definition of resources available, and (c) build a more efficient administrative system for 
implementing associated benefits.  This Component would support the implementation of 
these proposals and related institutional strengthening.  This would require investments in 
enhancing MOLSP processes and tools for making and reviewing policy, revising its 
administrative procedures and systems, and strengthening its information systems.  
MOLSP staff are planning to develop and implement a strategy on information 
management and the use of information technology that would enable MOLSP to use 
information efficiently at each level of administration, transfer information appropriately 
between levels, establish links with other databases electronically, and support overall 
administration and policy-making effectively.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support a rehabilitation of a Ministry of Health building as a part of 
strengthening of the Ministry of Health together with other pooling donors (DFID, KfW). 
This will be an only Bank financed physical investment.  In addition to this minor 
rehabilitation/renovation of existing primary healthcare facilities - selected Feldsher - 
Midwife Points (FAPs) and Family Group Practices (FGPs), as well as selected Sanitary 
Epidemiological Surveillance (SES) facilities all over the country is envisaged to be done 
under the SWAp program supporting implementation of the National Manas Taalimi 
health reform program. The Bank funded project will be implemented in the context of 
Health SWAp together with other donors. Decision on renovation of PHC and SES 
facilities might be changed during the implementation as a commitment to a specific 
expenditure is done on a year-by-year basis under the SWAp. As FAPs, FGPs and SES 
facilities are located throughout rural areas no major environmental issues or impacts are 
envisaged.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will support the rehabilitation/renovation of a Ministry of Health's building 
and this investment will be funded by the Bank together with other pooling donors.  
 
In addition to this, a minor rehabilitation/renovation of existing selected FAPs, FGPs 
and SES facilities all over the country is envisaged to be done under SWAp programme 
supporting implementation of the National Manas Taalimi health reform program. As this 
project will be implemented in the context of SWAp, plans on a minor rehabilitation of 
FAPs/FGPs and SES facilities are still considered in this EMP.  
 
However, the immediate impact on the environment from the envisaged rehabilitation 
works will be limited. Potential adverse environmental impacts are expected to be limited 
in scope and severity. Effects could comprise dust and noise related to demolition and 
construction; disposal of construction waste; inadequate handling of hazardous 
wastewater, waste gases and spillages of hazardous materials during operation of the 
building. These risks can be effectively anticipated in advance of project implementation 
and will be addressed by appropriate mitigation measures in the design and 
implementation process.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect and / or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area is expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
review of the environmental laws and regulations relevant to the Project was 
conducted.  
 
During project preparation, experts financed from the PHRD grant and the Manas 
working group have been carrying out an inventory of the buildings and equipment of 
health care facilities (which will provide data on the expected scope of civil works and 
rehabilitation needs, including identification of the potential scope and nature of 
environmental impacts and appropriate mitigation measures). The number of PHC 
facilities to be renovated under health SWAp program will be determined based on this.  
 
A
Draft Environmental Management Plan was prepared in consultation with the main 
stakeholders. The Draft EMP refers not only to the project supported activities 
(renovation of the MoH's building) but also refers to SWAp program which envisages 
Page  5
renovation of the selected PHC and SES facilities, as well as health waste management 
activities. The latter to be funded under parallel financing from other sources.  
 
The Draft EMP (in Russian language) was disclosed in country and placed on the 
Ministry of Health's website. A stakeholder consultation meeting on the discussion of the 
Draft EMP was held on September 30, 2005.  The Minutes of the meeting were sent to 
the Bank.  
 
The borrower has successfully implemented two operations in the health sector, and 
significant capacity has been built in the health sector. A specialist will be identified 
within the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance, who - together with the 
staff of the MoH's United Directorate of Construction Enterprises - would be responsible 
for coordination and supervision of the EMP and risk mitigation measures to be 
undertaken in the project. The specialist would work closely with the MoH's 
Department/Unit responsible for coordination of the project and existing supervision staff 
on the ground. They would (a) coordinate relevant training for staff, designers and local 
contractors; (b) disseminate existing environmental management guidelines and develop 
guidelines in relation to issues not covered by the existing regulations, for 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of mitigation measures; (c) ensure contracting 
for construction and supply of equipment includes reference to appropriate guidelines and 
standards; and (d) conduct periodic site visits to inspect and approve plans and monitor 
compliance.  
 
A
site-specific screening process, as well as supervision of construction, is required by 
law for all civil works in the Kyrgyz Republic. Further details are described in the 
Environmental Management Plan, which will be part of the Operational Manual for the 
program. Implementation of the EMP and relevant provisions by Kyrgyz law would be 
supervised by the MoH and oblast, city and rayon branches of the SES department.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders with regard to safeguard issues are:  
 
-
the Ministry of Health,  
 
-
the MoH's United Directorate of Construction Enterprises,  
 
-
the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance (including rayon SES 
stations),  
 
-
management and staff of the participating PHC and SES facilities, local communities, 
patients and contractors for civil works.  
 
A
Draft Environmental Management Plan was prepared during project preparation. The 
Environmental Management Plan was translated into Russian and placed on the MoH's 
website. A stakeholder consultation meeting was held on September 30, 2005with 
participation of all relevant stakeholders (representatives of the Ministry of Ecology and 
Emergency Situations, the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance, the 
MoH's United Directorate of Construction Enterprises, the MoH's working group 
Page  6
members involved in the development of National Manas Taalimi health reform program, 
Coordinator of Public Health Component of Health-II project funded by the Bank).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/19/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peyvand Khaleghian 
10/18/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Asel Sargaldakova 
10/18/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/19/2005 
Comments:  This project is being delegated to the project sector manager for future clearances 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Patricio V. Marquez 
10/19/2005 
Comments:  This ISDS was cleared by Patricio Marquez, Action Sector Manager, Health, ECSHD. 
