                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/27/2005                                    Report No.: 32460

1. Project Statistics
Country: Lao People's Democratic               Project ID: P090693
Republic
Project Name: Lao Environment and Social Project
Task Team Leader: Patchamuthu Illangovan
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2005         Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2005
Managing Unit: EASES                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Central government administration (50%);Forestry (50%)
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               4.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.80
                                                                          0.80
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple [X]           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)         Yes [ ]    No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the management of
environmental and social issues in the use of natural assets in Lao PDR for enhancing
quality of growth and reducing poverty. Specifically, the project aims to:

 a.     Strengthen institutions and instruments for assessment, monitoring and
compliance for environmental and social sustainability, and broaden the constituency for
environmental change;
 b.     Invest in on-the-ground environmental improvement activities identified in the
national Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy (NGPES), with emphasis on
biodiversity conservation, community environmental management and livelihoods
enhancements; and
 c.     Operationalize the Lao Environment and Conservation Fund (LECF) to become a
permanent entity that is eligible to use NT2 revenues for priority environmental
protection activities by developing two windows that will serve as models for the LECF
operations and potentially become permanent structures within LECF.

3. Project Description
The project is proposed as an IDA Development Grant. Its primary objective is to
contribute to long-term environmental protection and social development objectives of
the country through capacity building efforts both at the national and local levels. The
Government of Lao PDR (GOL) is introducing policies, legislations and plans to
replicate NT2 experiences nationally, and their implementation emerges as the main
focus of the proposed Project. The Project?s geographical focus has a mix of both
national and provincial coverage, with the three central provinces ? Bolikamxay,
Khammouane, and Savannakhet ? being the main focus target of the project. The project
comprises of three components as outlined below:

 a.     Component 1 ? Policy Implementation and Capacity Enhancement (PICE; US$
1.91 million): This component will strengthen at the national, provincial, and district
levels: (i) environmental and social safeguards policy formulation and implementation;
(ii) assessment, and monitoring of compliance; (iii) integrated river basin management;
(iv) hydropower sector sustainability; and (v) resettlement management; and (vi)
environmental education and awareness.

 b.     Component 2 ? Conservation and Community Investments (CCI; US$ 1.74
million): This will support initiatives to strengthen conservation practices and livelihood
improvement activities in and around protected areas (building on the Social and
Environment management Framework and First Operational Plan (SEMFOP)
experiences in Nakai Nam Theun), and to improve localized environmental conditions
through partnership activities of communities, local governments and small businesses, in
Central Lao.

 c.     Component 3 ? Management and Monitoring Support (US$ 1.15 Million) will
support the following activities: the day-to-day operation of the LECF, specifically PICE
and CCI Windows; marketing and business development of the Windows to assist
beneficiaries to prepare sub-grants; and developing and implementing a monitoring,
evaluation and dissemination process to assess performance of the two windows.

 The Project will provide sub-grants to finance activities submitted by national,
provincial and district government agencies and other eligible beneficiaries such as
community groups, universities, mass organizations, civil society organizations,
international non-governmental organizations. The type of activities include: (i) capacity
building grants for Component 1 which will include studies, surveys, workshops,
training, preparation of technical guidelines, monitoring and assessment of environmental
conditions, etc; and (ii) grants for protected area management and community
environmental management activities. In addition, the Project will also support the
sourcing of international expertise to assist in the implementation of some tasks for
Component 1 activities.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
A priori, there is no specific physical location for the Project activities, as these will be
selected and implemented on an open menu basis throughout the course of the project.
Activities involving construction and/or land use changes will take place principally
under Component 2 and will be concentrated in and around protected areas in central
Lao. Activity locations will therefore typically be in close proximity to important natural
habitats and in areas inhabited by ethnic minorities and other relatively isolated and
vulnerable groups. Despite the sensitivity of these locations, significant negative impacts
are not anticipated as Component 2 activities will be selected specifically to improve the
management of natural habitats and the livelihood security of the people dependent on
them.

5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team
Mr Anthony J. Whitten (EASEN)
Mr Svend Jensby (EASSD)
Ms Nina Bhatt (EASSD)
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                 Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                            X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                     X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                            X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. Social and
environmental impacts of sub-grants are expected to be positive as the objectives and
eligibility criteria for sub-grants are established to support improved environmental
management . Project benefits have been defined in the Results Framework and
Monitoring.

 Possible adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the sub-grants are most likely
related environmental impacts, land acquisition/compensation, and resource restriction
(Indigenous People).

 Environmental Impacts: The nature and scale of sub-grants, are such that the vast
majority will result in no adverse environmental impacts. In some case only minor and
easily mitigable negative environmental effects may occur, in particular related to the
community grants (i.e., those associated with small construction works and minor natural
habitats conversion issues). Although the cost of the subprojects will limit the size of
infrastructure projects, in some cases, municipal environmental infrastructure such as
small wastewater treatment plants or trash disposal facilities may be proposed.

 If applicable, sub-grant agreements will include conditions and mitigation measures to
address all possible adverse impacts. These would focus on sensible site selection criteria,
good construction practices and diligent management practices in the operational phase
for different types of sub-grants. In addition, construction contracts will include common-
sense environmental clauses, with specific expected performance standards relating to
environmental protection. These include measures to ensure that erosion is controlled and
waste materials are disposed of in appropriate manners.

 Land Acquisition and Resettlement: No significant resettlement or land acquisition is
anticipated. No involuntary resettlement will be allowed and the project will not fund the
acquisition of land. However, there may be some land acquisition or voluntary
resettlement based on voluntary contributions or with compensation provided by the
village. In such cases, project facilitators will ensure that affected families agree with the
proposed arrangements, as discussed and recorded in open village meetings.

 Indigenous Peoples: It is acknowledged that the socio-economic and ethnic diversity of
Lao PDR and the traditionally centralized development planning processes are key
challenges for designing and implementing any community development component
successfully. Experiences from the SEMFOP (Nakai Nam Theun watershed) will be used
in designing sensible strategies for appropriate local decision making processes that
would ensure the participation of vulnerable groups such as ethnic groups and women.
There may also be instances that sub-grants may affect indigenous peoples or their
ancestral domains.

 As such, concerns of ethnic groups are met primarily through the design of the project
itself, since the demand-driven and participatory design features aim to allow local
decision-making over the use of development funds through a facilitated and inclusive
process. In addition, other measures support the involvement of ethnic groups, such as:
hiring staff, as far as possible and needed, that come from local ethnic groups, and
providing additional training if needed; training of project staff and facilitators on ethnic
group issues; grievance redress mechanism that allows ethnic groups an avenue for
complaints; and particular attention to ethnic minority issues in monitoring and
evaluation. Finally, the project includes screening procedures in the ESSF to address
situations where vulnerable ethnic groups may be adversely affected by sub-grants.

 If protected area management proposals involve involuntary resource access restriction.
In these instances, the Project will follow a standard participatory framework based on

models developed in the SEMFOP. Detailed procedures are included in the ESSF to meet
the requirements of the Bank's policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
In Lao PDR in general, the dependence of economic growth on natural resources means
that both local impacts and cumulative impacts within river systems are likely to result
from future hydropower and mining developments. Pressure on forests, and other natural
habitats and renewable resources are also likely to increase with growing population
densities and improvements in transport infrastructure. The direct impacts of the Project
will be minor, however, and are not expected to be intensified by these future
developments. Fundamentally the project is designed to strengthen the ability to manage
long term environmental and social impacts from the development process.

 Long-term benefits of the Project stem from support for safeguards implementation and
management within those sectors anticipated to be at the forefront of Lao economic
development, including river basin management and cumulative impact assessment, and
support for the establishment and operation of the LECF as a long-term vehicle for
sustainable environmental finance. By establishing the two Windows, the project will
provide the required experience of preparing environmental improvement and
conservation activities, which will continue after the end of the Project with earmarked
revenues from NT2 and eventually other natural resources development projects.

 Regarding the focus on the three target provinces in Central Lao, the project will
address possible cumulative impacts from further development of hydropower in the area.
The cumulative impact analysis that was conducted for the NT2 Project in the Nam
Theun/Nam Kading River Basin, concluded that the full suite of hydropower projects
(four projects totaling 2100 megawatts by 2012) when developed would have significant
cumulative impacts in the basin encompassing these two rivers and their major
tributaries. The mitigation of cumulative impacts fall within the responsibility of the
Government to addressing them. As such, the Government of Lao PDR (GoL) sees the
need for a long-term basin-wide strategic approach to integrated water resources
management, which would involve the key stakeholders in planning and decision making
roles. Moreover, it would require strengthening of the GOL?s capacity to implement the
forthcoming national decree on resettlement , including the establishment of a Division
for Resettlement in the Department of Environment, capacity in the three central
provinces, and developing guidelines and other technical instruments.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The considered alternatives for the entire project focused on the general design of the
project, and the focus of capacity building in Lao. A safeguard related design aspects has
been the channeling of the funds through the LECF, which would improve overall
transparency and more efficient delivery of sub-grants and allocation of funding for
conservation and environmental protection.

 As the sub-grants are still to be defined, project alternatives will be considered and
included during sub-grant preparation. The Environmental and Social Safeguard
Framework, as included in the Project Implementation Plan and subsequent Operations
Manual, details the screening procedures to be applied, and will emphasize the need for
considering alternatives if any environmental or social concern is expected.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The development of the Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Power Project (NT2) project, and its
extensive consultations and assessment/mitigation of environmental and social impacts,
has served as a catalyst for the Government of Lao (GOL) to improve its environmental
and social performance.

 Based on the NT2 experiences, STEA, responsible as Chair of the Project Steering
Committee for implementing and monitoring the project, has prepared an Environmental
and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF), as included in the Project Implementation
Plan. Moreover, it is in the process of preparing a detailed Operations Manual, outlining
in detail all safeguard procedures and conditions to be applied during the preparation,
screening and implementation of sub-grants.

 It is acknowledged that the current implementing capacity for conservation and
environmental/social protection activities is still relatively weak in Lao PDR. This is
partly due to an insufficient allocation of Government funding for environmental and
social protection. The Government has addressed this constraint by establishing the
LECF, which will allow the Windows to operate relatively independent and attract highly
qualified staff on a competitive basis. Moreover, during the first two years of the project
an international full time advisor will support the WMU in implementing all safeguard
procedures as part of the sub-grant review and implementation process.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for the LENS are all government agencies and Organizations
eligible to apply for funding from the LECF. These include all Ministries, mass
organizations, non-Governmental organizations, and communities. Other key
stakeholders are the members of the Project Steering Committee, which includes amongst
others Science, Technology, and Environment Agency (STEA), Ministry of Agriculture
(MAF), Ministry of Industry and Handicraft (MIH), Committee for Planning and
Investment (CPI), the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the Ministry of Education (MOE),
Ministry of Culture and Information (MCI), and representatives of the three target
provinces.

 Various meetings and a Consultation Workshop (May 12, 2005) were conducted with
the key stakeholders to discuss the concept of the project, and to initiate the process of
grant preparation. The process of promoting and supporting grant preparations has been
included into the Project design as a key activity for the first two years.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/16/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/20/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/20/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/16/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/20/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/20/2005
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/16/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/20/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/20/2005
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA     No
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in           No
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan?       No
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as          Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve     No
the plan / policy framework / policy process?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure

  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mr Patchamuthu Illangovan                    05/20/2005
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Anthony J. Whitten                        05/20/2005
Social Development Specialist      Mr Svend Jensby                              05/20/2005
Additional Environmental and/or    Mr Chaohua Zhang                             05/20/2005
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Glenn S. Morgan
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Ms Maria Teresa Serra
 Comments:

