                                                                                  100598
i                      INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
i                              APPRAISAL STAGE
i
j
    I. Basic Information
    Date prepared/updated: 9/23/15

I
"
I
l
     .
    1 Bas1c       . tD ata
            . P ro1ec
    Country: Lao PDR                       I Project ID: Pl 13860
I
I
    Project Name: Developing and Demonstrating Replicable Protected Area Management
    Models at Nam Et-Phou Louey National Protected Area
I   Task Team Leader: Original: Viengkeo Phetnavongxay. At restructuring: Jean-Michel
I   Pavy
I   Estimated Appraisal Date: NA           I Estimated CMU Approval Date: July 31, 2012
I   Managing Unit: GENDR
    S~ctor: Environment
                                           I Lending Instrument: SIL
    GEF Amount (US$m.):             $0.879
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
    Simplified Processing                         Simple [X]         Repeater[]
I   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
    or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
                                                                      Yes []     No [X]
I
!
!
    2. Project Objectives

    This project aims to test, in selected areas of the Nam Et-Phou Louey National Protected
I
I
    Area (NE-PL NPA), targeted activities for sustainable natural resource use and protection
    of selected species threatened by human interaction.


I
i
    3. Project Description

    Original project. The project will finance the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) to
    provide the NE-PL NP A goods, small works (checkpoint to control access at the two
    ends of Phathi road, ranger's substations, and ecotourism camp) and technical assistance.
    WCS will be the beneficiary as well as the executing agency of the project. The project
I   activity includes the implementation of Phathi Road Co-Management Plan as a working
    model of managing anticipated impacts from road infrastructure development inside the
    NP A. The following components will be implemented to achieve the project objective:
I
I   Component 1: Management and conservation working models, within NE-PL NPA
    including implementation of co-management of infrastructure in sensitive habitats. (US$
I   678,000).
I
I   Under this component, the project will strengthen Protected Area Management Unit
    (P AMU) capacity to monitor and manage harvests of managed species for sustainable use

I
I
    in the Controlled Use Zone within the NE-PL NP A. Activity includes a) Community
    Awareness Raising in 30 NPA villages aimed to raise community awareness and
    understanding of, and ultimately their compliance with, NPA regulations; b) Village

                                                                                              1
I
Natural Resource Agreements with approximately 20 communities including those in the
controlled use zone near the Phathi Road to map village use areas and ratify village
agreements with the NP A for wildlife and land-use management; c) Monitor Change in
Harvest of Wild Foods and Estimate Sustainability of Wildlife Off-take. Results of
monitoring will be incorporated into campaign messages and used to adapt agreements
for PA zoning and wildlife use; and d) Expand patrolling effort and ranger substations to
secure Totally Protected Zone, reduce illegal/unsustainable wildlife trade, and encourage
villages to graze their livestock at their village's area rather than in the core zone. These
activities will allow the Protected Area Management Unit, WCS, the Province and
District to work together to ensure that access to the core zone along Phathi Road is
managed and monitored.

Furthermore, this component will demonstrate best practices to mitigate anticipated
impacts from the use of Phathi Road through supporting the implementation of the Co-
Management Plan which includes awareness raising on the use of Phathi road;
establishing a lock gate and check point at the two ends of the road; establishing one
substation along the road and financing permanent staff at the two check points and
substation to carry out patrolling activity; establishing access monitoring system;
conducting training staff on patrolling along the road; supporting land use planning in the
villages near to the road; and supporting the development of long term Phathi road
management plan.

This component will include developing alternative community livelihoods within and
near the NE-PL NP A to help local villagers including ethnic minorities minimize their
dependency on wild meat consumption and collection of NTFPs and mitigate potential
short-term negative impact following the introduction of restricted access to natural and
forest resources under the GEF project. Two co-financiers will provide parallel financing
to the development of alternative community livelihood. Ktw/GiZ funded Climate
Protection through Avoided Deforestation Project (CliPAD) will support the
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) in all 30 target villages, and develop alternative
community livelihood in 15 of them through providing training and demonstration as
well as the provisjon of in-kind inputs. PLUP will help target villagers demarcate various
categories of land based on the existing land use patterns. Based on the results, villagers
will be assisted identifying and developing alternative community livelihoods. Initial
expectation is that the livelihood support would center around increasing small and large
livestock productivity within the allocated areas.

The World Bank financed Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF), through its Livelihood
Opportunity and Nutrition Gain (LONG) component, will support alternative community
livelihoods in the other 15 target villages where CliPAD will conducts PLUP but will not
provide subsequent livelihood support. Specifically, LONG will provide training,
technical support and block grant for groups of affected villagers to start up and
implement their livelihood activities that will be identified through participatory
processes. All these livelihood priorities, and the implementation arrangement and
timeframes jointly identified between PRF and villagers, will be documented in the



                                                                                           2
I
i
1
~
l
l   Village Development Plan (VDP) and are formalized in the Village Natural Resource
i
    Agreement (VNRA).
l
l   Component 2: Working models of ecotourism for community engagement and
I   sustainable financing. (US$130,000)


I
I
    Under Component 2, project will build capacity of the NP A MU and local communities
    to diversify revenue for forest and wildlife management by generating alternative income
I   through ecotourism-based activity. It aims to Operationalize Feasible Ecotourism
    Products in NE-PL NPA and Establish Mechanisms for Making the Revenues Directly
l   Available for the Management of the PA. Activity includes a) development of guidelines
    and regulations on the development of ecotourism activity in NE-PL NPA; b) organize
    village structure to manage and run ecotourism activity in their village area; c) support
I
I
    the establishment of ecotourism based facility such as tourism camping station and
    trekking route etc.

    Component 3: Dissemination and replication working models of NE-PL NPA within Lao
    PDR. (US$33, 795)

    Under the Component 3, a NE-PL NP A management model will be produced, and
    disseminated to practitioners from the protected areas in Lao. Activity includes a) TA to
    Synthesize the lessons from NE-PL NPA, on: (i) sustainable natural resource use by
    villages inside a protected area; (ii) tiger conservation; (iii) ecotourism based livelihoods
    for local communities; and (iv) management of infrastructure, particularly roads in
    sensitive habitats in multiple use protected areas; and b) Incorporation of the protected
    area management model into a curriculum to train at the National University of Lao
    (NUOL) and disseminate it through workshops with DFRM and related agencies.

    Component 4: Project management. (US$37,205)

    This component will support the implementation of entire project components. Activities
    will include the management of staff; implementation of activities under the three core
    components; the management of stakeholder relations; the management of project
    finances and procurement; and support for the needs of WCS to work with the NE-PL
    PAMU and NE-PL PAMAC.

    Restructuring. At the September 2014 MTR it was determined that while the activities
    funded continued to be relevant, the way they are organized (i.e. the component structure)
    was not aligned with the logical organization of protected area development or the PDQ
    and some of the indicators required realignment with funded activities. Components 1
    and 2 were (a) imbalanced in favor of a complex oversized Component 1, (b) not
    measuring intermediary outcomes that contributed well to the PDO, especially the design
    and testing of protected area (PA) models, and (c) not logically organized according to
    standard protected area management systems, which have proven functional elsewhere
    and will be adopted when NEPL protected area management is scaled up under the IDA
    and GEF Second Lao Environment and Social project (LENS2). The restructured project


                                                                                               3
places more emphasis on the institutional model for NEPL NP A, under component 1, and
on testing a village-based natural resources law enforcement model. In addition,
community activities and associated financing were moved from Component 3 to
Component 1 to regroup all activities that improve community livelihoods such as land
use planning and community-based tourism development, in a coherent package.

Component 1: Community Engagement Model (US$385,000)

Community engagement must follow a process of empowerment, awareness building,
land-use planning and livelihood development including ecotourism. All such activities
are consolidated now in a single component whose intermediary outcome is easier to
define. The revised component 3 focuses on: 1.1. Outreach/Social Marketing; 1.2.
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP); 1.3. Sustainable livelihoods aligned to
conservation outcomes (ecotourism, agroforestry, NTFP sustainable management); 1.4.
Lesson learned and dissemination.

Component 2: Protected area administration model. (US$80.000)

The current component structure does not afford enough attention to institutional issues
even though those are critically important for sustainability and scaling up under LENS2.
The new component 1 focuses on: 2.1. Three-province NP A management model; 2.2.
Human resource development; 2.3. Lesson learned and dissemination.

Component 3: Resources management and protection model. (US$280,000)

All activities initially in component 1 regarding resource protection and management are
now consolidated in a single component whose intermediary outcome is easier to define.
The new component 2 focuses on: 3.1. Management of externally-driven infrastructure;
3.2. Kumban-led natural resource protection; 3.3. Ranger sub-sector law enforcement;
3.4. Lesson learned and dissemination.

Component 4: Planning, research, development model. (US$96,000)

The monitoring and evaluation of working models must be mainstreamed in the research
and development function of the protected area, itself a working model. By regrouping
all R&D and communication activities in a component it contributes better to protected
area management capacity building while remaining consistent with the initial intent of
lesson learning. The component 4 focuses on: 4.1. Restructure and test wildlife
monitoring model; 4.2 PA re-delineation; 4.3. Research and development.

Component 5: Project management. (US$38,000)

This component will support the implementation of entire project components. Activities
will include the management of staff; implementation of activities under the three core
components; the management of stakeholder relations; the management of project



                                                                                       4
I
I
'l\
{




    l
        finances and procurement; and support for the needs of WCS to work with the NE-PL
        PAMU and NE-PL PAMAC.

I
i
i
        4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
        analysis


I
l
I
        The project area is the Nam Et-Phou Louey National Protected Area (NE-PL NPA)
        which is located at the conjunction of three Northern provinces (Houaphan,
l
        Luangprabang and Xiengkhouang). The NPA covers 497,749 ha and makes up 80% of
l       the Viengthong District in Houaphan Province. In addition, about 64 km of the NE-PL
I       NPA boundary directly borders Vietnam. There are 98 communities living within or
l       closely surrounding the NE-PL NP A. Communities belong to three ethno-linguistic
I
l
        families namely Lao Tai (majority Lao including Tai Dam, Tai Deng), Mon-khmer
        (including Khmu), Hmong-Mien (Hmong and lu-mien). The latter two ethnic groups,
I       Mon-khmer and Hmong-mien, are considered to be vulnerable groups of ethnic
        minorities meeting the World Bank's definition of Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10).
I
l
        These ethnic groups live in rural remote areas and rely heavily on natural resources for
        their subsistence livelihood. NE-PL NP A is known as a nationally and globally
j       significant location for biodiversity conservation, which includes the only remaining
        breeding population of Indochinese Tiger in Lao PDR.

I       5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
i
'
I       At appraisal
!       Mr. James Monday (Senior Environmental Engineer, EASTS)

I
I
        Mr. Sybounheung Phandanouvong, Social Development Specialist (EASTS)

        At restructuring
        Mr. Jean-Michel Pavy (Senior Environmental Sp., GENDR)
        Mr. Sybounheung Phandanouvong, Social Development Specialist (GSURR)
I
l       6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes         No
        Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                      x
        Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                              x
                                                                   x
I
l
        Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
        Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                             x
l       Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              x
        Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                            x
                                                                   x
I       Involuntarv Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
        Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           x
        Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      x
        Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                               x



                                                                                              5
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Activities that may have impact on natural habitat/ forest:

Project activities under the component 1 and 2 include a) Community Awareness
Raising; b) Village Natural Resource Agreements; c) Expand patrolling effort and ranger
substations; d) development of guidelines and regulations on the development of
ecotourism activity in NE-PL NPA; and e) support the establishment of ecotourism based
facility such as tourism camping station and trekking route will have safeguard
implication.

Above mentioned activities will not involve any major or significant civil works and
therefore is not expected to generate negative impacts on the local environment and on
people. Project activity will rather provide a positive impact on the natural habitat and
key wildlife species. Village awareness raising and patrolling activities aim at managing
the over harvesting of forest resources and wildlife by villager and outsider. The activity
will help to reduce the encroachment into the core zone for an agriculture activity and
livestock grazing, thus will help improve natural habitat and preserve the key species in
the area such as tiger and its prey. However, minor civil works will be financed under this
project, which will include the following:

   •   Patrolling substations: there will be three patrolling substations built under the
       project support, using high standards of minimal environmental impact. The
       planned substation is a one room structure, twenty four square meters in size, with
       a detached kitchen and toilet. The structures are constructed from wood, metal
       roofing and concrete posts sourced from outside the NP A from local vendors
       (Figure 3 in the EA report). The project will finance metal roofing; nails; and
       local labour. All substations will be built in strategic locations - already cleared
       areas (old village land or agricultural land). Thus, there is no land and forest
       clearing involved. This would maximize enforcement effectiveness while
       minimizing environmental impacts on the TPZ and the CUZ.

   •   Eco-tourism activities: will be limited to provision of tourist camps and lodgings
       to house tourists (no more than approx. 600 tourists per year) who come into the
       NE-PL NP A. The eco-camp consists of simple wooden structures, including guest
       huts for sleeping, a staff house, a sala (small open hut) for meals, a detached
       kitchen, toilet and showers. All structures are made from materials that are
       sourced locally from outside of the NP A. The facility can house up to six guests
       at any one time. Ecotourism facilities are built in strategic locations to maximize
       ecotourism appeal while minimizing environmental impacts on the NP A. It is

                                                                                            6
I
I
I
!
l
I           anticipated that during the GEF project two more eco-camps will be built. Only
I


I
I
            technical assistance, materials and local labour cost will be supported under this
            project. Again, minimal environmental impacts will be ensured. Minor
            disturbance of natural habitats and wildlife may occur as a result of the above
!           activities such as lighting or setting fires in the forests, and noise generated from
I
j
            the construction of patrolling substations and tourism lodges.
I       •   The development of Phathi road (the government funded activities) within NE-PL
I           NP A. About 61 km section of the so-called Phathi Road is under rehabilitation
l           inside the NP A, including a 31 km section that cuts through the Totally Protected
I           Zone. Notwithstanding that the Phathi Road is not financed by the project, it is
            likely to have some adverse impacts in the NE-PL NPA. The 31 km road section
            runs east-west through the critical habitat for the last known breeding tiger
I           population in Indochina (Lao, Vietnam and Cambodia). In December 2010,

l
I
            construction began on an old four-wheel vehicular road inside the NE-PL NP A,
            which had by then been degraded and no longer traversable by motorized cars.
            The road development included the widening of the existing road to four-meters.
            Construction of the road has brought about concerns regarding increased access to
            the core zone of the protected area, including the key tiger habitat. The developer
I           is the Ministry of Defense who will hand over the upgraded road to the Province

l           one year after completion of the civil work. The World Bank Task Team and
            WCS have worked with the Government to bring these parties together with the
            Province and the Ministry of Defense to discuss potential impacts from the road,
I           and solutions to address its adverse effects. Project will demonstrate the practices
            to mitigate anticipated impacts from the use of Phathi Road through support of the

I           implementation of the Co-Management Plan. The activity includes awareness
            raising on the use of Phathi road; establishing a lock gate and check point at the
I           two ends of the road; establishing one substation along the road and financing
I           permanent staff at the two check points and substation to carryout patrolling
I           activity; establishing assess monitoring system; conducting training staff on
            patrolling along the road; supporting land use planning in the villages near to the

I           road; and supporting the development of long term Phathi road management plan.

    Update on the Phati Road's impact. The road construction is slowly ongoing but not
    completed. Car and motorcycle traffic, while still very low, is increasing. In 2015, WCS
    confirmed the project's Advisory Committee observations from their 2013 visit. The
    portion of the protected area intersected by this road is largely a traditional grazing area
    for livestock. Tigers had been detected in this area in prior years. Conflict with livestock
    was occasional. Since 2013, no tiger sign has been recorded in this area and no livestock
    have been preyed upon. It was probably not judicious in the first place to map the Phati
    road area as a Core Zone within the NEPL NP A. Regardless, WCS had initiated the
    implementation of the agreed co-management plan by installing checkpoints at both ends

                                                                                               7
of the road. Unfortunately; those have proven ineffective in slowing usage because of the
lack of buy-in from communities and authorities. The same lack of buy-in applies
generally to the co-management plan itself since it was drafted by central agencies
without sufficient consideration for local realities. In fact, the co-management plan, even
though it had been cleared by the Bank, is not fully coherent with the project's Process
Framework which demands a more thorough participatory process.

Activities that may have impact on livelihood of the local ethnic minorities and
require land acquisition:

Original Project: Ethnic minorities (Hmong, Khmu, Iu-Mien) living in and around the
NP A are the primary targeted beneficiaries of the project. These are considered to be
vulnerable ethnic groups in Lao PDR, meeting the Bank's definition of Indigenous
People (OP/BP 4.10). Their culture is unique with their own customs and languages.
These· group's livelihoods are heavily based on subsistence, upland agriculture and
forestry. These ethnic villages have their own village cemeteries and some, especially the
Khmu ethnic group, have spirit forests (the inhabitant of the village ancestor's spirit)
located adjacent to their villages. Extraction of timbers and hunting are usually prohibited
in the spirit forest areas. The project will enhance the protection of spirit forests, and will
avoid routing any ecotourism treks in this community-managed area. The project will not
involve any physical relocation. The project will ensure that local villagers are aware of
and conserve their forest use areas, so that project-affected people have an improved,
long term resource access. However, especially within the Totally Protected Zone, a
new, more sustainable use of forest resources that will be introduced under the project
may mean that the livelihood of local population may be negatively impacted, at least in a
short run.

Project activity including boundary demarcation; awareness raising on National laws and
regulations; village agreement on natural resources management; forest patrolling may
have restriction local ethnic communities from their traditional access to natural
resources including wild meat and NTFs for their own consumption.

The livelihood support activities which will be undertaken by PRF and CliP AD may need
minor land acquisition if infrastructure construction activity is choosing by local
community, namely school; health care center; and irrigation scheme in the village areas.

As mentioned, the most impacts as a result of project activities are expected to be positive
for natural habitat and key wildlife species in the NE-PL NPA, the activity will help to
reduce the encroachment into the core zone and improve forest area and protect the key
species such as tiger and its prey. The negative impacts from the activities described
above will be local and for the most part site specific as they will be mostly be associated
with managing relatively small volumes of solid waste and waste water, and materials
used for construction will be sourced from outside the NP A. Mitigation measures have
been incorporated into the EA report; IPP/EPP; and RPF developed for the project.




                                                                                             8
~



I
l   Update: The safeguards issues impacting local ethnic minorities and land acquisition
    have not been revised. To clarify, it should be noted that the Ethnic Peoples' Plan and
l   Process Framework include measures to ensure communities' continued access to
    physical culture resources, such as spirit· forests. Furthermore, where minor land

I   acquisition is required by PRF, that project's Resettlement Policy Framework will be
    utilized. For the minor land acquisition under the CliPAD, the World Bank team has
    informally reviewed the safeguard documents and finds them to be satisfactory.
I
l   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
l   activities in the project area:
I
I
    Original project. As the NE-PL NP A is the only NP A within in Lao PDR that has a
    breeding population of Indochinese Tiger, success of the project could lead to the
    increase or stabilization of the tiger population and the resultant dissemination of best

I
I
    practices in NP A management throughout the country.

    Update. The NEPL NP A is subjected to the myriad of long-term threats that all Lao
I
    ecosystems face. The causes of deforestation and forest degradation in Lao PDR are:
    fire, unsustainable wood extraction, pioneering shifting cultivation, agricultural
I   expansion, industrial tree plantation, mining, hydropower, infrastructure development,
    and urban expansion. In recent years, roads construction, mining and hydropower
    development increasingly threaten natural habitat in PAs including NEPL. In addition to
    habitat destruction, a threat to biodiversity is illegal hunting. Hunting contributes to food
    security, but increasingly illegal wildlife products enter the national and international
    markets for food, skins, medicinal ingredients and ornaments. The increasing demand for
    wildlife, including tiger parts, is linked to urbanization and economic growth, especially
    in China and Vietnam. Lao PDR is an important country in the international illegal
    wildlife trade, as both a transit and source country. The project helps to build the
    capacity of NEPL MU to address several of these threats and identify which models are
    viable options. However, many of these threats will continue and especially those related
    to infrastructure development (roads such as the Phati Road) and hydropower. Another
    World Bank project, the Second Laos Environment and Social Project (LENS2), aims to
    build the capacity of various Lao PDR agencies to start addressing these threats through
    better planning, design, and mitigation.

    For NEPL's tiger population, it is likely already too late. In 2011, the NE-PL NPA was
    known as the only NP A within Lao PDR with a breeding population of Indochinese
    Tiger. WCS could claim success is maintaining that population when all others had been
    extirpated. It was expected that the project could increase or stabilize the tiger
    population. Unfortunately, organized poaching has turned its attention to NEPL and a
    WCS survey, while still inconclusive; show a drastic reduction in tigers. Their
    population may now be below minimal breeding size. Nonetheless, WCS and NEPL MU
    protection efforts continue. In addition, the LENS2 project will finance a countrywide
    survey of tigers to verify their status and check whether there are still options for wild
    tigers in Laos PDR.



                                                                                               9
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

NIA

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

To address the impacts from the project financed activities, the WCS and NE-PL NPA
Management Unit have developed an Environmental Assessment Report/Environmental
Management Plan which includes tangible mitigation measures to address the impacts
associated with the patrolling substations and eco-tourism activities. The project
implementing agencies have developed Ethnic People Plan (EPP) and Resettlement
Process Framework (RPF) to address the social safeguard related issues. The EPP aims to
enhance ethnic community benefits and their participation in the project and to establish
their broad-based and informed support and ownership in order to increase the likelihood
of project sustainability. The RPF and CliPAD are intended to address potential
livelihood impacts that may result from restriction of access to the natural resources and
provide/ measures to address such impacts.

As a measure to address the potential impacts possibly resulting from the Phathi Road
improvement, a Co-Management Plan had been developed that would support NPA MU
to identify and manage emerging impacts from Phathi Road in partnership with local
population and all other key stakeholders. The Co-Management Plan was discussed in a
meeting held on March 16, 2012 at the national level, attended by all concerned parties
including the province and Ministry of Defense. Roles and responsibilities of each party
including the government agencies at the central and provincial levels, development
partners, local communities and International and Local NGOs in Lao PDR have been
agreed upon. Measures include installing check points at the two ends of the road and
building a monitoring system to monitor access along Phathi Road. This strategy has
now been updated as described in the section below on Phati Road.

As mentioned above, there will be two co-financiers to the project, besides in-kind
contribution from the NE-PL PAMU. The NE-PL Protected Area Management Unit
(P AMU) will ensure that all activities in or near the NE-PL NP A including but not
limited to those financed under the two co-financiers will follow with Bank safeguard
policies.

As part of project preparation process, social assessment that consists of various socio-
economic and biodiversity surveys, participatory land and forest use planning, outreach
activities and inclusive consultations, has been undertaken in all target villages within
and adjacent to the NEPL NPA by WCS and PAMU. Process of free, prior, and informed
consultation (FPIC) with local communities have been and will be an important part of this
EPP and the Process Framework and were conducted in 56 villages including four out of
the eight villages affected by the rehabilitation of the Phathi road. The field visit
conducted under the appraisal mission, jointly conducted by the Bank task team and


                                                                                       10
WCS, also found that villagers in the NEPL NP A are well aware of and knowledgeable
about the project and support the activities planned under the project, indicating that the
consultations had been conducted properly. Community support activities have been
confirmed by PRF and CliPAD projects.

The project will not support involuntary resettlement of local people or dispossession of
their assets in and near the NE-PL NP A as a result of any possible development projects
even if they are not related to and financed through Bank.

Update. In light of the situation (see section II.A.1 and 11.A.2 above), at the September
2014 MTR, it was agreed that the existing co-management plan required significant
revision. Thus, it was agreed to revise the co-management plan and rename it Mitigation
Plan. The revision will follow a participatory processes that conforms with the
provisions of the Process Framework. The new Phathi Road Mitigation Plan will serve
as model for the mitigation of other infrastructures that may intersect with Lao protected
areas; as such is it well aligned with the PDO. The new plan will propose a process to
review the whether the 50,000 ha traversed by the road should remain Core Zone or
become a Multiple Use Zone. If this is the case, the plan will explore whether there are
alternative critical habitat within or outside the NP A where the protection status can be
elevated. This decision will be reviewed by the external advisory panel, the GoL and the
Bank before being proposed for implementation. It will not be implemented under the
current project and may be implemented under the LENS2 should it meet the instruments
adopted under that project.

WCS has initiated the action plan agreed at the MTR and contracted the NGO Village
Focus International (VFI) to assess the grievances and customary rights of the Hmong
communities grazing their cattle along the Phathi Road. The assignment will determine
the pre-1993 (establishment of NEPL-NPA) situation; document the consultations by
WCS and Government officials with communities over the past 6 years; and make
recommendations on acknowledging customary rights and integrating those rights into
NEPL management. This will be the basis of the new Mitigation Plan. The Plan will be
reviewed and approved by District and Provincial authorities. WCS will mobilize the
Advisory Group before the end of September 2015 to validate whether this approach
conforms both to the prevailing situation and to the initial intent of Phati road co-
management.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders are the WCS, NE-PL NPA management unit, local population and the
concerned provincial and district sectors. These agencies were extensively consulted
during the preparation of the project. Annex 1 of the EA provides the record of these
consultations. Free, prior and informed consultations with local multi-ethnic communities
on the project activity has been conducted throughout project preparation since April
2008, and continues to be conducted into the implementation stage to establish their
support and cooperation with the project with assistance from the above agencies. EA,

                                                                                        11
EPP and RPF may be updated during implementation based on the comments and
feedback received.

Update. The EA, EPP and RPF are not revised. However, the Phati Road co-
management plan will be revised into a fully fledge Mitigation Plan that id designed
following the prescriptions of the safeguard instruments as described in the above section
on Phati Road.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    May 28, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                June  1, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 May 31, 2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
                                                               May 28, 2012
Date of receipt by the Bank
                                                               June 1, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure
                                                               May 31, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                      May 28, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  June 1, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                   May 31, 2012
Pest Management Plan:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?

                                                                                       12
.   '
        ..-
              OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
              Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of      Yes
              critical natural habitats?
              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other Yes
              (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
              acceptable to the Bank?
              OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
              Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                 Yes
              appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes
              Manager review the plan?
              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed  Yes
              and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
              OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
              Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?           No
              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential         No
              adverse impacts on cultural property?
              OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
              Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process             Yes
              framework* (as appropriate) been prepared?
              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector       Yes
              Manager review the plan?
              *Included in the ESSF
              The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes,
              Infoshop?
              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
              form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
              groups and local NGOs?
              All Safeguard Policies
              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
              been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
              policies?
              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
              cost?
              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
              monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? Yes
              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
              borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
              documents?

              D. Approvals
              At Appraisal



                                                                                                   13
                                                                                    ..
Signed and submitted by:                          Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr. Viengkeo Phetnavongxay
Environmental Specialist:         Mr. James Monday
Social Development Specialist     Mr. Sybounheung Phandanouvong
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards               Mr. Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan
Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms. Julia Fraser
 Comments:

  At Restructuring

Signed and submitted by:                              Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr.   Jean-Michel Pavy
Environmental Specialist:         Mr.   Jean-Michel Pavy
Social Development Specialist     Mr.   Sybounheung Phandanouvong
Additional Environmental and/or   Mr.   Satoshi Ishihara
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Adviser:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:
  Comments:




                                                                               14
