Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 19, 2004                                 Report No.:AC835
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Lao People's Democratic Republic     Project ID: P083543
Project: Road Maintenance Program (Phase 2)   TTL: William D. 0. Paterson
Total project cost (by component):
PRESERVATION OF THE ROAD NETWORKS (US$64.2 million)
CAPACITY BUILDING (US$10.1 million):
PROJECT ADMINISTRATION (US$0.6 million)
Appraisal Date: May 18, 2004                  Loan/Credit amount($m):
l____________________________________________ IDA: 25
Board Date: June 29, 2004
Other financing amounts by source:           ($m.)
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD             4.8
GRANTS
Managing Unit: EASTR                          Sector: Roads and highways (97%);Central
l                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~~government administration (3%)
Lending Instruments: Adaptable Program Loan                                               l
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?)  Yes?  [ ]    No?   [X]
Environmental Category: B                     Safeguard Classification: S2
A.2. Project Objectives
The second phase of the Road Maintenance Program (RMP-2) will expand the operation of
financing and management systems for the sustainable maintenance of the road networks to all 18
provinces/zones countrywide, based on the successful experience of initiation and piloting under the first
phase, with the following development objectives:
(a)   National and local road assets are preserved to provide sustainable improved travel and
access for road users and communities in most areas countrywide; and
(b)   Sustainable financing and management of roads is operational countrywide with improved
institutional capacity at central and local levels in the public and private sectors.
In line with the main objective of the World Bank's CAS, the proposed project will support rural and
national infrastructure development, including maintenance of national highway networks. The second
phase of the APL will continue to assist with the long-term development of an effective road management
system at the central and provincial levels for the maintenance of both the national and local road networks.
The proposed grant activities will complement a US$25 million IDA credit and other cofinancing for goods
and services with a results-oriented capacity-enhancement program which aims to achieve a sustainable
maintenance management and financial management systems for the entire network.
A.3. Project Description
Component A. PRESERVATION OF THE ROAD NETWORKS (US$64.2 million)
Adopting a programmatic approach, this will support a slice of four Annual Work Programs (AWPs) for
periodic maintenance and routine maintenance on the National Road network countrywide and on selected
parts of the Local Road network in all Provinces/Zones countrywide, and strengthen the quality of
implementation. In a shift of focus based on economic and social analysis of needs, the Phase 2 program
would devote nearly half the resources (48%) to maintenance of local roads, with particular emphasis on
Provincial roads (30%) due to the poor condition of that network, and will contribute to substantial
improvements in the quality of access to all districts, especially the 47 poorest districts.
A. 1    National roads: Support for the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation program at an
average level of US$6.4 million/yr (estimated to be about 45 percent of the sustainable level
of about US$15 million/year), by supplementing the resources of the Road Maintenance Fund



(RMF) which is recovering an increasing portion of costs from road users, and resources from
other donors. All routine maintenance will be financed by counterpart funding, largely
through the RMF, and all implemented through the private sector and mainly village-based..
A.2     Local Roads: Support for the periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of about 30% of the
provincial road network at an average level of US$4.10 million/yr with costs shared by local
government, RMF and external funding. There is the potential for additional external donor
support for the District and rural road networks in the near future.
A.3    Implementation Support: Assistance to central and provincial departments for improving
the quality of implementation of the road preservation programs, including strengthened
supervision of technical aspects and monitoring of safeguards aspects, especially at the
provincial level.
Component B. CAPACITYBUILDING (US$10.1 million):
This will support the strengthening of capacity of the transport sector in two core business functions
(management and financing of the road infrastructure, and management of road transport and safety), as
well as the general institutional capacity at both national and sub-national levels, through:
B.1     Road Management and Financing - the establishment and operation of appropriate
procedures at central and provincial levels for planning, budgeting and implementing
maintenance work programs on: a) National roads and bridges; b) Local roads and bridges
(provincial, district and rural roads); and c) Support for scaling up the RMF to a sustainable
level of cost recovery and determining appropriate cost-sharing arrangements at the local
level.
1B.2    Road Transport Management and Safety - Improvements to road transport administration
procedures and systems, expanding the heavy transport management program (HTMP) of
overloading control through the operation of new weight control facilities built under RMP 1,
and development and implementation of a program of road safety improvements.
1B.3   Institutional Capacity Building - Strengthening the capacity and performance of MCTPC
and provincial DCTPCs's through: a) Improvements to the organization and business
processes, for upgrading key business functions including safeguards and strengthening
organizational functions, and for effective operation under a decentralized structure; b)
Human Resource Development, including results-oriented learning and training programs; c)
Information technology and communications, for upgrading the computerization of central
and provincial offices; d) Facilities, for provision of basic office facilities and transport to
support operations at district level; and e) Strengthening of the private sector, including
construction and transport industries, and consultant capacity.
Component C. PROJECTADMINISTRATION (US$0.6 million)
This will support efficient administration of the Program through:
C. 1   Project Monitoring - Strengthening project management, reporting, monitoring of project
impacts and safeguards, and preparation of future sector programs.
C.2    Incremental operating costs - Modest budget support for project-related activities at central
and provincial levels.
C.3    Auditing - Financial and technical audits to ensure quality of project implementation.
The project scope of approximately US$74.9 million is slightly larger than the originally planned scope of
US$70 million because of the inclusion of all the local road network and thus a larger apparent share by the
government. The IDA allocation of $25 million available for the second phase is less than the US$35
million planned. Other financing has been tentatively planned to meet the financing gap of $9.75 million,
but this would also be eliminated if the RMF targets for road user cost recovery are fully met.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
Lao PDR is one of the poorest countries in the region, with an estimated per capita income of US$310 in
2002 and agriculture as the main contributor. The country area is 236,800 square km with a population of



about 5 million (a density of 23 person per square km). The country is rich in biodiversity and ethnic
groups; over 13,600 genetic varieties of rice and over 200 ethnic groups have been identified. Four major
ethnic groups are Lao-Tai, (Tai-Kadai), Mon-Khmer, Hmong-Mien, and Tibeto-Burnese.
The project locations will be on existing national and local road networks which run throughout the
country. Classification of the networks by pavement types suggested that of a total length of 31,210 km net
of national and local roads, about 14.4% (4,497 kmn) are paved, 32% (10,097 km) are gravel, and 53%
(16,615 km) are earth. A rough estimate of less than 0.1% (200-300 km) of the total run through 7 National
Biological Conservation Areas (NCBA) and another 0.1 % run along 7 NCBA borders. The NCBA system
was established in 1993 and it is a multi-purpose conservation area not a national park in a conventional
sense. People are allowed to live in the areas and harvest natural products as part of their livelihoods. The
areas located in the north and east along the Vietnam border can be characterized as plateau, hilly, and
mountainous terrain and the people live there are considered poorest. The areas located along the Mekong
River in the middle and southern part are flat land and flood plain and socioeconomic activities are active.
The Mekong River and its tributaries are the main river networks and there are a number of waterfalls,
wetlands, and other scenic sites. Luang Prabang World Cultural Heritage and the Plain of Jar are two of the
most well known cultural and historic sites.
B. Check Environmental Category A [],B [X], C [],FI [l
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes                 No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                [X]                 [I]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                           []                 [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                               []                 [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)          []                 [X]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                  [X]                  [ I
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                           [X]                  [ ]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                    []                 [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/13P 4.37)                            []                 [X]
Proiects in Disputed Areas (QP/I3GP 7.60)               []                 [X]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/B3P/GP 7.50)    []                 [X]
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D. 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts were identified. It is anticipated that the proposed
project will bring positive social and economic benefits through the improved road system.
RMPI experience suggests that most of the impacts during maintenance operations will be localized,
temporary, and can be mitigated through the application of the guidelines. There are concerns, however, on
the supervision budget, capacity of the Environmental and Social Division (ESD) and the provincial staff
(DTCPC) of MCTPC, impacts in sensitive areas, and compliance performance on safeguards of
contractors, especially in the areas of road safety, dust, disposal of waste, location and treatment of borrow
pits and quarries, and consultation with local authority and community.
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None are anticipated. However, actions will be carried out through pilot studies to initiate the community
participation process (see D4 below)
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.
None are anticipated
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
No construction of new roads is proposed; hence the need to develop and evaluate alternatives is not
required. The alternative is basically a no or limited maintenance approach which carries with it adverse
environmental risks as lack of maintenance can lead to localized erosion and drainage problems.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During RMP 1, an Environmental Guidelines for Road Projects (EGRP) was developed to mitigate the
impacts during road maintenance. Although resettlement and land acquisition is not expected, a
Resettlement and Compensation Guidelines (RCG) was developed and found acceptable to the Bank.
However, if needed, the RCG will be applied. The government disclosed a policy to follow the EGRP and
RCG, and was considered as an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project.
For RMP2, the Borrower has proposed to apply the policy statement (EMP) similar to RMP 1. However, in
response the Bank's request, the EGRP has been updated to ensure adequate consultation and information
disclosure and also address the impacts related to the improved road conditions/access. Given the
nationwide nature of the RMP2 and the lesson learnt from RMP 1, a Strategic Environmental Assessment
(SEA) was also prepared, including specific guidelines for maintenance operation in sensitive areas. Given
the ethnic minority distribution in the country, an Ethnic Minority Development Policy (EMDP) has also
been prepared for the project and will be applied when needed for preparation of Ethnic Minority Action
Plan (EMAP), as appropriate.
In addition, a safeguard screening framework (referred to as an Environmental and Social Safeguards
Framework, or ESSF) will be used in RMP2. This is to ensure that the project activities will:
1) have no adverse impacts on critical habitats such as protected areas or other sensitive areas which
fall outside of protected status or on cultural heritage;
2) ensure that mitigation plans are carried out effectively; and
3) complaints from the local communities are effectively addressed and adverse social impacts are
minimized.
Capacity of the Borrower is limited and technical assistance, training, and capacity building activities will
be carried out in the Project. The following actions will be undertaken to ensure effective implementation
of safeguards:
1) Ensure (a) effective screening, supervision, and reporting of safeguards, (b) close supervision of
contractor performance, and (c) training of DCTPC and ESD staff. In addition to the inclusion of
specific safeguard requirements in the bidding process, the contractor will be required to insure
their performance through the performance bond arrangement and prequalification process.
Technical assistance will be provided through ESD to ensure achievement of these objectives and
a budget of about $0.15 million has been included for the Project supervision cost. This TA will
also cover the activity identified in 2) below.



2) Facilitate effective application for the updated EGRP and integration of the safeguards procedures
into DOR operational process. A number of operational procedures/manuals to apply the EGRP
will be prepared and applied. A high-level management committee will be set up to oversee
performance of the concemed units. Safeguard performance will be evaluated during the
Technical Audit. Training of staff will be provided through the Capacity Building component.
3) Conduct pilot studies in two priority areas: (a) construction resource mapping and inventory of
communities located in the existing right-of-way; and (b) initiation of community participation to
address the issues related to the improved road access/conditions such as road safety, health
impacts due to dust, drug, HIV/AIDS, illegal trade, etc. Budget of about $0.25 million has been
allocated from the project (PHRD grant).
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Borrower has disclosed MCTPC's intention to apply and comply with the EGRP and RCG (the EMP)
through the local newspapers in late February 2004. In RMP 1, districts and villages were informed of road
maintenance activities to be conducted through the DCTPCs and PMU. This process of public consultation
of communities along roads targeted by the project through ad hoc meetings to inform of project activities
and solicit feedback on local priorities and needs in road maintenance will be continued for RMP-2.
F. Disclosure Requirements                    Date
Environmental Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                 02/27/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure             02/27/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop              02/27/2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Director
Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process. RCG
Date of receipt by the Bank                 06/03/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure             06/03/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop              06/03/2004
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: EMDP
Date of receipt by the Bank                 06/03/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure             06/03/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop              06/03/2004
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                 Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure             Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop              Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                 Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure             Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop              Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                    Yes        No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? SEA was
prepared and reviewed at appraisal
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?



OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: Not triggered                              Yes        No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable
to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management: Not triggered                                  Yes        No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11. 03) - Cultural Property: Not triggered             Yes        No
Does the EA include adequate measures?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                             Yes        No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation
with the Indigenous People? Ethenic Minority Development Policy (EMDP) was           1
prepared and reviewed during appraisal
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the
plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                    Yes        No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been
prepared? Resettlement and land acquisition is not expected. However, a
Resettlement and Compensation Guidelines (RCG) was prepared and will be
applied
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the
plan / policy framework / policy process? During appraisal
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests: Not triggered                                       Yes        No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.3 7 - Safety of Dams: Not triggered                               Yes        No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: Not triggered              Yes        No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP
prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas: Not triggered                       Yes        No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of
the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent
to the RVP?



Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: ***                                          Yes        No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs'?
*** The SEA report, the updated EGRP, the RCG, and the EMDP will be
disclosed to the public by the end of appraisal.
All Safeguard Policies:                                                    Yes        No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
of safeguard impacts and measures'?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Signed and submitted bY.                        Name      /                     Dae
Task Team Leader:               William D. 0. Paterson,
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Manida Unkulvasapaul /MT 45 ttu'2604|
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 4t1lTeck Ghee Lim
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:
Approved by:                                       me    ,                      Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Glenn Morgan            -
Comments:
Comments:
WBI56224
K:\DeSerio\RMP2\Env and social\ISDS Appraisal 052504.doc
May 25, 2004 4:27 PM



