Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1470 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Central America 
Project ID: P094062 
Project Name: Conservation and Sustainable Use of Neotropical Native Crops and Wild 
Relatives of Crops 
Task Team Leader: Nadim Khouri 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);Information 
technology (15%);Agricultural extension and research (10%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Regional integration (P);Rural policies and institutions 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Technology diffusion (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
4.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project Global Goal:  Contribute to the conservation of the globally important eco-system of the 
Mesoamerican region by focusing on three aspects of the agriculture/conservation interface: (i) 
improving conservation instruments targeting wild relatives of agronomic crops; (ii) 
mainstreaming - at the policy and operation levels - conservation objectives in agricultural 
development strategies; and (iii) creating additional opportunities for the equitable sharing of 
benefits arising from the use of biodiversity.   
 
Project Development Objective (PDO):  The proposed project will contribute to the global goal 
of improved agrobiodiversity conservation by focusing on three objectives of importance in the 
Central America region: (a) Application of genetic diversity knowledge for targeting wild 
relatives of crops in Mesoamerica within overall conservation efforts; (b) Capacity building and 
promotion of policies fostering agrobiodiversity conservation in countries of the region; and (c) 
Page  2
Increasing potential benefits to small farmers and rural communities from integrating 
biodiversity conservation in their agriculture practices and sustainable use of natural resources.  
 
By aiming for the above objectives, the project will support participating countries in 
implementing two important international treaties: the Convention on Biological Diversity and 
the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. This will be done 
through applied research using recent advances in genomic and geographic sciences and through 
the promotion of policies and capacity building for the implementation of integrated 
conservation of wild relatives and traditional crops.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1. Targeting of Agrobiodiversity in Conservation Strategies.  
 
This component targets knowledge generation related to genetic resource characterization, use, 
and conservation and provides some of the knowledge for the other three technical components 
of this project.  The outputs will include: (i) databases of spatial distribution of populations of 
wild relatives of selected crops and a limited number of land-races; (ii) information on the 
structure of genetic diversity for populations of wild relatives of crops; (iii) information on the 
functional diversity  of wild relatives of crops in relation to economically important traits of 
these plants; (iv) suggestions for improvements to current in-situ conservation efforts through the 
integration of the acquired knowledge in genetic and functional diversity.  
 
Component 2. Improving Policy Definition and Implementation Capacity  
 
This component will address prioritizing and evaluating agrobiodiversity conservation efforts 
on a national scale as well as on a regional scale by providing the information needed for sound 
policy decisions and assist in developing coherent national and regional policies on sound and 
sustainable approaches to the conservation and use of agrobiodiversity.  
 
This component aims to establish policy-related guidelines based in part on the technical 
knowledge generated in Component 1, and to ensure that such knowledge is appropriately 
included and/or considered in setting or modifying the policy instruments on agriculture, 
agrobiodiversity conservation, and environmental issues.  Specific outputs include: (i) 
Documentation of selected plant populations in relation to changes in land use, socioeconomic 
and demographic pressure, urbanization patterns and other potential threats on biodiversity; (ii) 
Assessment of conservation status for selected plant populations under threat and the causes of 
the threats; (iii) information for policy-makers for the evaluation of risks and costs associated 
with the loss of biodiversity at regional and national levels; (iv) products and programs for 
training and capacity building for government and private sectors.  
 
Component 3. Improving Policy Definition and Implementation Capacity  
 
This component will address prioritizing and evaluating agrobiodiversity conservation efforts 
on a national scale as well as on a regional scale by providing the information needed for sound 
policy decisions and assist in developing coherent national and regional policies on sound and 
sustainable approaches to the conservation and use of agrobiodiversity.  
 
This component aims to establish policy-related guidelines based in part on the technical 
knowledge generated in Component 1, and to ensure that such knowledge is appropriately 
included and/or considered in setting or modifying the policy instruments on agriculture, 
agrobiodiversity conservation, and environmental issues.  Specific outputs include: (i) 
Page  3
Documentation of selected plant populations in relation to changes in land use, socioeconomic 
and demographic pressure, urbanization patterns and other potential threats on biodiversity; (ii) 
Assessment of conservation status for selected plant populations under threat and the causes of 
the threats; (iii) information for policy-makers for the evaluation of risks and costs associated 
with the loss of biodiversity at regional and national levels; (iv) products and programs for 
training and capacity building for government and private sectorsThis component would include 
knowledge generation support to plant propagation and agronomic practices, field production 
guidelines and sustainable studies, ethno-botanical and inventory work for collection, 
conservation, and sustainable use of wild species.  Specific outputs include: (i) demonstration of 
systems for improved management of wild relatives of selected crops in-situ; (ii) demonstration 
of the role that small farms and home gardens could play in decreasing the pressure on wild 
relatives.  
 
Component 4. Project Administration and Coordination among Partners.  
 
This component will support the two executing agencies (IICA and CIAT) in the 
implementation of the project with respect to overall administration, communication, monitoring 
and evaluation and reporting.  In-country implementation of activities will be done by national 
agencies.  
 
Project Implementation arrangements will include designing a strong science-based monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) indicators, and a M&E system, study to establish baselines, and impact 
assessment of the project interventions.  The requirements for sustainable funding of the overall 
project will be assessed at preparation and updated during implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project encompasses the Mesoamerican region, which is an area extending from Southern 
Mexico to Panama, and the lowlands of Northern Colombia.  The broad locations will be 
determined in the course of project preparation.  Once identified, the native and wild relatives of 
crops in this area will be evaluated as part of the Environmental Assessment (EA) of the project 
preparation and as on-going operation during implementation.  Prior to and during the project 
implementation, actual activities sites will be identified and defined in relation to the proposed 
in-situ agrobiodiversity conservation and sustainable use.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The overall institutional capacity to address safeguard policies will be better assessed during 
preparation.  The two partner agencies (CIAT and IICA) are familiar in the use of these 
conventions and guidelines.  Preliminary analysis indicated the availability of technical 
specialists within the executing agencies and in some of the participating country agencies.  
 
Social and environmental assessments will be carried out during project preparation to identify 
direct and indirect impact on poverty alleviation in rural and indigenous communities.  In 
addition social, environmental and other safeguard experts would be contracted as a part of the 
preparation team.  
 
Environmental safeguard (OP/BP 4.01) might be triggered, as well as safeguard policies linked 
to agricultural production, given the distribution of some wild relatives of crops as currently 
proposed by project participants.  Project preparation activities include the development of an 
EA (and resulting Environmental Management Plan) and social assessment ? both of which will 
develop measures to enhance the Borrowers? capacity to deal with identified environmental and 
Page  4
social issues.  The project beneficiaries would prepare an Environmental review report during 
preparation.  
 
The project proposed activities are favorable and is not expected to have any negative impact 
and to trigger the indigenous peoples safeguard (OD4.20).  Nevertheless an Indigenous People 
assessment and proper guidelines for remedies will be done systematically as site-specific sub-
projects are being developed.  
 
On issues of Intellectual Property Rights during project preparation,  the Team will comply 
with the existing guidelines in documents such as the Convention of Biological Diversity , the 
International Treaty of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and, where applicable, 
the FAO Code of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collectors.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project preparation activities include the development of an EA  resulting on an 
Environmental Management Plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The project proposed activities are favorable and is not expected to have any negative impact 
and to trigger the indigenous peoples safeguard (OD4.20).  Nevertheless an Indigenous People 
assessment and proper guidelines for remedies will be done systematically as site-specific sub-
projects are being developed.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The time frame for Safeguard studies will be determined during the first project preparation 
mission.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nadim Khouri 
02/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
02/16/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
02/16/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
