                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      CONCEPT STAGE
.
                                                                Report No.: 105100
.
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 25, 2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                         Liberia     Project ID:             P159493
    Project Name:                    Girls Ebola Recovery Livelihood Support (GERLS) Project
    Task Team Leader(s):             Suleiman Namara
    Estimated Board Date:            30-June-2016
    Managing Unit:                   GSP07
    Sector(s):                       Other social services (100%)
    Theme(s):                        Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care
                                     Services (100%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP           No
    8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:      0.53                   Total Bank Financing: 0.53
    Financing Gap:           0.00
      Financing Source                                                                    Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    0.00
      ERR                                                                                   0.53
      Total                                                                                 0.53
    Environmental Category:          C - Not Required
    Is this a Repeater project?      No
    Is this a Transferred project?   No
.
    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide income generation support to Ebola-
    affected adolescent girls.

    3. Project Description
    The proposed project will provide livelihood recovery support through trainings and cash

                                                1
grants to selected vulnerable adolescent girls who are susceptible to post EVD shocks. The
project will be implemented in the following counties, which were some of the worst hit
counties by the EVD crisis: Montserrado (4502 cases, 1853 deaths), Grand Bassa (180 cases,
79 deaths), and Margibi (1261 cases, 576 deaths) and also all have participated in MGCSP
labor market programs for adolescent girls

The proposed project is expected to have the following components:

Component 1: Life and Business Skills Support for Targeted Adolescent Girls ($130,000)

The objective of this component is to support the reentry and participation of targeted
adolescent girls into the labor market through life and business skills training.' Specific
attention will be given to addressing behavioral constraints such as negative attitudes towards
work and lack of non-cognitive skills that inhibit business growth. The component will
specifically include the following activities: (i) beneficiary selection and enrollment; (ii) a
needs assessment to inform training; (iii) the formation of Beneficiary Business Groups for
business implementation; and (iv) life and business skills training This component will
particularly be useful to all beneficiaries, regardless of previous participation in life and
business skills training programs. For beneficiaries who have received similar training prior to
this project, these activities will serve as a refresher and would include new elements to bolster
resilience and positive coping mechanisms in light of the recent economic shock from the
EVD outbreak. Prior to initiating training, the Project Management team will select and enroll
2,000 beneficiaries, half of whom have benefited from MGCSP labor market programs. Upon
completion of the enrollment, a pre-training assessment will be conducted to tailor the
trainings to the beneficiaries' needs.

Component 2: Livelihood Recovery Support for Adolescent Girls ($320,000)

The objective of this component is support to start or restart the livelihoods of beneficiaries
who have completed life and business skills, have formed Beneficiary Business Groups
(BBGs), and have approved business plans, and provide them with cash grants. This
component will finance cash grants which will provide a financial stimulant to restart or grow
their businesses

Component 3: Project Management and Coordination ($80,000)

The objective of this component is to finance activities related to project management and
coordination under the MGCSP for project implementation. This includes staff costs,
equipment, fuel, and communications costs, as well as incremental project-related operating
costs for implementation of Components 1 and 2. This will include support for the
procurement of service providers to carry out the needs assessment, trainings, and
disbursement of grants. This component will also support coordination and consolidation of
annual and quarterly reports and auditing of the project. The MGCSP will ensure collaboration
across sectors and counties, as well as linkages with other ministries and policyrnakers in the
overall implementation of GERLS project.


                                              2
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)

The project will be implemented in 3 counties, which were some ofthe worst hit counties by
the EVD crisis: Montserrado (4502 cases, 1853 deaths), Grand Bassa (180 cases, 79 deaths),
and Margibi (1261 cases, 576 deaths).


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01 )
Sekou Abou Kamara (GEN01 )


6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OPIBP 4.01         No              Assessment of the project
                                                            components shows that the core
                                                            activities to be financed-Business
                                                            and Life Skills Development and
                                                            Business Recovery Grants-are
                                                            likely to have no negative
                                                            impacts on the environmental.
                                                            Businesses to be financed under
                                                            Component 2 are not defined at
                                                            this stage. To ensure that
                                                            recipients of business recovery
                                                            grants do not engage in
                                                            businesses that could generate
                                                            some negative environmental and
                                                            social impacts, the project
                                                            implementation manual will be
                                                            strengthened to contain detailed
                                                            targeting and enrollment
                                                            requirements to will exclude
                                                            activities that could generate
                                                            adverse environmental impacts
                                                            This will mainly be in the form of
                                                            a "negative" or "exclusion" list
                                                            against which activities are
                                                            screened before enrollment.
                                                            Some generic environmental best
                                                            practices will also be included in
                                                            the operation manual to guide
                                                            project activities.
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04                 No              This project will not invest in


                                             3
                                                           activities likely to affect the
                                                           natural ecosystem
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No             No investment in forest or
                                                           protected areas is involved
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No             Project activities will not require
                                                           the procurement, use,
                                                           transportation or storage of
                                                           pesticides
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No             the project avoids impact on sites
                                                           with any cultural significance
Indigenous Peoples OPIBP 4.10               No             There are no Indigenous Peoples
                                                           in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No             The project activities envisioned
                                                           under Component 1 and 2 are
                                                           1arge1 y for business skills training
                                                           and cash transfer for reviving
                                                           businesses such as tailoring,
                                                           catering etc. No civil works are
                                                           envisaged under the Project, and
                                                           therefore OP 4.12 on involuntary
                                                           resettlement policy is not
                                                           triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No             No dam construction is involved
                                                           and Project activities will not rely
                                                           on any existing dam structures
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No               the project activities will not be
7.50                                                       supporting activities with
                                                           potential impact on international
                                                           water ways
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No             The project is not located in a
                                                           disputed area


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated as Category C. The activities envisioned under Component 1 (Life and
Business Skills Support for Targeted Adolescent Girls) and component 2 (Livelihood
Recovery Support for Targeted Adolescent Girls) do not envisage any significant or
irreversible environmental and social impacts.


                                            4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Long term impacts of this project are expected to be positive. The life and business skills
component will primarily focus on increasing girls' participation in the labor market by
improving their readiness to restart or expand their businesses. The Livelihood Recovery
support component will provide support to enable beneficiaries revive their livelihoods through
the provision of cash grants. Sustainability of the project will be enhanced through
harmonization and coordination with existing country programs and systems under the
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection (MGCSP) including the SCT-REPLI and
EP AG projects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The project presents minimal environmental     and social impacts and as such no alternatives
were considered.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Although no adverse environmental and social impacts are anticipated, the project will develop
a menu of business opportunities to be financed by component 2 in the POM. The subproject
technical manual will also include technical design, work productivity norms, and social and
environmental mitigation measures that any potential negative impacts are addressed.

The ministry for Gender, Children and Social Protection will bear the overall responsibility of
ensuring the effective implementation of this project through the GERLS PM team. MGCSP
has the capacity and draws experience from implementing the WB funded safety cash transfers
programs in Liberia.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders will be the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection
(MGCSP), NGOs or a consortium of organizations who will provide training and other
activities under Components 1 and 2, local community leaders and mentors and the direct
beneficiaries (vulnerable adolescent girls) in the selected counties.

The project will develop communications strategies for engagement with stakeholders with the
aim to improve transparency and accountability, and strengthen social cohesion between the
project participants and their communities. The project will partner with existing social
protection and EVD-targeted programs that have ongoing public communications campaigns to
ensure efficiency in the use of resources, and consistency of messages and tools. Further details
on the communications strategy and action plan will be detailed in the POM.

A GRM will also be used to enable both beneficiaries and citizens to lodge complaints and
grievances regarding any aspect of the subproject cycle and to provide feedback. The existing


                                               5
Safety Nets Management Information Systems (MIS) will be used for collecting and
addressing grievances at the town/community, district, county, and national levels and will be
detailed in the POM as well.

No safeguards policies are triggered and as such no instruments are required for disclosure.
However this ISDS after approval will be disclosed together with the PAD.



B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [ ]   No [ ]     NA [x]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ]     No [ ]    NA [x]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NA [x]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NA [x]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NA [x]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NA [x]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?




                                               6
III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader( s):       Name: Suleiman Namara
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                                        J
                                                    Date: l{ 2S)   2-0 /   6
Practice Manager/Manager:




                                          7
