Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC351 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 04, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID: P083499 
Project Name: TRANSPORT SECTOR 
REFORM 
Task Team Leader: Olivier Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 15 
Estimated Board Date: June, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Stan Peabody, Miroslav Ruzica 
Other financing amounts by source ($m.): 
Borrower: 8 
Other: 7  
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
Improve the financial viability, productivity, and effectiveness of railway operations. This will be 
achieved through separation of infrastructure from operations, increasing accountability and 
competitiveness in rail operations, restructuring and rationalization of passenger services, labor 
rationalization, as well as corporatization and privatization of non-core activities. 
 
The project will help to progressively transform the consolidated state railways into 
economically viable entities for its different functional areas, and establish regulatory 
competence for multiple operator market.  It should lead to focused management, improved 
motivation, better accountability, and a contractual financing arrangement between the 
Government and the Infrastructure and Operating entities.  Combined with significant labor 
restructuring as well as divestiture or selling of non-core activities, streamlined operational and 
financial performance is expected to show a marked improvement.  The benefits of the 
restructuring to the national economy and to the national budget will be substantial. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
Railways component:
 
(a) Staff retrenchment and social mitigation. 
 
(b) Infrastructure rehabilitation.  
Page  2
 
 
(c) Rehabilitation of operating assets.  
(d) Technical Assistance. 
(e) Staff training and re-training. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will not have any particular physical location with the exception of the rehabilitation 
of the existing rail infrastructure to recover the backlog resulting of deferred periodic 
maintenance. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The Borrower has demonstrated sufficient capacity so far and through implementation of past or 
ongoing projects. The Ministry of Transport would be the implementing agency.  The Ministry 
would borrow staff from MR to improve implementation. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
Infrastructure rehabilitation would consist of replacement of worn rails and rotten 
sleepers as well as modernization of the signalization system or automation of 
equipment as required to operate safely after the reduction of staff.  
[No] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[No] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[No] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[No] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[No] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[No] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[No] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[No] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  3
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
As noted below, the borrower will conduct a limited environmental assessment to clarify what 
we believe is the primary environmental issue; the safe handling of old creosote-treated railway 
sleepers. It was clarified that MR procedure for discarding old sleepers is to sell then to 
individuals or firms who normally reuse them for fencing their properties
1
. MR stated that buyers 
are informed of the nature of the impregnation. MR also clarified that sleepers impregnated with 
creosote are no longer manufactured for about 5 years. Since then sleepers are impregnated with 
a environmentally friendly oil. While selling the used creosote-impregnated wooden sleepers, 
MR will provide to the buyers a written statement with regard to the dangers of burning them 
and of the creosote lining and will confirm compliance to the Bank. This information will be 
included in the focused management plan; also noted below. 
 
A particular attention will be paid to the social impact of the project to ensure a fair treatment of 
lay-offs. Even when there is an agreement to reduce staff, there is a marked reluctance to do so. 
Risk mitigation measures would include close cooperation between the Government, SOEs 
management and the trade unions, early definition of an appropriate safety net, expeditious 
payment of the severance benefits and assistance to the retrenched staff to get reemployed or 
self-employed. Experience from other countries (like Poland and Croatia) will be brought in. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Consultation meeting will be organized to discuss the draft EA with the stakeholders (the 
minutes of the meeting should be attached to the EA) and the EA will be disclosed in the country 
(in local language) and at the Bank's Infoshop (in English) prior to Appraisal. 
 
 
                                                
 
1
 There is an EU Directive of 2001/90 (October 27, 2001) which deals with creosote as a chemical, applicable as of 
June 30, 2003. Second-hand sleepers treated with creosote (manufactured before the issuance of the directive) can 
be sold on the second hand market, but must not be used inside buildings, or for toys, playgrounds, picnic tables and 
specified other uses. 
Page  4
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Environmental rating in accordance with OP4.01 for the project should be "B"
.  The reason is 
that as the project is going to finance replacement of wooden sleepers, which do pose some 
environmental and health risks, and therefore it is needed to prepare a limited environmental 
analysis (supporting the claim that the only appreciable risk is the handling of sleepers) and an 
EMP of limited focus specifically to describe how the sleepers will be handled safely.  As being 
the only environmental issue, that task must be regarded as quite limited, but still the EA and the 
EMP must be prepared. The report would be disclosed as per category B projects. 
 
 
Social safeguards comments.  The infrastructure rehabilitation under the railways component 
will consist of renovation of existing tracks and modernization of signals, and there is no 
infrastructure rehabilitation associated with the road component. As described in the PCN, the 
project would not require any land acquisition, and both the ISDS and the PAD should state this 
explicitly. Given that there will be no land acquisition associated with the rehabilitation, neither 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement nor OP 4.11 on Cultural Property will be triggered. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
A mini QER was held on October 20, 2003. Comments were reflected in the PCN. 
 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Olivier Le Ber 
12/16/2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/17/2003 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Motoo Konishi 
12/18/2003 
Comments 
 
 
