Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/19/2005 
Report No.:  AC1513
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Macedonia, former Yugoslav 
Republic of 
Project ID:  P083499 
Project Name:  RAILWAYS REFORM 
Task Team Leader:  Olivier P. Le Ber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Railways (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
19.74 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.84
0.84 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project development objective is to improve the financial viability, productivity, and 
effectiveness of railway operations. This would be achieved through labor rationalization, 
separation of infrastructure from operations, increasing accountability for performance of 
the separated entities, introducing competition in rail operations, and restructuring and 
rationalization of passenger services.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Technical Assistance for restructuring, regulation, preparatory steps for 
private sector involvement, and implementation capacity building and support (Eur1.30 
million):  This component will provide for technical assistance, consultancy services, and 
transaction advisory services as needed to complete the first phase of  restructuring and 
preparing for privatization of MR and establishing a regulatory framework, and 
supporting implementation. The component makes provision for four consultancies 
studies: (i) staffing and cost reduction study, (ii) a transport company privatization study, 
(iii) a PSO study and, (iv) a track access charge study. The component will also comprise 
the following equipment and TA to support implementation of the project: office 
computers, software, office equipment and furniture, training and seminars, financial 
Page  2
management TA to MR, procurement TA to MR, and project financial audits. Provided 
that the successors of MR are established, this component will be implemented by  the 2 
new companies.  
 
Component 2:  Social mitigation (Eur0.65 million): The component will provide a 
variety of employment services to the retrenched staff, such as: (a) social, psychological, 
and financial counseling to the willing staff; (b) one-to-one consultation with the 
retrenched staff to determine the most appropriate training needs for the staff; and (c) 
facilitating actual staff training by providing a voucher to every inquiring retrenched staff 
to be used for training of his/her choice in selected institutions to be identified. The 
component will also support the Skopje Labor Bureau (SLB) which will provide most of 
the above services through (d) furniture and equipment.  
 
Component 3:  Increasing Operating Capacity (Eur7.90 million) of MR-Transport: The 
component would comprise: remanufacturing and retrofitting of two electric locomotives, 
remanufacturing and retrofitting of 2 numbers 4 unit EMU, procurement of two shunting 
locomotives, retrofitting of 60 wagons to handle new steel traffic, and procurement of 20 
new flat bed wagons.  
 
Component 4:  Mechanization of track maintenance and Infrastructure modernization 
(Eur5.25 million) for MR-Infrastructure:  The component would comprise: supply and 
installation of CTC system, track mechanized maintenance equipment, i. e.,  sleeper 
replacement, reballasting, and tamping machines, Heavy rail vehicles., other equipment, 
i.e., loader trucks and track machine for catenary service, building inventory of rails, 
sleepers, and switching parts, and capacity allocation and information system for 
infrastructure.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Environmental issues are minor, associated with Component 4, and occurring along 
needy segments of the Macedonian rail lines existing right-of-way (ROW).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
Mr Miroslav Ruzica (PA9SS) 
Ms Jolanta Hess (ECSIE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Pesticides were previously used for vegetative clearing and this was expensive and 
polluted waterways and agricultural land. In the project only manual or physical methods 
(steam) will be used for clearing. Disposal or reuse of old sleepers impregnated with 
creosote will be in strict accordance with Western procedures. All new sleepers will meet 
EU specifications.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Measures are indicated above under Section A.1. Borrower capacity to implement these 
measures were reviewed and are considered adequate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP or Study on Protection of the Environment) 
was presented to the Ministry of Environment, and 38 Environmental NGOs on April 15, 
2004.  Several NGOs were invited to a public consultation on June 9, 2004. 
Recommendations were incorporated into the EMP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/23/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Olivier P. Le Ber 
03/15/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
03/15/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:  Delegated 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/15/2005 
Comments:   
