Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC429 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 24, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P080935 
Project Name: MALI- GROWTH 
SUPPORT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Francois Nankobogo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry/trade sector (50%) 
Telecommunications (20%), Mining 
(20%), Micro-&SME finance (10%). 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S); Small and medium 
enterprise support (S); Other financial and 
private sector development (S). 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Amadou Konaré 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 55 
Other financing amounts by source: TBD 
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The overall project objective is to assist Mali accelerate growth, as reflected by increased value-
added, employment creation and income generation, by supporting the most promising areas of 
the economy towards enhanced performance and sustainable development. The project will 
particularly seek to : (i) improve the performance of the micro, small and medium enterprise 
sector through better business environment and direct support services; (ii) support targeted 
investment and export promotion activities; (iii) enhance the socio-economic impact of the 
mining sector; (iii) increase access to, and efficiency (price and quality) of telecommunications 
and postal services; and (iv) increase economic opportunities in tourism and handicrafts. 
Indicators of performance will be developed during project preparation. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project consists of four components described below. 
Component 1: Business environment and direct services to enterprises
.
This component will: 
Page  2
i) provide support to improve the investment climate by: (a) streamlining the registration process 
in terms of cost and time involved in business start up operations; (b) developing procedures to 
streamline the corporate taxation process; and (c) improving commercial dispute resolution and 
arbitration mechanisms. ii) improve Business Development Services by: (a) developing a 
mechanism to strengthen the capacity of service providers to serve MSME clients and address 
market needs more appropriately, including a establishment of a Consultant Accreditation 
Program of local consultants, business associations, and financial institutions; and (b) setting up 
an electronic information system  (SME Toolkit) that will provide information on BDS services, 
access to finance, the investment climate, fiscal issues pertaining to MSMEs, tools on best 
practices in business, as well as other issues that concern small businesses. 
iii) improve access to finance for MSMEs through: (a) the development of a program to provide 
technical assistance to banks that  have potential to lend or increase lending to MSMEs; and (b) 
training of bank staff on topics related to SME finance and risk management, and complemented 
by a mentoring program. 
 
Component 2: Investment and export promotion.
This component will support activities related to increasing direct investment in Mali, both local 
and foreign, as well as exports. Specific activities will support:(i) the development of sites and 
services for industry development by supporting the establishment of a well-functioning 
industrial zone as well as an operational oversight agency; (ii) improvement of airport cargo 
facilities; (iii) targeted investment promotion; and (iv) simplification of customs and immigration 
procedures; and (iv) strengthening key institutions involved in investment promotion and trade 
facilitation.  
 
Component 3: Sector reforms in support of private sector development
3.1. Mining sector
:
This component will seek to: 
i) 
improve artisanal mining production, through: (a) establishment of demonstration centers 
to better integrate artisanal mining into rural development; (b) improvement of 
environmental, sanitary and health conditions at artisanal mining sites; (d) improvement 
of monitoring capacity for commercialization and marketing networks for gold; and (e) 
putting into place special fiscal measures to stimulate development of small scale mines; 
ii) 
improve environmental management and monitoring of mining sites, through: (a) 
reinforcement of environmental legislation and regulations; and (b) setting up institutions 
and systems to manage environmental issues; 
iii) 
improve management of social, economic and financial impact of mining, through: (a) 
assistance to mining companies and the government to maximize the beneficial
 
impact at 
the local level
.
(b) putting in place participatory procedures for local management of the 
benefits from mining, and strengthening their management capacity (e.g., training 
modules), including consultations about eventual closure of mine operations; (c
)
addressing mining taxation issues; and (d) putting in place an information system to 
collect statistical information on the sector; 
iv) 
improve the collection, use and distribution of geo-scientific information, through: (a) 
updating relevant aspects of the geological database; (b) upgrading logistical and human 
Page  3
capacities at the various technical services; (c) and promoting a better understanding and 
knowledge of Mali’s geo-science data with potential investors. 
 
3.2. Telecommunications and postal services
This component will: 
i) support the development of ICT and make the sector more conducive to investment in 
infrastructure and delivery of services by: (a) improving the regulatory framework; (b) 
strengthening the capacity of the Telecommunications Regulatory Commission to optimize its 
ability to provide incentives to market players; and (c) strengthening the capacity of the Ministry 
of Communications and New Technologies in governance issues; 
ii) support improved access to rural telecommunications services by: (a) developing a rural 
telecommunications strategy; and (b) financing the implementation of the first phase of that 
strategy; and, 
iii) support reform of the postal sector by: (a) developing a postal sector policy and defining the 
role of the postal sector within the emerging ICT environment; (b) establishing the postal 
regulatory framework; (c) supporting the realignment of the postal operator with the new sector 
policy; and (d) defining the potential for utilizing the postal sector as a vehicle for extended 
distribution of financial services to rural and other areas underserved by the current financial 
network.  
 
3.3.  Tourism and Crafts
This component will assist Mali provide support for:  
i) the development of the tourism sector though: (a) support to the formulation of sector policies 
and development plans; (b) help enhance the legal and regulatory framework for the sector so as 
to reduce transaction costs and improve the investment climate; (c) build capacity of players in 
the industry, particularly sector support institutions, tourist guides, etc; and (d) support the 
improvement of essential infrastructure networks. 
ii) the enhancement of the potential of the craft sector through: (a) the improvement  and 
effectiveness of policies and support institutions, (b) the enhancement of skills and improvement 
of design and production methods; and (c) the development of market linkages (building 
commercial relationships between businesses and markets) in the sector. 
 
Component 4
.
Project management, coordination. and monitoring.
The project will assist the government in project management and coordination. Overall 
coordination will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Investment Promotion and Private 
Sector Development. At the moment, the Investment Promotion Center (CNPI) has been asked to 
handle the day-to-day project management, particularly procurement and financial management, 
in coordination with focal persons in relevant technical ministries (mining, telecommunications, 
tourism and handicrafts) and the private sector. Implementation of some activities pertaining to 
private sector support are expected to be contracted out. 
 
D.  Project location 
 
Project will be coordinated in Bamako and will have nationwide coverage. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  4
Mali’s overall institutional capacity for safeguard policies is still weak. However, most of the 
line ministries (e.g. Communication and new information technologies, Energy and Mining) 
have some expertise that will help address issues pertaining to safeguard policies that may arise. 
Assistance will be provided to Mali in this area as needed. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
A
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared by the borrower, 
reviewed by ASPEN, approved and disclosed in country and at the Bank Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.
 
[
]
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
)
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared by the borrower, reviewed by ASPEN, 
approved and disclosed in country and at the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests (
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared : December 22, 2004 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.   
 
The EA will be reviewed and approved by ASPEN for disclosure, and will be consulted 
and disclosed prior to appraisal. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Francois Nankobogo 
Date: 11/29/ 
2004 
Approved by: 
 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name: Thomas Walton 
Date: 
11/29/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name: Demba Ba 
Date: 
11/29/2004 
Comments 
1
Re
minder: The Bank’s Disclosure policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal 
(i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible 
to potentially affected persons.   
Page  6
