                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                               Report No.: AC7147

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:       3/7/2016

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Republic of Mali                     Project ID: P148355
 Project Name: Renewable Energy Guarantees Project
 Task Team Leaders: ManuelBerlengieroand PatriceCaporossi
 Estimated Appraisal Date: May-June 2016 Estimated Board Date: Nov. 30,2016
 Managing Unit: GEEDR                          Lending Instrument: PRG
 Sector: Energy and Mining:Hydropower (50%) and Other Renewable Energy (50%)
 Theme: Financialand private sector development/ Infrastructureservicesfor private sectordev.
 IBRD Amount (US$m):
 IDA Amount (US$m):
 GEF Amount (US$m):
 PCF Amount (US$m):
 Other financing amounts by source:
 Private Investors: US$30m
 IDA Guarantees: US$8m
 Environmental Category: B
 Simplified Processing                Simple [ ]                 Repeater [ ]
 Is this a transferred project         Yes []                    No [X]

B. Project Objectives

 The project development objective of the series is to increase the supply of renewable energy by
 Independent Power Producers (lPP).

C. Project Description

 The proposed operation consists of a series of IDA payment guarantees to mitigate the risks of
 the low creditworthiness of EDM as a sole power off-taker, as well as selected obligations of
 GoM under the concession contract, in order to enable renewable IPP investments in the sector.
 The first guarantee of the series will support the development of the Segou Solar project.
 Segou solar project has been developed with the support IFC InfraVentures since January 2011.
 It is the most advanced solar IPP of a number of solar projects pursued by GoM. Both concession
 and PPA contracts have been signed on July 9, 2015. This pioneering on-grid large scale solar
 photovoltaic IPP project will pave the way for subsequent solar IPP developments in Mali and
 throughout the sub-region.
  The Project consists in the construction and the financing of a greenfield 33MW polycrystalline
  PV plant, made of approximately 130.000 PV modules installed on a fixed structure, located in
  Segou, the fifth largest city in Mali, 236 km North-East from Bamako. The plant will generate
  57 GWh on yearly basis. It will be connected to a 33 kV line on the national grid through an
  existing substation and a 2.5 km transmission line to be constructed by the project. The plant
  will be built, operated and maintained by Segou Solar IV, the project's concessionaire. This IV
. is composed by Scatec Solar AS, IFC Infraventures and a local partner. The main shareholder
  will be Scatec Solar AS, a company experienced in developing constructing and operating solar
  plants in Africa. This company will also be EPC and O&M contractor under specific agreements
  with the project's concessionaire.
 The total project cost is estimated at about EUR 50 million, of which EUR 40 million for the
 EPC works and EUR 4 million for development costs. Equity will finance 25% of the overall
 costs. Concessional and commercial debts will cover the rest. Construction is expected to start
 by mid-20 16 and the project is expected to start commercial operation 10 months later.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):
The project proposes to develop a PV plant in a greenfield area near Segou, a large town North-
East of the capital Bamako. In addition to the construction of the plant, an existing substation will
be used to connect the plant to the grid and a short transmission line, 2.5 km, will be constructed.
These activities will cause adverse environmental and social impacts, and since the locations are
already known, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) are being prepared to address the negative impacts through mitigation
measures.

Environmental and Social Risks.
The project meets the criteria for application of World Bank Performance Standards in OP 4.03.
Because the impacts are limited and site-specific, largely reversible and can be mitigated, the
project category is proposed to be B. Given that the construction requires some land acquisition
and will potentially cause some resettlement and/or losses of assets or access to assets or sources
of livelihoods; these risks will need to be mitigated through measures defined in a RAP. PS 5
on Land Acquisition and Resettlement is triggered to cover these risks.
Resilience to Climate Change.
 Issues with regard to Climate Change are the increased possibility of violent wind or rains
 storms causing damage to the PV system. The design of the plant (technical specifications)
 needs to take the occurrence of violent storms into account.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

Scatec Solar AS has a strong track record of solar power plant development, construction and
operation as well as with solar IPP in Africa. It is thus well equipped from technical, contractual
and financial standpoints to undertake the project. During project due diligence, the team will work
closely with IFC colleagues and build on the due diligence already carried out during the sponsor
selection process.
F. Environmental   and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

 Robert Robelus, Consultant - Environmental Specialist
 Cheikh Sagna, - Senior Social Scientist

II. PERFORMANCE       STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY TO SEGOU SOLAR
PROJECT

   Performance Standards (please explain why)            Yes          No       TBD
  PS 1: Assessment and Management of
                                                          X
  Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  The project has been categorized as Category B and meets the criteria in OP 4.03 for
  application of the World Bank Performance Standards.
  PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                      X

  PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention              X

  PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                    X



  PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary                            X
  Resettlement
  Some land acquisition and subsequent resettlement or losses of assets/access to livelihoods
  will take place due to the construction of the plant and transmission line; therefore the PS 5
  is triggered for this project to address such negative social impacts. A Resettlement Action
  Plan (RAP) is being prepared to address any adverse social impacts and will be consulted
  upon, approved and disclosed publicly.
  PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable
                                                                                X
  Management of Living Natural Resources
  The site also does not contain any species in danger of extinction, but does contain species
  protected under Malian law and one reptile species, the freshwater turtle Cyclanorbis
  senegalensis, which is near threathened (NT) according to the IUCN Redbook. An important
  forestry resource on the site are the Karite trees producing Shea Butter, which is a valuable
  economic resource for local women.
  The impacts on the physical and biological environment during the pre-construction,
  construction and operational phases are minimal. The main impact on the human environment
  is the loss of income through the loss of land and economic trees. Replacement land, which
  need to be of the same or better quality as the lost land, can only be found a distance away
  (14.4 to 17.6krn), which is inconvenient, but this is the nearest replacement land available.
  PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                      X
  No groups that meet the definition in PS7 have been identified in the project area.
  PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                           X
  The ESIA needs to verify if there is cultural heritage, such as shrines or archaeological
  remains, in the project area.
  OP 7.50: Projects on International Waterways                                  X
                                                                                           Yes            No             TBD




III. SAFEGUARDS               PREPARATION              PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: June 2016.

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: NA

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing! should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: May 2016

IV. APPROV ALS

    Si ned and submitted b :
    Task Team Leaders:                            Name: Manuel Berlengiero and Patricef
                                                  Ca orossi                             ,0..

                                                  Name: Hanneke Van Tilbur
                                                                                   '-<Iz
      Comments:
    Sector Mana er:                               Name: Meike van Ginneken
      Comments:




I   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
