Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC176 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 3, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P081704 
Project Name: Agricultural 
Competitiveness and Diversification 
Task Team Leader: Patrick Labaste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 35 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (100%) 
Theme: Export development and 
competitiveness (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:   Amadou Konare  
Other financing amounts by source:  Borrower  
($m.) 2 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The Project has two development objectives : 
 
- To  increase the revenues derived from cotton for the Malian economy and for cotton-growing 
farmers in particular, by restoring and improving the performances of the cotton sector through 
the transition to a more open and competitive organization of the sector, and greater involvement 
of producers organizations and private sector in the management of the sector, and 
 
- To increase and diversify rural households incomes and economic opportunities through the 
development of supply chains for selected high-value agricultural and livestock products.  
 
The project proposes to achieve these objectives by (i) supporting institutional reforms and 
capacity-building activities to facilitating the transition to a more open, competitive and 
sustainable cotton sector; (ii) disseminating information on market opportunities and providing 
Page  2
 
 
training to producers and professional organizations; (iii) developing and disseminating low-cost 
agricultural technologies and agro-processing techniques for high-value products;  (iv)  putting in 
place an efficient information system for cotton and selected high value products; (v) building 
rural infrastructure to facilitate and support marketing of agricultural and livestock products; and 
(vi) developing detailed strategies for the further development of selected high-value agricultural 
and livestock products in Mali. 
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The project consists of the following components: 
Component 1: Cotton sector reform program 
The cotton sector in Mali has long been under the control of CMDT, a state-owned company 
which operates under a monopoly system and thus for many years the private sector was 
excluded from activities ranging from marketing and ginning of seed cotton, the export of lint 
and cotton seed, the importation and distribution of inputs, to the provision of services to cotton 
producer such as extension, credit, and transport.  This state-controlled system has been affected 
by inefficiencies such as lack of transparency and other critical weaknesses which must be 
addressed.  The monopoly system has created vast opportunity for rent-seeking and 
mismanagement, generally at the disadvantage of farmers.  The inefficiencies have also led to 
recurrent crises and bailouts of the industry by public funds.  The Government, since 2002, has 
undertaken steps to privatize three CMDT ginning plants. 
The proposed project will support the privatization and liberalization of the cotton sector, and 
facilitate the transition to a more competitive model by providing assistance to private-sector 
operators and their institutions in order to fill the void that may be left by the privatization of 
CMDT and HUICOMA.  The privatization also means that the private sector, including 
producers organizations, has to take over technical support services that the companies used to 
provide as part of monopoly system, including the provision of inputs and credit.  The project 
would therefore focus on (i) providing technical and financial assistance to the privatized 
institutions to enable them to successfully carry out the transition process towards a more 
competitive sector, (ii) supporting accompanying measures, (iii) building the institutional and 
technical capacity of cotton producer organizations, and (iv) setting up a cotton information 
management system and a modelization of the cotton sector data. 
Component 2: Support to the development of high value agricultural supply chains 
There is a wide range of agricultural products with high value for which Mali has a comparative 
advantage and that are potential sources of export revenues and growth for the rural economy.  
Some of these product lines have already been extensively analyzed and tested and have proven 
to be highly profitable, i.e.mangoes, french beans, Tiger nuts, sesame, potatoes and shallot/onion. 
Other products with high margin are currently being studied and tested like gombo, arabic gum 
and shea nut.  Because of their added value, employment and income generation, these high-
margin value products present a financial and economic development potential for the rural 
population, thus reducing the widespread rural poverty. 
 
Page  3
 
 
The proposed project would support diversification by promoting selected high-value products 
that have proven profitable to assist the country diversify its export base. Although high margin 
products are currently produced, the production level is considerably low compare to that of 
neighboring countries such as Burkina Faso. The low level of productivity is explained by a 
number of constraints including the high transport costs, low-quality of products, insufficient 
professionalism, use of rudimentary production techniques, lack of rural infrastructure such as 
storage, processing plants, and the lack of market information. The project would therefore 
support (i) institutional and technical capacity building for producer organizations involved in 
selected products, (ii) building public/collective infrastructure such as collection centers, storage 
and processing facilities, and rural-access roads to support horticulture production and 
processing, (iii) development of detailed intervention strategies for selected products, (iv) 
facilitation of producers’ access to financial services, (v) establishment of a market information 
system for producers, (vi) setting up of efficient producers advisory services, and (vii) assisting 
in removing key obstacles to supply chain development. 
 
Component 3: Dissemination of intensification technologies for high value agricultural 
products 
The project would support the dissemination of low-cost and simple techniques and technologies 
to improve the production, processing and marketing of selected high value products.  Existing 
techniques for different crops will be modified and tested to better respond to the needs of 
international markets. 
 
(i) Small-scale irrigation techniques and methods. The project would support the further testing 
and dissemination of low-cost adapted irrigation equipment in the areas of : groundwater 
utilization (manual and motorized drilling, improved traditional wells, filters); groundwater 
recharging (submersible weirs, “
seuils
”, in streams); water extraction (manual-, wind-, solar-, 
animal-, biogas-, diesel-, petrol-powered and other pumps); water transport (channels, pipes, 
hoses, etc.); distribution (surface, drip, sprinkler irrigation).It would support the establishment 
and development of private supply chains for the provision of equipment and inputs. 
 
(ii) Intensification of cropping techniques and methods for high value products. This concerns 
improving productivity in terms of planting material, soil and labor, for the following products: 
(a) mangoes: varieties, grafting, integrated pest management, flowering induction, harvesting, 
transport, etc.; (b) french beans: irrigation techniques, environmentally sound pest management, 
harvesting; (c) tiger nuts: cultivation on ridges, irrigation and harvesting; (d) potatoes: cropping 
techniques fine-tuning, mechanization, fertilization, irrigation, integrated pest management; (e) 
sesame: improved varieties, intensification, harvesting. seeds, biopesticides, crop management, 
development of agro-technical referentials, support to emergence and development of private 
service providers (inputs, advisory services). 
 
(iii) On-farm storage, transformation, packaging techniques and methods. The project will seek 
at improving the storage of perishable products (potatoes, onions, french beans, mangoes, etc.) 
and disseminating of techniques such as hygienic drying (solar, gas-powered), steaming, curing 
and disinfecting techniques for a range of products; juice, jelly, jam, peanut and/or shea butter, 
oil extraction, husking techniques; packaging for sale and transport, etc. 
 
Page  4
 
 
(iv) Demonstration and product information. The existing agro-business centers should be further 
expanded, to have on permanent display not only a range of ready for sale locally produced 
agricultural products, but also to have facilities to demonstrate and make available technologies 
and methods tested and adapted by the project. For simple technologies, local craftsman will be 
trained, who will sell the products to local producers and transformers. For more complex 
equipment and technology, it will be necessary to work through larger enterprises or groups of 
producers, transformers or traders. Training and information activities will promote the 
dissemination of proven technology. 
 
Component 4: Project Management
  
 
This component provides for support to the project implementation unit(s). This does not 
constitute a component per se but the overall management of project activities including project 
coordination, sub-contracting, financial management, procurement and project monitoring and 
evaluation. The two concerned entities will be the MRSC (Cotton Sector Restructuring 
Authority), which reports to the Prime Minister Office, and the PMU in the Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries Ministry (MAEP). Further discussions will determine which ministry 
will have the overall responsibility for project implementation. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Project activities would be undertaken in five regions (Kayes, Koulikoro, Mopti, Segou and 
Sikasso), where cotton and high-value diversification crops are cultivated. The exact location of 
the production sites and marketing infrastructure to be constructed is not known at this time. 
Detailed information on environmental characteristics will be obtained during preparation. 
However, the project will exclude any protected areas. 
 
Although there are culturally sensitive areas in Mali such as ancient burial sites and sacred 
groves, the proposed activities of the project will not impact on cultural property.  Where there is 
a possibility that project activities will encroach on these areas, project activities will be diverted 
to ensure that these culturally and socially sensitive areas are avoided. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
In 1999 with the adoption of the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP), the GoM 
strengthened its policy for the environment with 7 strategic axes, 4 of which were to strengthen 
national capacity, restore degraded areas, organize a permanent system of control and monitor 
the environment.  However, implementation of the strategy has to date been ad hoc and partial.  
Soil degradation is the number one environmental issue in Mali: to improve its focus on this 
issue, the GoM is currently preparing the National Soil Fertility Management Plan and has 
requested Bank support through various operations including the PASAOP and the proposed 
Rural Community Based Development Project.  As water management is key to rural 
development, the National Irrigation Strategy, elaborated under the National Infrastructure 
Program (PNIR), concentrates on both large irrigation schemes as well as pilot actions and 
operations for small irrigation.  Biodiversity also requires significant attention although capacity 
Page  5
 
 
for biodiversity management is still extremely weak.  The Government is trying to address this 
through a Bank-supported pilot geared to exploring community-based conservation in an arid 
area while addressing structural issues at the national level. 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[Yes ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[Yes ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[No] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[Yes] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[No] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[No] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[TBD] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
An Environmental Impact Assessment will be carried out during project preparation to ensure 
compliance with safeguard policies that are applicable. A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment 
is already planned for the cotton sector reform program component and should be carried out 
during the second half of FY2004. In addition, an integrated pest management plan will be 
prepared and included as an integral part of the Project Operation Manual.  It will specify a clear 
and systematic process for the effective assessment of any potential environmental or social 
impacts that result from project-funded activities.  It would also establish sound environmental 
and social review and screening, monitoring, evaluating and supervision mechanisms to prevent 
certain types of productive or infrastructure micro-projects from producing irreversible negative 
environmental effects.   
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultations through newspapers, radios, libraries and periodic stakeholders meetings will be 
organized.  The agreed upon safeguard documents will be disclosed in country and at the 
InfoShop prior to Appraisal
.
 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
February 2004
 
 
 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Patrick Labaste  
Date 12/03/2003 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
John Boyle  
 
Date: 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
Yvette Djachechi 
Date: 
Project Safeguards Specialist 3: 
 
 
Date: 
Page  7
 
 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Omar S. Fye  
 
Date 12/08/2003 
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Mary Barton-Dock 
Date 12/05/2003 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
