INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC711
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 6, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Mauritania                      Project ID: P082888
Project Name: Public Sector Capacity      Task Team Leader: Christian Diou
Building Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15,    Estimated Board Date: February 8, 2005
2004
Managing Unit: AFTU2                      Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
Loan
Sector: General public administration    Theme: Administrative and civil service
sector (100%)                            reform (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Isabelle Paris
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IDA: 17
Other financing amounts by source:                                     ($m)
B. Project Objectives
The project's objectives are: (i) to build institutional capacity and governance within the public
administration and develop genuine stakeholder participation (private sector, NGOs and civil society) to
implement the PRSP in a more effective manner; (ii) to help the Government implement the public
finance reform program, and press ahead with private sector-related institutional reforms, maximizing the
synergies with existing external assistance programs in these areas (IMF, EU, France and Germany); and
(iii) reinforce environmental management, as one of the three pillars for sustainability.
As part of its objectives, the project aims to improve the Government structure and management, as well
as govemment employment practices and systems at a decentralized level. In particular, the project
targets the strengthening of capacity in budget formulation and execution at national and local level so as
to improve the overall delivery of services and a better focus on the PRSP.
C. Project Description
The Project will have three components:
Component 1. Support to public resource managemne7t (est. US$10.0 million)
This component would provide funding for the relevant Directions and Ministries for civil works,
equipment, training and technical assistance in support to:



(a)    Modernization of Public Administration through the strengthening of public administration
human resource management (i.e. payroll, recruitment, career development, training, pay and
grading);
(b)    Improvement of Public Resource and Expenditure Management through: (i) the overall
strengthening of capacity for budget planning, execution and reporting, as per the
recommendations of the CFAA, ROSC and HIPC Expenditure Tracking studies; (ii) the
establishment of a monitoring and evaluation mechanism to assess the effects of poverty-oriented
expenditures with a view to maximizing their impact; and (iii) the enhancement of the role of
Parliament in the budgetary process; and
(c)    Improvement of Private Sector Environment through the promotion of regulatory practices and
capacities to enhance competition and good governance, drawing on recent analytical work done
in these areas (Regulatory Reform Study, FIAS, Integrated Framework).
Component 2: Support to mainstreaming environment (est. US$3.5 million)
Looming perspectives of oil and mining industry, development of unrestrained tourism in fragile
ecosystems, over-exploitation of fossils aquifers and impact of rapid urbanization on land make the
Mauritanian Government fully aware that environmental issues can significantly impede sustainable
development and prevent the country from achieving the MDGs and NEPAD's main objectives.
The National Environment Action Plan (NEAP), currently reaching completion, advocates the creation of
an independent body that will be able to address issues crosscutting several ministries like a National
Environmental Agency, a High Commission for the Environment or another type of institutional structure
whose design will be decided during the validation of the NEAP. IDA-financed projects such as the
Integrated Development Program for Irrigated Agriculture (PEDIAIM), the Mining Sector Capacity
Building Project (PRISM) and the Urban Development Program (PDU), or GEF-financed activities, all
point out the difficulties in improving environmental management of their respective sector due to the
lack of a national authority dealing with all environmental laws and regulations. Official endorsement of
the strategy will be ascertained at early stage of preparation.
This component would support mainstreaming the environment into development in Mauritania, as
recommended in the Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Environment Strategy endorsed by the Board in 2001.
It would provide funding to: (i) the establishment of an independent and central environmental body as
recommended in the NEAP; (ii) preparation of a strong policy and legal framework; and (iii) capacity
building programs for the new entity and selected ministries (including Environment and Rural
Development, Interior and Telecommunications, Fishing and Maritime Economy, Mining and Industry,
Infrastructure and Transport, Water and Energy).  This would enable effective coordination of
environmental planning and management in Mauritania, help integrate environmental concerns in the
social and economic development process; and better define the roles of public and private sector. It
would finance civil works, equipment, training and technical assistance.
Component 3: Support to the decentralization program (est. US$6.5 million)
Important efforts have been made by the Government since1986 to establish a decentralization framework
and improve the fiscal transfer from central to local level. A National Strategy of Decentralization and
Local Governance was launched in 2002. New rules for increased transfers trough the Regional
Development Fund (FRD) were defined in 2003. However, greater autonomy should be granted to
municipalities for budget execution and further empowerment. To reach the full range of benefits
expected by the decentralization process, these efforts should be boosted and coordinated by a



restructured institution with adequate financial and human resources and higher administrative status and
improved capacity at the local levels. This component would support the efforts of the Government in: (i)
strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Interior, and in particular the Directorate for Local
Authorities (DCL) to play an effective role in coordinating and sustaining important efforts engaged in
termns of communal development; and (ii) reinforcing the administrative capacity of provincial and local
governments, especially vis-a-vis the implementation of the PRSP. It would benefit from the existing
pilot operations developed through ongoing donor-financed projects, both in rural and urban areas
(mainly IDA, France and Germany). A Capacity Needs Assessment will be undertaken at both central
and local levels to define specific programs (civil works, equipment, training and technical assistance)
that would complement and consolidate existing efforts. A communication and outreach program to the
lowest decentralized level will also be prepared.
The financing of civil works and equipment as mentioned in the above 3 components will be related to the
extension or rehabilitation of administrative buildings and equipment for offices located in Nouakchott
and other capital buildings.
D. Project location (if known)
Capital city of Nouakchott.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Each of the components of the Project would be implemented through the best-suited Governmental
institution in order to make best use of the various programs: Public Sector Management component
through the relevant directorates, under MAED supervision; Environment through the central
environmental body recommended by the NEAP; and Decentralization through the Ministry of Interior
(MIPT). Overall implementation will be managed under a structure to be identified with the Government
to ensure good synchronization with relevant national policies (Good Governance, PRSP, etc.) and
adequate coordination with the active donors (see below).
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
Applicable?  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[xI      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
[ ]      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[1 ]     Pest Management (OP 4.09)
[1 ]     Involuntary Resettlemeiit (QP/BP 4.12)
[ ]      Indi2enous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
[ ]      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)



Cultural Propertv (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[ ]      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ]FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
Due to the nature of civil works related to the extension or rehabilitation of administrative buildings and
equipment for offices located in Nouakchott and other capital buildings, the EA category has been
classified as B. However, this will be reviewed at the time of pre-appraisal when the team will be able to
assess more in-depth the nature of the civil works to be carried out.
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA
category (mandatory):
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
be prepared.
October 2004
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.
Not applicable.
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
The environmental impact assessment framework will be prepared at pre-appraisal (September 2004) and
the final version will be available for disclosure in the country and in Infoshop before appraisal
(November 2004).
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                0                                       c./C&b/01
Task Team Leader:               6 Christia      I /  1                             Date
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: k Se$vefmOofarye                                  Dat
Comments                     '                                              0    1  64
Acting Sector Manager:            Rich4n Verspyck                                  Date
Comments                                                                     O I  C4 I/ (
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



