                        INTEGRATED       SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:   98136
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 6, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: MAURITANIA                              Project ID: P150123
                                                 Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: MAURITANIA - EITI POST -COMPLIANCE II
Task Team Leader: Morten Larsen
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Estimated Board Date: N! A
Managing Unit: GEEDR                          Lending Instrument: N! A
Sector: Other mining and extractive industries
Theme: Other Accountability!Anti-Corruption
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: EITI MDTF grant of$350,000
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                Simple [X]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes []                  No [X]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The purpose of this third EITI MDTF grant is to increase the effectiveness ofEITI
implementation in Mauritania by strengthening the institutional framework and support
Mauritania's compliance with the 2013 EITI Standard. In concrete terms, the proposed grant will
finance parts of the CNITIE work plan with the objective to generate further information on the
economic contribution of the extractive sector to the overall economy, increase trust between
stakeholders by creating space for dialogue and engagement among them, increase knowledge of
the decision-making process in the sector, and improve the communication framework. The
grant has been requested by the MAED (Coordinating Ministry for donor support) in its letter of
April 2014 (received in July) and the proposal is integrated into the overall EITI workplan 2014-
2015 approved by CNITIE.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

The Project includes the following activities:
a. Secretariat Operations
- The grant will fund the salaries of technical staff within the National Secretariat.
- The grant will fund the process of restructuring the office to increase its effectiveness.
- The grant will also fund parts of the operational costs of the National Secretariat.

b. Training
- Training activities on the 2013 EITI Standard for key EITI stakeholders. This includes civil
society, private sector, civil servants and the newly created parliamentarian network on EIT!.
- The EITI secretariat will engage with MSG members to restructure CNITIE as recommended
by the November 2013 EITI Implementation Diagnostic study.

c.Awareness, Outreach and Campaign
- Dissemination campaigns in various parts of the country to increase EITI awareness.
- CNITIE seeks to create El'Tlfocal points across the country so that they may relay the
information and increase knowledge within their regions.

d. Data production, reporting and dissemination
- Data production and capacity building activities will include topical studies and discussions
that will advance EITI implementation in Mauritania: (1) a drafting of the process to introduce
the fisheries sector to the EITI framework funded separately by the West Africa Fisheries
Program for Mauritania, (2) an assessment of private companies' social payment and the
requirements to include them within the EITI reporting, (3) an M&E framework for regular
assessment of public perceptions and the impacts of EIT!.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
The project will not finance any physical works and none of the planned activities are expected
to have adverse environmental or social impacts.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
This has not been assessed as the project does not trigger safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
WB Africa region team: Svetlana Khvostova (Natural Resource Management Specialist).
    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

    Safeguard Policies Trizsered (please explain why)                                     Yes               No             TBD
    Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                   X

Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                                               X

    Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                    X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                   X

Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                                    X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                             X

Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                                       X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                 X

Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                                            X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                     X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                                         X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: this is not applicable

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: the project is a recipient executed small-grant and there is no plan for a QER.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing! should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
   This is not applicable


I   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Si ned and submitted b :
                                         Narne Morten Larsen

                                         Name Hanneke Van Tilb
   Comments:
 Sector Mana er:                         Narne Christopher Sheldon
   Comments:




                 (Template Version November 2007)
