Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC566 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 23, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mexico 
Project ID: P082950 
Project Name: Water Resources Management 
Project II 
Task Team Leader: Douglas C. Olson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 25, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector 
(88%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (12%) 
Theme: Water resource management 
(P);Environmental policies and institutions 
(S);Decentralization (S);Natural disaster 
management (S);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 100 
Other financing amounts by source:  
BORROWER:  
($m) 
80 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
Mexican objectives as iterated in the 2001-2006 National Water Plan are: (a) to achieve integrated and sustainable 
management of water resources in the country’s basins and aquifers with the participation of water users; (b) to 
increase water use efficiencies in irrigated agriculture and in municipal and industrial use; (c) to promote efficient 
financial management in water resources related activities; (d) to reduce the risk and mitigate the effects of floods 
and droughts; and (e) to decentralize operation functions presently realized by central government agencies to states, 
municipalities and users.   
 
Within this context, the Project Development Objectives are: (a) to improve conditions for sustainable integrated 
water resources management and use through integrated planning and actions in selected areas; and (b) to detain the 
accelerated deterioration of water resources in selected areas. 
 
To achieve these objectives, Project activities would be designed recognizing that water resources management is 
both a top-down and a bottom-up undertaking.  Top-down aspects include policies, laws, standards, allocation of 
water between uses and technical assistance.  Bottom-up aspects recognize that effective water resources 
management requires the direct participation of water users and other stakeholders.  Integrated water resources 
management includes: (a) surface water and groundwater in terms of both quantity and quality; (b) the reuse of 
treated effluent; (c) economic valuation of water as a scarce resource in the agriculture, industrial and service 
sectors; (d) protecting and preserving the environment; (e) flood and dro
ught management; and (f) institutional 
integration of the various private and public support programs from different levels (international, national, state, 
municipal, local).   
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Page  2
 
 
The proposed PROMMA II would have three components with a total cost estimated at US$180 Million financed 
with an IBRD loan of US$100 Million and US$80 Million of national counterpart funds. 
 
The first component would support top-down actions in order to consolidate and strengthen 
policies, strategies, plans and actions in an integrated manner at the central level and in priority 
basins in the central and northern part of the country where there is serious overexploitation and 
contamination of water resources.  The principal activities under the component would include: 
(a) consolidate and strengthen programs to improve monitoring and assessment of surface water 
and groundwater in terms of quantity and quality, including the classification of discharges and 
receiving water bodies as set out in the National Water Law; (b) improving flood management 
and control processes and procedures; (c) introduction of new remote sensing technologies to 
estimate actual evapotranspiration (ET) and the utilization of these techniques in water 
resources management; (d) develop and implement a unified water data base; (e) improve water 
resources planning and the evaluation and prioritization of investments; (f) establish regional 
centers to apply and disseminate advanced technologies for water savings and economic 
valorization in irrigated agriculture; (g) improve the norms and related systems for water rights 
administration and water fee collection; (h) design and test tariffing schemes to improve demand 
management of water; and (i) design and test schemes for reducing non-recoverable water 
losses and for water reuse. 
 
The second component would support bottom-up actions on specific projects in subbasins within 
priority basins.  These projects would benefit from the experience, methodology and lessons 
learned in PROMMA and would include: (a) concrete actions related to integrated and 
sustainable management and use of water resources for both surface water and groundwater in 
terms of quantity and quality such as local effective water rights administration and discharge 
control, as well as pricing/measurement and valuation actions, including water rights reductions 
to sustainable levels; (b) actions in water supply and sanitation and modernization of irrigated 
agriculture such as wastewater reuse, cropping pattern adjustments and deficit irrigation; (c) 
intersectoral transfer  of water to improve socioeconomic productivity and environmental 
benefits; and (d) regulation of water rights in aquifers and basins in accordance with the 
National Water Law.  The projects would need to contribute directly and measurably to 
reductions in the overexploitation and/or contamination of water resources and would address: 
(a) preparation, financial design and mechanisms, appraisal, and implementation support of 
water resources management schemes; (b) development and implementation of innovative 
actions aimed at improving the efficiency and economic valuation of water use in irrigated 
agriculture, water supply and sanitation, industrial use, including water reuse; and (c) the 
design and introduction of strategies and instruments that contribute to innovative financing 
mechanisms in the water sector. The amount of funding to implement all of the bottom-up actions 
would be large and would require mobilizing financing from different sources including 
international, national, state, municipal and private.  PROMMA II would include the 
establishment of a fund to stimulate/leverage investments in these bottom-up actions.  The 
process of preparing the projects would be carried out with the direct and constant participation 
of water users and other stakeholders under the leadership of local authorities, who would 
assume the responsibility for their implementation, with the participation and assistance of the 
CNA general subdirectorates, and regional and state management units.  The projects would be 
demonstration in character, with the objective of learning from the experiences and 
dissemination of the acquired knowledge in other parts of the country. 
Page  3
 
 
 
The third component would support institutional development and project management support 
at the central, regional, state and local levels, and specialized training related to project 
implementation  in areas such as integrated water resources management, project management, 
and communication and awareness building.  This component would support programs in 
communication, awareness building and responsibility taking of authorities, water users, and 
society in terms of the value and vulnerability of water resources and approaches for its 
sustainable integrated management and use.   
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The Project would include activities in the central and northern parts of Mexico with water scarcity issues. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Government of Mexico in general and the National Water Commission (Comisión Nacional de Agua – CNA) in 
particular have long experience on Bank financed projects and have strong capacity to comply with safeguard 
policies. 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project would include the implementation of some yet-to-be-determined small civil works.  An 
Environmental Assessment will be prepared during Project preparation that will include the 
development of site and project screening criteria to ensure that these investments do not cause 
undue environmental impact.  The environmental assessment will also
 
address how to ensure that 
environmental sustainability and stakeholder participation are integral parts of planning and 
implementation in the subbasins selected for integrated water resources management actions.
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
The project would include the implementation of some yet-to-be-determined small 
civil works.  During project preparation it will be determined whether it is 
necessary to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan to address works undertaken 
under the project.  
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
During project preparation it will be determined if project activities would affect indigenous 
people, and whether the project needs to include culturally compatible strategies, methodologies, 
and instruments in order to ensure that they have access to the water resources program. 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
December 01, 2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
It is planned that the EA will be initiated in May 2004 and completed in August 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Douglas C. Olson 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Juan David Quintero (LCSEN) 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Abel Mejia (LCSEN) 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
