Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 14, 2004                                Report No.:AC779
A. Basic Project Data
A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: Mexico                              Project ID: P080149
Project: MX-Decentralized Infrastructure Reform a  TTL: Krishna Challa
Total project cost (by component):
Appraisal Date: December 10, 2003             Loan/Credit amount($m):
IBRD: 107.76
Board Date: May 18, 2004
Other financing amounts by source:               ($m.)
Managing Unit: LCSFU                          Sector: Roads and highways (40%);Water supply
(30%);Housing finance and real estate markets
(10%);Housing construction (10%);Sewerage (10%)
Lending Instruments: Sector Investment and
Maintenance Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?  Yes?  [        No?  [X]
Environmental Category: Fl                    Safeguard Classification:
A.2. Project Objectives
The proposed Decentralized Infrastructure Reform and Development (DIRD) Program is designed to
improve the performance of infrastructure services throughout the territory of Mexico while
operationalizing the decentralization objectives of the national government, thereby enabling and
catalyzing the efficient and sustainable development of selected infrastructure sectors at the sub-national
level. The program's first loan also serves as the first "Safeguards Pilot" in the Latin America and the
Caribbean Region (LCR), in which the Bank will test reliance on existing country systems for management
of environmental and social safeguard-related issues within the context of the project.
The first Bank loan under the DIRD Program would be a US$ 107.76 million specific investment loan
extended to BANOBRAS to achieve in the State of Guanajuato (SoG) sustainable investment levels and an
efficient operation of the sector strategies for the following sectors: road transport, water supply and
sanitation, and low-income housing, with enhanced basic services for the poorest population segments and
financial sustainability. The sector strategies include investment, reform-oriented and institution building
sub-components for each sector.
The unmistakable mandate provided by Mexico's Constitutional amendments and corresponding legislation
adopted in the 1990's was to link firmly the country's future economic and social development to a much
more decentralized mode of economic management in most economic and service sectors. However, the
majority of the states and local authorities do not yet have the institutional or technical capacities to
undertake effectively the responsibilities implied in the strong move to decentralization or to formulate
comprehensive economic and sectoral strategies to guide such a process. Institutional and strategic
capacities of some of the national entities responsible for guiding the decentralization process in the
respective sectors are also not yet well developed. Combined with the prospects for Mexico graduating
from Bank lending in the coming decade or two, this makes it crucial for the Bank to engage firmly in this
process at this time, so that the Bank could help leave behind in Mexico adequate capacities to manage the
decentralized development process.
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) approved by the Board in April 2004 identifies decentralized
development and working at sub-national levels of Government as a priority. The CAS envisages that the
Bank program would help strengthen sub-national economic management and performance building on
Mexico's Constitutional reforms of the 1990's. The Bank previously provided analytical work to help
establish a clearer fiscal decentralization framework, and is involved in ongoing work to facilitate the
discussions of the Convencion Nacional Hacendaria. The hard budget constraints within which states
manage their fiscal programs helps reduce the moral hazard in sub-national borrowing and enhances



transparency and accountability of state fiscal and financial management. The CAS specifically suggests
the importance of capacity building and institutional strengthening as well as community participation to
improve the effectiveness of the decentralization process and the efficiency of subnational expenditures.
Also supported was the proactive use of country systems in financial management procurement systems.
The proposed Program/project is an integral part of these efforts and is designed to promote structural
reforms, effective strategies and priority setting, institutional strengthening and capacity building at
subnational levels, taking into account the specific state priorities and community needs.
A.3. Project Description
World Bank support would be made available to address the issues discussed above through financing of a
Program being mounted by BANOBRAS to support comprehensive infrastructure sector strategies
undertaken by states. The actual Bank support would take the form of a series of independent state-by-state
loans via BANOBRAS. Candidate states would be those that are taking reform and development measures
to catalyze and promote efficient and fiscally and financially viable infrastructure development in priority
sectors, with poverty responsiveness and access of public services to the poorest segments of the
population. The proposed US$ 107.76 million loan to BANOBRAS to support SoG is the first of a series
of loans under the DIRD to be considered.
The three SoG sector.strategies, together with cross-sector TA program to improve state government
processes are, hereinafter referred to as 'Project Components', derive from SoG's "Plan Estatal de
Desarrollo" - a long-term plan prepared on the basis of a systematic consultation process.
Component I: Implementing the Road Transport Sector Strategy
The three-year sector strategy proposed by SoG, to improve overall performance of the road transport
sector includes both investment and institutional strengthening actions with an estimated cost of around
US$163 million, of which US$60 million will be covered by the Bank loan. The main sub-components
under this are:
(i)    Institutional strengthening: Improving  the investment planning  and  the Planning
Programming Budget (PPB) cycle, introducing performance maintenance contracts, designing
a program for the transfer of the federal roads, development of pavement management
systems and development of an improved framework for private sector financing of road
projects;
(ii)    Preventive and routine maintenance and rehabilitation of the existing road network: This is a
high priority program covering about 2071km state managed network. It would be based for
the first time on a network assessment to derive the maintenance and rehabilitation priorities
for optimally allocating resources;
(iii)  Expansion of the state managed network. This includes building 600 new km of roads;
(iv)   Improvement of bridges and elimination of bottlenecks: Road grade separation overpasses and
improvement of unsafe or restricted spots along the state roads;
(v)    Construction of toll roads: Completing two projects; and
(vi)   Improvement and construction of rural roads.
Component II: Implementing the Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Strategy
This component addresses the problems faced by SoG in water and sanitation service provision. This
strategy is consistent with the national development plan and the state's hydraulic program for 2001-2006,
and covers both the investment and institutional strengthening needs through four sub-components. The
estimated cost for this component is US$94 million, of which US$38.4 will be covered by the Bank loan:
(i)    Improve water resources management: Establishing a Hydraulic Planning System, efficient
measurement of hydrological cycle and introduction of participatory mechanisms for water
management systems;



(ii)    Increase coverage of water supply and sanitation in rural and urban areas, increase wastewater
treatment in large communities'; and
(iii)   Institutional Strengthening of Comisi6n Estatal del Agua de Guanajuato (CEAG) and Support
Mechanism to Operators. Improve the regulatory framework, process certification, staff
training, promote technological transfers. A substantial element of this item is the Program to
Improve Efficiency and financial sustainability of service providers, e.g. TA to service
providers and municipalities to achieve cost effectiveness and a satisfactory level of tariff
recovery; further development of benchmarking models for service providers.
Component III: Implementing the Low-Income Housing Strategy
(i)     Institutional Strengthening
(a) Establish adequate prudential financial criteria suitable for decentralized or autonomous
non-bank financial intermediaries engaged in housing finance, efficient loan recovery
mechanisms and provisions policy thereof;
(b) Formally approve the legal framework applicable to the sector to incorporate item (a)
above and to make Instituto de Vivienda del Estado de Guanajuato (IVEG) financially
sustainable in the medium term and able to preserve its capital in real terms; and
(c) Implement item (b) above and improve the information and supervision systems to
enable it.
(ii)    Increase supply of low-income housing for the poorest segments of the population through
financing of materials self-construction, financing additional housing for the poorest segments of
the population, financing gradual improvement and rehabilitation of housing, and financing of
urbanized lots ready for housing construction.
Completion of the institutional strengthening sub-component, satisfactory to the Bank, would be a
disbursement condition to begin withdrawals under item (ii).
Component IV: Technical Assistance to Cross-Sector Areas
In response to the State's request and in order to implement the necessary reforms as suggested by the
Bank's assessments for the state, a TA component of US$2 million has been designed to strengthen
existing capabilities within the state in order to achieve full compliance with the Program's Operating
Regulations. The subjects covered are cross-sectoral and would have a positive impact beyond the sector
strategies proposed for Bank financing. Specifically this includes:
(i)     Strengthening of the mechanisms to screen, prioritize and monitor public investments;
(ii)    Strengthening of the existing consultation and participation mechanisms at state, municipal
and community levels;
(iii)   Enhancing the capacity of state environmental and social agencies and practices;
(iv)    Strengthening of procurement policies and practices; and
(v)     Optimization of the existing financial management and audit systems and processes.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The first Bank loan under the Program will support the sector strategies described above throughout the
territory of the State of Guanajuato. Guanajuato possesses a variety of natural habitats which are well
represented in the state's protected areas program, and identified and addressed through the project's
environmental management provisions.
The wastewater treatment element of the strategy is part of a national program directed by CNA, however several deficiencies have
been identified by CEAG and the Bank regarding the financial and operational sustainability of these investments. As part of the
proposed loan. CEAG is developing additional screening criteria to bolster their effectiveness and promote sustainability, which
could eventually be used by other states of the Program.



B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [ ], C [ ], Fl [XI
Comments: BANOBRAS will be the Borrower and will on-lend Bank funds to state governments and
within them to eligible sectors. Since BANOBRAS is a financial intermediary, the project falls under
category Fl. BANOBRAS has designed a satisfactory environmental and social management framework to
be carried out by each participating state. For the first loan to support SoG's sector strategies, the ESMF
was applied in the context of a "Safeguard Pilot" approach, which tests reliance on existing country and
state systems to oversee environmental and social safeguard related issues and achieve adequate
environmental and social outcomes as a surrogate for traditional application of the World Bank's safeguard
policies. Application of a similar pilot approach to future state programs will be made on a case by case
basis, based on rigorous examination of the state's capacity to adequately manage environmental and social
safeguard-related aspects of its DIRD program.
The Bank has assessed and confirmed as satisfactory the environmental and social management plan
resulting from application of the framework to SoG's sector strategies. Because of the pilot approach, the
project will support strengthening measures, including a strong capacity building program, and rigorous
monitoring, supervision, reporting, and evaluation procedures concerning the responsibilities of the SoG
and the Bank and the effectiveness of the pilot approach.
C Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes                 No
Environmental Assessment (P/BP/GP 4.01)                [X]                 [I 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                          [X]                 [I]
Pest Managgment (OP 4.09)                               []                 [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 1 1.03-)        [X]                 []
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                  [X]                 [I]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                           [X]                 [I]
Forests (_P/BP 4.36)                            -       [                  [X]
Safety of Dams (QP/BP 4.37)                            [X]                 []
Proiects in Disputed Areas (P/BP/GP 7.60)               [ ]                [X]
Proiects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)     [ ]                [X]
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal detennination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D. 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will support sector investment strategies in SoG in the water and sanitation, roads, and low-
income housing sectors. Many of the infrastructure subprojects implemented through these strategies will
have safeguard-related impacts related to maintenance, upgrading, or new construction of civil works. As
indicated above, it is expected that potential impacts may occur related to the environment in general,
natural habitats, cultural property, involuntary resettlement, and safety of dams.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.
Indirect impacts from the project will be adequately managed through the project's environmental and
social management plan. No cumulative adverse environmental impacts are expected.
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
N/A
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower applied the DIRD environmental and social management framework to the SoG's sector
strategies to produce an environmental and social management plan for SoG. More specifically, the
Borrower evaluated the potential environmental and social risks of each type of subproject proposed, based
on an analysis of typological risk factors, and conducted an assessment of SoG's existing institutional
capacity for environmental and social management of the subprojects included in the sector strategy. The
Bank reviewed the submitted strategy and corresponding assessment and: (i) identified the procedures for
it's oversight of subprojects; (ii) recommended additional strengthening measures; (iii) identified a program
of institutional capacity enhancements; and (iv) provided guidance on additional up-front sectoral
environmental and social assessment required. The Bank's review confirmed that, with implementation of
the identified strengthening measures (particularly procedures for managing resettlement), SoG has
satisfactory capacity, following the safeguard pilot approach of relying on country systems, to adequately
manage and monitor and report on the environmental and social safeguard-related aspects of its DIRD
program.
Environmental Assessment: The SoG has well a developed policy, regulatory, and institutional framework
for environmental assessment. The key policies and regulations are the Law for Protection and
Preservation of the Environment of the SoG (LPPAEG) and the associated Regulation of the LPPAEG in
Matters of Environmental Impact Assessment. Through these policies, the state, in 1996, created a strong
regulatory basis for it's new administrative structure for environmental assessment; removing the
Directorate of Ecology from the Secretariat of Urban Development and Works, and constituting two new
independent entities: (i) the Instituto de Ecologia Guanajuato (IEG) [Institute of Ecology of the State of
Guanajuato] as the state's lead regulatory agency, responsible for overseeing and issuing standards for the
application of environmental laws and regulations, and (ii) the Procuraduria de Protecci6n al Ambiente del
Estado (PROPAE) [Judge Advocate General for Environmental Protection of the State of Guanajuato],
which is the state's lead juridical agency on environmental matters and is also in charge of monitoring and
inspection.
Natural Habitats: The SoG has a very well developed policy, regulatory, and institutional framework for
protecting natural habitats. This framework is based on the Regulation of the LPPAEG in Matters of
Protected Natural Areas, and several associated ordnances and technical norms. Through this framework.



the SoG ensures that critical natural habitat areas are protected through the Sistema de Areas Naturales
Protegidas del Estado de Guanajuato (SIANPEG) [System of Protected Areas of the SoG]. This is a very
strong and dynamic state protected areas (PA) system. As indicated in Figure 1, SIANPEG includes 16
legally established PAs with an additional six officially proposed. No development is allowed in existing
or officially proposed PAs. In addition to the SIANPEG, the SoG requires through it's EA system,
mitigations to avoid or minimize impacts to non-protected natural habitats.
Cultural Property: No discrepancies are seen between the GoM's cultural property laws and the Bank's
Cultural Property Policy (OPN 11:03). The SoG's existing systems, are considered highly adequate for
enforcing GoM laws in this area. The state's lead entity is the Secretaria de Obras Publicas' (SoP)
[Secretariat of Public Works] restoration unit (Direcci6n de Restauraci6n de Monumentos), which is
responsible for identifying and mitigating any potential infrastructure-related impact on cultural property.
Safety of Dams: The National Water Commission (CNA) is responsible for the design, construction and
overseeing of all dams within the state of Guanajuato; however, CNA can delegate some of these activities
to be carried out on its behalf by the State Water Commission (CEA). Given the capability of both
institutions to ensure adequate oversight of dam safety-related issues, the Bank will oversee only dam
projects greater than 15m in height. The existing state procedures are considered adequate for smaller dams
(<15m).
Involuntary Resettlement: The GoM does not include a single comprehensive resettlement law or
instrument. Existing laws broadly address the different aspects of OP 4.12, but do not precisely define the
manner in which livelihood restoration will occur. The SoG has a well developed system for implementing
and enforcing GoM laws in this area, but it has not issued specific state laws or regulations that more
precisely define how resettlement will be addressed. As a matter of non-codified good practice SoG has
demonstrated a capacity to undertake resettlement activities in a manner consistent with the requirements of
OP 4.12, including consultation and participation of the affected population, assets and land compensation
at market prices to legal occupants with and without titles, and the restoration of livelihoods. As part of the
application of the ESMF, SoG will implement a resettlement framework that ensures that all resettlement
undertaken its DIRD program fulfills the identified good practice model and the requirements of OP 4.12.
The Social and Human Development Ministry (Secretaria de Desarrollo Social y Humano; SDSH) will be
responsible for ensuring the application of this framework.
Indigenous Peoples: There are no significant discrepancies between GoM laws and the Bank's Indigenous
Peoples Policy (OD 4.20). SoG's DIRD program is not expected to trigger OD 4.20 because Guanajuato
does not have a large indigenous population, and the state's DIRD program, which is focused on enhancing
competitiveness, does not include subprojects which have been determined to have potential adverse effects
on indigenous people. The state does address indigenous peoples issues through the state Indigenous
Peoples Committee, and current practices assessed during preparation are acceptable. Nevertheless, if the
investment program changes to include subprojects that affect indigenous people, IEG and SDSH will work
with the Bank and the Indigenous Peoples Committee to ensure that the Bank is able to review each such
subproject prior to implementation and that there is adequate consultation of the affected group.
In addition to the SoG's specific provisions in each of the above areas, it has a strong overall strategy for
sustainable development and environmental protection. In particular, the Plan de Gobierno 2000-2006,
which establishes a strategy for all sectors of government, includes strong objectives, goals, strategies, and
actions related to improving environmental quality, and promoting social development.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include among others: (i) participating Mexican agencies and state and municipal
agencies in SoG, particularly those responsible for infrastructure development, environmental and social
management, and the water and sanitation, roads, and low-income housing sectors; (ii) civil society in SoG,
including users associations, construction related organizations, academics, public and private utilities, and
non-governmental organizations. Key stakeholder groups were closely involved with the preparation of the



project. Key public agencies worked closely with BANOBRAS and the Bank on project preparation, and
civil society groups, were consulted as well. SoG does have a small indigenous population, which is not
expected to be adversely affected by the sector strategies being supported. Nevertheless, the Borrower
consulted with the key indigenous peoples organization for development issues in SoG, and the project
includes procedures to ensure consultation if a subproject may affect indigenous peoples. For persons who
I may need to be resettled, the project includes procedures to ensure their consultation.



F. Disclosure Requirements    Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               6/14/2003  or Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be fllled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                        Yes      No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?  X
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the creditAloan?  X
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                              Yes      No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural  X
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                  Yes      No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                              Yes      No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                       X
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts  X
on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                               Yes      No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with  X
the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?  X
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?



OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                      Yes      No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?  X
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / X
policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests:                                                       Yes      No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions
for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                Yes      No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been
made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                              Yes      No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has
this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                       Yes      No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                               Yes      No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  X
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local  X
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                     Yes      No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared  x
for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                 X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?  X
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of  X
safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the  X
same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents'?
Signed and submitted by:                         Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:              Krishna C alla                                  4/15/04
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:
Approved by:                                      Name                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Juan David Qui nterro,                       4/15/04
Comments:
Sector Manager:                John Henry Stein               Cl}4/15/04
CAommen-t/s:



