                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
         MEXICO REDD+ READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT PROJECT (P120417)
                                           . APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                  Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             24 July 2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Mexico                 Project ID:                P120417
    Project Name:                 Mexico REDD+ READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT PROJECT
    Task Team Leader(s):          Angela Armstrong
    Estimated Board Date:         Not Applicable
    Managing Unit:                Environment & Natural Resources (GEN04)
    Sector(s):                    Forestry
    Theme(s):                     Climate Change
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                  No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        5.00                       Total Bank Financing:       5.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
        Financing Source                                                                             Amount
        Borrower                                                                                          0.00
        Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                          5.00
        Total                                                                                             5.00
    Environmental Category        B
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred         No
    project?
.
    B. Project Objectives
    1.       The current PDO aims “to support a participatory and inclusive process for the finalization of
    Mexico’s National REDD+ strategy (ENAREDD+).? However, since this REDD+ Readiness
    preparation goal is soon to be achieved and to more fully define the objectives of ongoing REDD+
    activities as well as those activities to be supported with additional funding, it is proposed that the PDO
    be modified with the aim of “strengthening the REDD+ Readiness process in Mexico.?
.
    C. Project Description
2.      In early 2010, Mexico submitted a Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) to the FCPF,
providing a detailed assessment of the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation as well as a plan of
action for its REDD+ readiness. The total budget envelope for carrying out these activities was
estimated at more than US$23 million. The FCPF Participants Committee approved Mexico’s R-PP on
March 2010 and granted the Government of Mexico a US$3.8 million readiness preparation grant. The
FCPF preparation process, however, was delayed and the US$3.8 million grant was signed only on
March 19, 2014 and became effective on July 7, 2014.

3.       On May 17, 2015, Mexico presented a Mid-Term Report (MTR) on progress made in carrying
out REDD+ Readiness Activities during the 19th Meeting of the FCPF Participant Committee (PC).
The PC allocated an additional funding of US$5 million, acknowledging that there was still a financial
gap to fully implement its REDD+ Readiness phase based on: (i) the PC’s consideration of Mexico’s
MTR, recognizing the significant progress achieved; (ii) Mexico’s commitment of at least 50% of the
original Readiness Preparation Grant at the time of the funding; (iii) the consistency of the additional
funding activities with the endorsed R-PP and current country needs; and (iv) the availability of
resources in the Readiness Fund.
4.      The proposed additional grant would finance the costs associated with scaling-up and
expanding activities under the original project, aimed at: (i) strengthening congoing REDD+
participatory processes; and (ii) strengthening the capacity of CONAFOR’s newly created Sustainable
Forest Management Technical Unit and newly created Measurement, Reporting and Verification
Technical Unit. Funding would be provided, as follows:

        Component 1. Organization, Consultation and Participation (US$2.6 million TF010261;
        US$1.0 million AF). Additional Funding activities will focus on strengthening ongoing
        participatory processes, by building the capacity of ejidos, communities, community
        and ejido associations, and forestry sector organizations (OSSF), including women and
        youth, to increase their engagement in REDD+ processes.
        Component 2. Development of REDD+ Strategy (US$1.2 million TF010261; US$1.5 million
        AF). Additional Funding activities will focus on (i) providing technical assistance to a
        Specialized Technical Unit on Sustainable Forest Management (UTE-MFS) that will help build
        capacity within CONAFOR’s Department on Promotion of Sustainable Forest Production; and
        (ii) enhancing the alignment of the ENAREDD+ with CONAFOR’s Sustainable Forest
        Management agenda, by providing technical assistance on integrated landscape management
        technologies and on fostering competitiveness of the forest sector.
        Component 3. National Forest Monitoring System (US$2.5 million AF). Additional Funding
        activities will focus on providing technical assistance to establish a Specialized Technical Unit
        on MRV (UTE-MRV) that will strengthen the new department overseeing the National Forest
        Monitoring System; and (ii) to support data collection through the National Forest and Soils
        Inventory (INFyS).
                                                              Original       Cost Additional Cost
    Component Name
                                                              (US$M)              (US$M)

    1. Organization, Consultation and Participation
                                                              2,558,000.00         1,000,000.00

    2. Development of REDD+ Strategy
                                                              1,242,000.00         1,500,000.00
    3. National Forest Monitoring System                                           2,500,000.00
               Total                                          3,800,000.00         5,000,000.00
    5. In this context, the Additional Funding will reinforce ongoing processes initiated under the original
       grant, contributing to the consolidation of the National REDD+ Readiness process beyond the
       R-Package presentation and therefore ensuring a solid foundation for the implementation of the
       REDD+ Strategy and the Emission Reductions Program under the Carbon Fund.
.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    6.      The project does not finance the implementation of activities on the ground.


    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    7.       The executing agency will be the Mexican National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR)
    responsible for overseeing the country’s forestry activities. Notably, CONAFOR has a dedicated
    technical team with experience and systematic engagement with a broad range of stakeholders,
    including indigenous peoples, communities, ejidos, etc. Social and environmental dimensions of the
    REDD+ Readiness are being managed in a satisfactory manner under the original grant. As part of the
    ongoing REDD+ readiness preparation grant, CONAFOR has undertaken a systematic Strategic
    Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate key environmental and social considerations
    into the REDD+ Strategy. The REDD+ Strategy, which began preparation approximately two years ago,
    has been widely consulted, reaching 26,089 people via 461 workshops. National consultations of the
    Strategy were conducted from July 2015 – February 2016 with wide ranging participation by civil
    society and other stakeholder audiences. More than 240,000 comments were received during this
    process. CONAFOR is now integrating this feedback into the final version of the REDD+ Strategy.
    8.           The main result of the SESA is an Environmental and Social Management Framework
    (ESMF), which provides a framework for guiding implementation of the REDD+ Strategy in Mexico.
    Its scope is national since it is applicable to any implementation activities of the Emissions Reduction
    Program or REDD+ Strategy. The draft ESMF establishes the procedures for addressing potential
    environmental and social impacts from the implementation of REDD+ activities, including associated
    mitigation measures. In addition, the extensive consultation process that has been conducted among a
    wide group of diverse stakeholders during the preparation of the REDD+ Strategy is considered best
    practice (in particular, in terms of the representativeness of people consulted).

. F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Arelia Jacive Lopez (Social Specialist, GSU04)
    Dora Patricia Andrade (Environmental Specialist, GENDR)
.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

9.       The Environmental Assessment (EA) Category remains B as the Additional Funding will only
finance technical assistance and small equipment purchases (e.g., computers). Two new safeguard
policies are triggered: Pest Management (OP 4.09); and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) based
on a better definition of the scope of activities to be supported by the REDD+ Strategy. The Safeguard
Policies triggered in the ISDS of the Project (P120417) are sufficient to cover the activities proposed under
the Additional Funding grant, given the significant advances made in the preparation of appropriate
safeguards instruments under the original grant, such as a highly participatory and analytic SESA and the
ESMF, which is currently in an advanced draft form. The SESA was completed in December 2016 and
the ESMF is being finalized (completion expected in CY2017) with funding from the original project.

  Safeguard Policies                     Triggered ?    Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP              YES       The Environmental Assessment (EA) Category
  4.01                                                  remains B as the Grant will only finance
                                                        Technical Assistance type of activities with the
                                                        objective of strengthening CONAFOR’s
                                                        capacity to transition from REDD+ readiness
                                                        to REDD+ implementation, and strengthen
                                                        sustainable forest management more generally.
                                                        A participatory Strategic Environmental and
                                                        Social Assessment (SESA) was carried out in
                                                        compliance with OP/BP 4.01, in order to
                                                        identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential
                                                        negative environmental and social impacts
                                                        associated with future activities to be
                                                        supported by the REDD+ Strategy. The SESA
                                                        has provided key guidance and elements for
                                                        the preparation of the draft Environmental and
                                                        Social Management Framework (ESMF), and
                                                        has directly influenced the final version of the
                                                        REDD+ Strategy by ensuring that social and
                                                        environmental risks are factored in the design
                                                        of activities to be implemented on the ground.
                                                        The completion of the ESMF is anticipated in
                                                        CY2017, and is being financed under the
                                                        original FCPF REDD+ Readiness Preparation
                                                        Support Project.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 YES       This policy seeks to ensure that all options
                                                        proposed in the REDD+ Strategy take into
                                                        account the conservation of biodiversity, as
                                                        well as the numerous environmental services
                                                        and products that natural habitats provide to
                                                        society. Overall, the REDD+ activities are
                                                        expected to have significant positive impacts
                                                        on natural habitats, as the country puts in place
                                                        an effective strategy to reduce the degradation
                                                        of forests. The SESA addresses issues related
                                                        to natural habitats and potential impacts of the
                                                        REDD+ Strategy, which are being
                                                        incorporated in the ESMF.
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                          YES       Overall, the activities proposed in the REDD+
                                                        Strategy are expected to have significant
                                                        positive impacts on the country’s forests, in
                                                        that its main goal is to reduce deforestation and
                                                        forest degradation, while contributing to the
                                                        well-being of forest-dependent communities.
                                                        Potential impacts of the REDD+ Strategy on
                                                        natural forests have been assessed through the
                                          SESA and are being incorporated in the ESMF,
                                          which will reflect the requirements of the
                                          Bank’s Operational Policy regarding forest
                                          management, in particular as these relate to the
                                          establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09             YES   This policy is triggered in a precautionary way
                                          in cases where specific activities in the
                                          REDD+ Strategy promoting agricultural
                                          intensification and reforestation, for instance,
                                          require the management of pests based on the
                                          methods employed. The critical provisions of
                                          the Bank Policy on Pest Management are being
                                          incorporated in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   YES   This policy is triggered in a precautionary way
4.11                                      to address cases where the REDD+ Strategy
                                          could promote activities in areas containing
                                          sites deemed as physical cultural resources
                                          (PCR). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                          REDD+ Strategy will have any negative
                                          impacts on such sites, the existence of any such
                                          sites in areas affected by the REDD+ Strategy
                                          will trigger provisions included in the ESMF
                                          on how to address preservation of known PCR
                                          sites.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       YES   Mexico is a country characterized by a rich
                                          culture and a diverse population. According to
                                          the results of the 2015 census, Encuesta
                                          Intercensal del INEGI de 2015, there are 7.2
                                          million indigenous people in Mexico; the
                                          World Bank’s Operational Policy for
                                          Indigenous People applies.

                                          The SESA process began early in the
                                          Readiness phase in a highly participatory
                                          manner and with a special focus on indigenous
                                          peoples’ participation, with the aim of
                                          identifying key issues and providing
                                          recommendations for the design of the REDD+
                                          Strategy. As part of the Readiness phase, this
                                          has been achieved through extensive
                                          participatory processes and indigenous peoples
                                          participated in most of the 16 Regional and
                                          National Workshops conducted as part of the
                                          SESA process, which included a total of more
                                          than 12,245 people in the Indigenous Peoples
                                          consultation process by CDI. Through the
                                          SESA, Indigenous Peoples assessed the risks
                                          and benefits of the proposed REDD+ strategic
                                          options from their own perspective and
                                                  contextual realities, providing also suggestions
                                                  for potential mitigation measures. The draft
                                                  ESMF includes a (draft) Indigenous Peoples
                                                  Planning Framework (IPPF) that is being
                                                  prepared in a culturally appropriate way in
                                                  compliance with the Indigenous Peoples policy
                                                  (OP 4.10) for addressing issues arising from
                                                  specific      investments        during      the
                                                  implementation of the REDD+ Strategy.
                                                  The IPPF will serve as guide for preparing
                                                  site-specific State Safeguard Plans, which
                                                  include the Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs)
                                                  during the implementation of the Strategy
                                                  under the principle of free, prior and informed
                                                  consultation.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     YES   During the Readiness phase, the SESA was
                                                  used to assess the risk of potential restriction of
                                                  access to natural resources as part of the design
                                                  phase of the REDD+ Strategy, providing
                                                  adequate     recommendations          from      the
                                                  perspective of stakeholders. Based on this, a
                                                  Process Framework (PF) is being prepared as
                                                  part of the draft ESMF. Additionally, a
                                                  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is
                                                  being prepared to provide procedures in order
                                                  to manage impacts in the event of potential
                                                  relocation and/or land acquisition as a result of
                                                  the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy on
                                                  the ground, including indigenous peoples. The
                                                  draft RPF and PF are being prepared as a
                                                  specific chapter of the ESMF.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               NO    This policy is not triggered as the Grant will
                                                  not support the construction nor the
                                                  rehabilitation of dams, nor will it support other
                                                  investments which rely on the performance of
                                                  existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways     NO    This policy is not triggered as the Grant will
    OP/BP 7.50                                    not finance activities involving the use or
                                                  potential pollution of international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   NO    This policy is not triggered as the Grant will
                                                  not finance activities in disputed areas as
                                                  defined in the policy.
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.
A.       Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
         Not Applicable
B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
         10. A SESA has been conducted to identify and address the environmental and social benefits and
             risks of the REDD+ Strategy, based on a highly participatory and consultative approach and
             integrating the World Bank’s environmental and social operational policies. As a result of the
             SESA process, an ESMF is being prepared to manage and mitigate any potential risks stemming
             from future investments and/or activities on the ground as part of the REDD+ Strategy. A draft of
             the ESMF is already in place and is expected to be finalized in CY2017, with funding from the
             original project, and will include a final consultation process report. The ESMF will be
             structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant requirements of the
             applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not necessarily limited to,
             a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); Process Framework (PF); and Indigenous Peoples
             Planning Framework (IPPF). It is expected that the ESMF and the procedures therein will
             accompany the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy in parallel with the execution to the
             proposed Additional Funding Grant.

         11. The IPPF establishes the following principles: (i) Access to benefits and information in a
             culturally appropriate manner; (ii) Avoiding and mitigating possible adverse impacts on
             indigenous populations; (iii) Recognizing and respecting the customs and practices of
             indigenous peoples and communities; and (iv) Broad community support. The IPPF will provide
             guidance for people involved in implementing the ENAREDD + and Emissions Reduction
             Program on how to identify and avoid negative impacts and maximize the potential benefits of
             working with indigenous peoples in the activities to be undertaken as part of this project and for
             which IPPs will be established in the states of Investment Programs. The IPP will describe the
             measures that will be taken to ensure that IP communities are equal beneficiaries of the program
             and that negative impacts do not fall disproportionately on them.
.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader(s):              Name: Angela Armstrong
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:               Name: Noreen Beg                               Date: July 27, 2017
    Acting Practice                   Name: Klas Sander                              Date: July 28, 2017
    Manager/Manager:

     1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed
    before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and
    language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
