                                                                                              102324
                          INTEGR.ATED SAFEGlARDS DATA SHEET
                                        RESTRUCTURING STAGE
          !\Jote: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             15-Dec-2015
l. BASIC INFORMATION
 l. Basic Project Data
 Country:                        Micronesia,         Project tp:                       Pl30592
                                 Federated States of
 Project Name:                   Pacific Regional Connectivity Program 2:Palau-FSM Connectivity
                                 Project (Pl 30592)
 Task Team Leader(s):            James L. Neumann,Natasha Beschomer
 Estimated Board Date:            17-Dec-2014
 Managing Unit:                  GTI09
 Sector(s):                      Telecommunications (98%), Public administration- [nformation and
                                 corrununications (2%)
 Theme(s):                       Infrastructure services for private sector development (97%). Regulation
                                 and competition policy (3%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00
                                                                                                INº
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financiog Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:          72.50                       Total Bank Financing:        147.50
 Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                      Amouot
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                       0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                               47.50
     Asian Development Bank                                                                                  25.00
     Total                                                                                                   72.50
 Environmental Category:         8 - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Traosferred              o
 project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The developrnent objective of the Project is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of TCT
 serv1ces needed to support social and economic development in the Recipient's territory.
 J>roposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


 3. Project Description
 The Project will finance the following components.

 Component 1. lntemational connectivity infrastructure. ($44.5 million) .

. (a) Subcomponent lA: Palau-Yap-Guam Cable System (US$22.5 million). In collaboration with
  Palau, fi.nancing for the construction of a new cable system (and/or the procurement of capacity rights)
  to connect Yap to the global tclecommunications network;

 (b) Subcomponent 1B: Chuuk-Pohnpei Cable System (US$ l 8.5 millionJ. For an undivided right to
 own and manage a new cable system which will be constructed between Weno and either at the
 Pohnpei landing station or the branching unit on the Pohnpei spur to the HANTRU-1 cable system
 (whichever is financially and technically most advantageous): and

 (c) Subcomponent IC: Kosrae Connectivity (USS3.5 million). This will finance a one-time purchase
 of intemational bandwidth for Kosrae on terrns wh.ich promote equitable access to broadband access
 across FSM.

 Component 2. Technical Assistance ($2.25 million) will fmance advisory services and training for:

 (a) Design and ownership structure of existing and new infrastructure.

 (b) Refonn and development ofFSM Telecommunications Corporation. Options for restructuring
 FSMTC and resulting actions to strengthen FSMTC's capacity to operate in a competitive market.

 (e) Sector regulation and regulatory capacity development. Complementing the TA Project
 (Pl32686), financing for medium-tenn technical assistance to develop key capacities within the new
 sector regulator.

 Component 3. Project management support ($0.75 mi Ilion) will finance Project managernent and
 coordination, financia! management, audit, general Project reporting, monitoring and evaluation,
 Training, and administrative costs associated with project implementation.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)
 The restructured project no longer proposes thc joint construction by Palau and FSM of a standalone
 cable from Guam to Palau with a spur to Yap. A new-lower impact-solution has been identified.
 FSM would construct a spur linking Yap to the SEA-US cable system and would buy capacity on the
 SEA-US cable system connecting Yap to the global telecommunications network via an existing
 landing facility on Guam (a United States Territory). By utilizing capacit; on SEA-US, rather than
 building a duplicate standalone cable systern, these revised implementation arrangements would
 reduce costs, project management risks and social and environmental impacts significantly. The
 SEA-US consortium has selected NEC Corporation of Japan (NEC) to construct the SEA-US cable
 system. NEC would also construct the spur for FSM connecting Yap to the SEA-US cable system.
 SEA-US and NEC are reputable intemational operators and accordingly major environmental risks on
the applicable deep-sea cable segment used to supply capacity to FSM are not anticipated. lt is
understood that NEC's Submarine Network Division is CS0900 l compliant, is a member of ICPC and
adheres to ICPC recommendations.

The lateral connecting cable to landfall in Yap is approximately 262 km in length, connecting to the
main SEA-US cable beyond 1,000 m isobath. This is well beyond the territorial seas and contiguous
zone of FSM, and well off the continental shel f. Deep ocean fiber optic cables are no larger than
17-21 mm diameter-about the size of a domestic garden hose-and are laid mainly upon the surface of
the ocean íloor. No specific environmental studies are undertaken for submarine cables whicb líe in
deep sea. However, prior to laying cables, a detailed Cable Route Survey is done to ensure that the
cable is not located in high risk locations or geological features (e.g., thermal vents) that often harbor
unique fauna! assemblages at abyssal depths. The [ntemational Cable Protection Committee ([CPC)
publishes recommendations on key issues such as cable routing, cable protection and cable recovery
and prescribes strict envirorunental standards. Extensive studies that are undertaken by cable
suppliers prior to final cable laying work as effective safeguards against any possible environmental
disruption, since in large part they are intended to identify routes for the cable that will avoid
seamounts, volcanoes, canyons, vents, seeps, deep water reefs. dissected terrain-all areas that tend to
be associated with higher biological value than the general abyssal plain.

The lateral cable spur between the main SEA-US cable and Yap would land in Yap at the existing
appraised and approved landing site (oras othe1wise documented in the project ESMF). The SEA-US
cable system which would supply capacity to Yap between the branching unit and Guam will follow
the same route and installation methodology as originally appraised. FSM will have no control or
intluence over the design, installation or functionmg ofthe SEA-US cable. Nor will FSM contribute
to the financia! or technical feasibility ofthe SEA-US cable. The spur for Yap would likely be placed
in the center ofthe shipping channel to the bridge, by Colonia harbor and then into Chamorro Bay,
outside ofthe marine conservation areas. to the state-owned landing area and facility site. For Chuuk,
it will likely be the corridor from the Guam-Pohnpei cable junction ski11ing a number of ato lis, also
outside ofthe marine conservation zones, to the North East end ofthe airport runway and then either
to the existing FSMTC office orto the govemor·s complex via an existing easement.

The lnitial Environmental Examination safeguards documentation preparcd by the Recipient has
indicated that in Yap. the inland location for the landing site, and the site for the cable station are on
vacant government land and that the sites are not being used by other parties. No structures, crops. or
productive trees will be used will be affected. No land acquisition will be required and no involuntary
resettlement has been identified. The cable landing site in Chuuk is located adjacent to the airport and
is currently being purchased by the state Government. The key issue here is to ensure that the
cumpensation for this land is paid in ful! and that appropriate consultation has been carried out, that
the compensation reflects the full replacement cost ofthis land and that no outstanding grievances
exist in relation to this purchase. Both options for the actual cable station are located on Govemment
owned land (one option is an FSM Telccom compound and the other is m the state Govemment
headquarters of M ichiti w ). Existing govemment easements are proposcd to be used to bring the fiber
optic cable to the cable station.

FSM will revise its Environmental and Social Management Plan ( ESMP), included as part of its lnitial
Environmental Examination (IEE) report to provide for due diligence reporting on envir.onmental and
social management systems and instruments applied by SEA-US in connection with the construction
of the segment of the SEA-US cable which will supply capacity to FSM, consistent with FSM's status
as a customer of SEA-US and accepted commercial practices. It is noted that, as a purchaser of
capacity from SEA-US under a contrae! for an lndefeasible Right of Use (IRU), FSM would have no
    intlucncc or control over the activities of SEA-US or the design, installation or functioning of the
    SEA-US cable. Ali ofthe parts ofthe SEA-US cable south ea st ofthe branching unit that would
    connect Yap to SEA-US is outside the area likely to be affected by the project and does not fall within
    the area ofinfluence ofthis Project. Any activities from Guam to Hawaii and beyond carried on by
    SEA-US is similarly outside the area of influence ofthis Project.

    The population of FSM is comprised of many ethnicities; and ali are descended from, and belong to,
    the Micronesian culture. These different ethnicities are Chuukese 48.8 percent, Pohnpeian 24.2
    percent, Kosraean 6.2 percent, Yapese 5.2 percent, Yap outer islands 4.5 percent. Asian 1.8 percent,
    Polynesian 1.5 percent, other 6.4 percent, un.known 1.4 percent (2000 census). Based on recent
    analytical work completed by the World Ban.k the comrnunities within FSM are not considered to have
    the four characteristics required to trigger OP 4.1 O (self-identification as distinct indigenous cultural
    group and recognition ofthis identity by others; collective attachment to geographically distinct
    habitats or ancestral territories in project area and the natural resources in these habitats or territories;
    customary cultural, economic, social or political institutions separate frorn those ofthe dominant
    society and culture; and lndigenous language, often different from official language ofthe country or
    region).

    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Ross James Butler ( GSURR )

    6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              The Project involves the laying of
                                                                     submarine cables and the construction of
                                                                     landing stations in FSM. Under the
                                                                     original project an existing landing
                                                                     station was to be used in Guam however
                                                                     this will no long be required as the
                                                                     restructured project would now intercept
1                                                                    the (soon to be installed) SEA-US cable.
                                                                     Accordingly no construction activities
                                                                     will be required in Guam and no social
1                                                                    or environmental impacts are
1                                                                    anticipated.
1
1                                                                    Potential negative environn1ental
                                                                     ímpacts related to the laying of the
                                                                     submarine cables, operations and
                                                                     maintenance phase of the cable operation
                                                                     and in the eventual removal of the cable
                                                                     are small-scale and temporary. The
                                                                     anticipated impacts include clouded
                                                                     water due to the temporary suspension of
                                                                     sand along the sections ofthe alignment
                                                                     due to cable laying and trenching; air
                                                                     and water pollutants as well as noise and
                                                                     vibration from survey and cable
                                                                     placement vessels; minar disturbance to
                                                                     coral reefs, mangroves, other marine
                                    habitats and hydrothermal vents; foreign,
                                    biologically-hannful or
                                    chemically-reactive cable materials or
                                    release ofharmful substances dw-ing
                                    cable laying operations.

                                      The Recipient has completed an Initial
                                      Envirorunental Examü1ation which
                                      included an Environmental and Social
                                      Management Plan (ESMP) for
                                      mitigation, monitoring and reporting of
                                      ali identified impacts including
                                      institutional responsibilities. policy,
                                      legal, and administrative framework,
                                      cost and financing, ami monitoring.
                                      Embedded in the ESMP is an
                                      Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP)
                                      wh.ich lists the items defined in the
                                      ESMP and adds further detail on
                                      boundaries and restriction to be adhered
                                      to by contractors conducting work in the
                                      marine cnvironment and on shore. The
                                      IEE also contains proccdures to establish
                                      a Grievance Redress Mechanism. The
                                      IEE includes assessment of ali
                                      project-related development sites and
                                      general layout and extent of facilities at
                                      project-relatcd developmcnt sites,
                                      analysis of altematives for the
                                      determination ofthe best location and
                                      technology of the cable alignment, cable
                                      laying, landing siles and cable stations;
                                      flow diagrams of facilities/operations,
                                    1 design basis, size. capacity;

                                      pre-construction, construction and
                                      operational activities; construction,
                                      schedule. facilities and sen ices;
                                      operation an<l maintenance activities.
                                      Community consultations were
                                      undertaken. and this has bcen
                                      documented in the IEE and ESMP and
                                      has been disclosed by the govemment.

                                    Unexploded ammunition from WWII
                                    poses risks that will be mitigated through
                                    careful management and due diligence;
                                    this issue is (also) addressed in the
                                    ESMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered since the cable
                                    alignments for Yap and Chuuk will run
                                                        1 through natural habitats but will not
                                                          enter any conservation area, nor degrade
                                                          or convert any critica! natural habitat
                                                          Although the alignment rnns close to 2
                                                          conservation areas m Yap, no impacts
                                                          are expectcd given the small ...cale ofthe
                                                          infrastructure being installed. The !EF
                                                          has assessed the impacts on the marine
                                                        / life and the coastal ecosystems and has
                                                          proposed mitigating measures in the
                                                        1
                                                          ESMP.
                                                        1
Forests 0Pf13P 4.36                       No                This policy is not triggered as there will
                                                            be no use of pesticides in this project.
Pest Management OP 4.09                   No                This policy is not triggered as there will
                                                            be no use of pesticides in this project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    Yes               This policy is triggered. Chuuk branch
                                                            line will run directly from junction to
                                                            Weno, entering the Chuuk Lagoon              1
                                                            through the northeast cham1et. Draft         1
                                                                                                         1
                                                            Chuuk Historie Preservation Act
                                                            declares there is a signiticant number of 1
                                                            sunken World War 2 (WW2) relics
                                                            (including 80 wrecks) in Chuuk Lagoon
                                                            protected under law and these
                                                            shipwrecks for nomination to
                                                            UNESCO's World Heritagc listing. The
                                                            ESMP has identificd potential impacts to
                                                            the PCR and mitigating measures and
                                                            chance find provisions are contained
                                                            therein. A separate PCR rnanagement
                                                            plan will be prepared and disclosed after
                                                            detailed infom1ation on the relics is
                                                            gathered during the oceanographic and
                                                            bathymetric survey. The ESMP also
                                                            establishes a chance-find procedure by
                                                            requiring that 1f the alignrnent 1~ found to
                                                            affect any cultural heritage once the
                                                            work has bcgun, mitigative actions will
                                                            be discussed with local officials andan
                                                            optional plan implemented and
                                                            monitored.
-
lndigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.1 O            No                This policy is not triggered as there are
                                                            no IPs identified in the proJect sites. This
                                                            is consistent with the PIC guidelines.
                                                                                     --         -     -
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12       No
                                                        ffº No land acquisition is required for any of
                                                                landing mes and all cable mutes "e
                                                            along existmg government owned ioads.
                                                            Construction retatcd impacts are
                                         --     -   .           ---
                                                managed via the ESMP to ensure these
                                                are mitigated and inconvenience to local
                                                conununities rrúnimized.

                                                 Due diligence documentation has been
                                                 prepared for the FSM landing site. The
                                                 project site (cable landing si te and si te
                                                 for cable station) in Yap will be located
                                                 on a govemment land in Nimar Village
                                                 in Weloy Municipality, Colonia (Parce!
                                                 l\Jo. 002 F 01 title) thus will not require
                                                 land acquisition. Both cable landing
                                               1 site and site for cable station are on a

                                                 vacant government land in a govemment
                                                 precinct including staff quarters,
                                                 government offices, the Post Office and
                                                 Office of Lands in the capital.

                                                 The cable landing station for Chuuk will
                                                 be on land which has already been
                                                 acqui.red by the State Govemment prior
                                               1 to the project and not for the direct

                                                 purpose of the project. The land on
                                                 which the cable landing site will be
                                                 located is fully owned by the
                                                 Government. This is confirmed in a
                                                 letter from the Govemor of Chuuk Sta te
                                                 to the Chairperson of the FSM Fiber
                                                 Optic Cable Taskforce. Ongoing
                                                 mon.itoring will be undertaken by the
                                                 PMU to confirm there are no outstanding
                                                 issues for this land .

                                                 Whereas under the original project a new
                                                 cable was being built from Palau to
                                                 Guam anda spur line to Yap would then
                                               1
                                               ¡be connected to this cable, the Yap spur
                                                 will now connect to the SEA-US cable.
                                                 The project therefore operates
                                                 independently from the ADB supported
                                                 connection of Palau ( which will also
                                                 have a spur to the SEA-US cable).
                                                 Accordingly ali Palau related irnpacts are
                                                 now removed from the World Bank
                                                 supported project.
Safety of Dams OPIBP 4.37                No    This policy is not triggered as there are
                                               no dams involved the project.
Projects on Intemational Waterways OP 'BP No   This policy is not triggered as submarine
7.50                                           cable systems will be deployed in the
                                                                 open ocean, not in shared waterways
                                                                 (ri,ers, lakes).
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No              No disputed areas.

    11. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their         ~lanagement

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    l. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
    and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The scale of social and environmental impacts is very low. The revised implementation arrangements
    further reduce any impact by avoiding the need to construct a second dedicated cable from Palau Yap
    to Guam. The only additive infrastructure as a result ofthis Project include~ the spur that will be
    installed linking Yap to the SEA-US cable system as outlined above.

    An IEE has identified key social and environmental impacts and benefits for the FSM (Yap-Chuuk)
    component to date. Another IEE was preparcd for.the Palau component, which will no longer be
    relevant as this will not form part of the World Bank supported project.

1   The !EE include social assessmenb which confirm that the project is expected to ha vean
    overwhelmingly positive social impact by impro\ ing the accessibility and quality of ICT services
    which will benefit the people of FSM.

    No land acquísition is required for the project however sorne localized disturbance may be created
    during construction. These have been assessed and management provisions established in the
    Environmental and Social Management Plan ( ESMP).
1
    Sorne negative environmental impacts may occur dueto physical works including constructíon of
    cable landing sites and laying and/or burial ofthe submanne cables on seabed floor. 1km buffer
    zones for sensitive environments (e.g .. seamounts and hydrothennal vents) and selection of
    appropriatc tcchnologies and cable placement methods have been established to minimize
    environmental disturbance ami are included in the ESMP. Maximizing placement ofthe cable in
    shipping channels will avoid harm to coral reefs. mangroves, other sensitive marine environments as
    well as sunken cultural rclics. Although two conservation areas (C As) in Yap are located adjacent to
    the project area, these areas can be avoided and the ESMP requires that contract specifications
    establish a cable route that provides ~ 75m distance from CA boundaries, and requires ali survey and
    cable laying vessels to maintain this distance at ali times (limited by the proximity ofCAs to the
    shipping channel).

    UXO Safcty Risks have also been identified in the ESMP and additional detailed work will be
    required during implementation to ensure UXO does not represent a risk to workers, the community or
    the environment.

    An Environrnental Code of Practice (ECOP) is embedded in the ESMP and will be used during
    ongoing consultation processes in guidrng the effective delivcry ofthe project.

    The ESMP requires that a PCR management plan be prepared after detailed information on the sunken
    relics are obtained after the oceanographic and bathymetric survey. The ESMP also establishes a
    chance-find procedure by requiring that if the alignment is found to affect any cultural heritage once
    the work has begun. mitigative actions will be <liscussed with local officials andan optional plan
implemented and monitored.

FSM will revise its ESMP to provide for due diligence reporting in connection with the construction of
the cable system segment by SEA-US which will supply capacity services for Yap. It is noted that, as
a purchaser of capacity from SEA-US under a contract for an Indefeasible Right of Use (IRU), FSM
has no influence or control over the activities of SEA-US.
2. Describe aoy potential indirect aod/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
tbe project area:
Construction of support infrastructure may have smalJ-scale and localized temporary impacts. No long
term impacts are expected.

Consultation highlighted concems about increased vulnerability to human trafficking and increased
accessibility of undesirable websites dueto improved technology
3. Describe any project alteroatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Altemative technologies, cable aligrunents, and methods were considered in the IEE, as outlined in the
report. Six options for the land site in Yap and three aJternative landing sites in Chuuk were
considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                                                         ~~~~~~~~~~~~


The cable laying operations will avoid infringing on any live coral reefs or areas where coral is
recovering from past degradation. To that end thc oceanographic survey team will receive instructions
to align the cable around living reefs (based on the 2014 surveys to date no such interaction is
anticipated, so long the cable is placed in the shipping channel).

lf not placed with care and in the shipping channel the cable could impact local seagrass meadows in
both si tes (albeit minimally. given that the cable is 3-7 cm in diameter). To avoid this, the cables
placement will be confined to a narrow path (less than 0.4m ( 15") wide and O. 75m (29.5'") deep, and
these specifications will be included in contract documents, and avoiding seagrass meadows wherever
possible. Seagrass meadow locations were identified and none found to be in the recommended
cable-placement corri<lor. or anywhere near it.

The lEE established the limited technical capacity ofthe project implementing entity, the Project
Coordinator or the PMU, to credibly implement the ESMP. Nevertheless, this capacity will be
reinforced by the recruitment of a Safeguards monitor who will oversee the monitoring the Project 's
safeguards performance. Capacity building activities will be conducted to strengthen the PMUs
capacity to supervise compliance with the ESMP and ECOP.
S. ldeotify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation aod disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Department ofTransport, Communications and IJ1frastructure, FSM Open Access Entity (once
established), Department of Finance and Administration, MicroPal Committee (Palau-FSM joint
steering committee).

The ESMP establishes the need, and outlines a process for stakeholder consultation including the
requirement to conduct a series of consultations before. during and after construction activities with
government, pri.vate sector and non-government organizations including women and youth to address
a number of issues including progress of work and cable alignment. These consultations have the
    object1ve of informing. and seeking feedback from al! interested people on the work and general
    alignrnent location and methods to used. Coastal resource users will be consulted and cable laying
    activities kept to as short a period as possible; preferably outside any fishing seasons which will be
    defined during the consultation with Marine Resources authorities and the above community
    consultation activities.

    The ESMP requires that a safeguards monitor-technician be retained as needed by the project
    coordinator's office or the national govemment to provide on-the-job assistance with infonnation
    distribution, community consultation, and compliance monitoring tasks. The Cost of community
    awareness activities such as community meetings/public consultations and information materials
    prior to construction, during and after construction-have been budgeted far and are expected to be
    approximately $20,000, or about $10,000 in each of Yap and Chuuk.

    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Eoviroomental Assessmeot/Audit/Maoagemeot Plao/Otber
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       l 7 December 201 5
    Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                    l 8 Decernber 2015
    Far category A projects, date of distributing the EKecutíve Summary of the        NA
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "ln country" Disclosure                                                                17 December 2015
    Pacific Islands
    Comments:
    lf the project triggers the Pest Management aod/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and discloscd as part of the Eovironmental                                1


    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.                                               YES                                      1

    lf in-country disclosure of aoy of the above documeots is not expected, please explain wby:
                                                                                                                    1

    NA - Disclosed in country                                                                                       1

    C. Compliance Monitoring llldicators at tire Corporate leve/
j OP/BP/GP      4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?       Yes [X)       No [     l   '\A [    l
1
    OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
    Would the project result in any significant conversion or               Yes [ l       No [X]       NA [     l
    degradation of critica! natural habitats?
    lf the project would result in signi ficant conversion or degradation   Yes [     l   No [     J   NA [X]
    of other (non-critica!) natural habitats, cloes the project include
    mitigation mea.sures acceptable to the Bank?
    OPfBP 4. l l - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural               Yes [X]       No [     l   NA [     l
    property?
    Does the credit!loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the             Yes [X]       No [     l   NA [     l
potential adverse impacts on.cultural property'?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of lnformation
Have relevant safeguard policíes documents been sent to the World Yes [X]      No [   l   NA [   l
Bank's [nfoshop?
Have relevant documents been dísclosed ín-country in a public       Yes [X]    No [   l   NA [   l
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Ali Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [X]   No 1 l     NA [   l
responsíbilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [X]   No [   l   NA [   l
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system ofthe project include      Yes [X]   No [   l   NA [   l
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]   No [   l   NA [   l
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


111. APPROV ALS

Task Team Leader(s):            l\ame: James L. Neumann,Natasha Beschomer
Approved By:
Safeguards Advísor:             Name: Peter Leonard
Practice Manager/Manager:
