Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/21/2005 
Report No.:  34005
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P090037 
Project Name:  Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) Stockpiles Management & 
Destruction GEF Project 
Task Team Leader:  Rita Klees 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (50%);Solid waste management (50%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.35 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.72 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
 0.93 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
1.60
6.25 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main development objective of the project would be to protect the environment and 
human health by safely managing and disposing of stockpiles of POPs contaminated 
pesticides and PCBs.   
 
The global project objective of the project is sustainable POPs stockpiles management 
and strengthening of the regulatory and intuitional arrangements for long term control of 
POPs and other toxic substances in line with the requirements of the Stockholm 
Convention and other related conventions and protocols ratified by Moldova. To track the 
progress toward achieving this development objective, the project will use four key 
results indicators as summarized below, and explained in more detail in Annex 3:  
 
Page  2
(i)  Reduced risks of POPs environmental pollution to human health by safely storing 
and disposing of stockpiles of POPs contaminated pesticides and PCBs  
 
(ii)  Destruction of 2,210 tons of PCBs and POPs containing and contaminated 
obsolete pesticides  
 
(iii)  Modern regulatory system established within Moldova for the management and 
control of POPs and other toxic and harmful chemicals and wastes 
 
(iv)  Institutional and human capacities for enforcement of the POPs regulatory 
framework and for sustainable POPs stockpiles management strengthened 
 
POPs are chemical substances that persist in the environment, bioaccumulate through 
the food web, and pose a risk of causing adverse effects to human health and the 
environment.  The Stockholm Convention is the United Nations treaty negotiated to 
eliminate persistent organic pollutants (POPs) worldwide.  Under the Convention, 
countries commit to reduce and/or eliminate the production, use, and/or release of the 12 
POPs of greatest concern to the global community including 9 pesticides, polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), and unintended by products such as dioxins.  Moldova has signed and 
ratified the Stockholm Convention (2004).  The POPs of relevance to Moldova in terms 
of the Stockholm Convention have been found to be obsolete pesticides and PCBs.  
Moldova does not produce or use any of the POPs pesticides covered by the Stockholm 
convention and the use of any of them is not permitted.  Moldova does not produce PCBs 
but there are no restrictions on their import or use.  
 
In terms of obsolete pesticides, one residual effect of the past extensive use of 
pesticides in Moldova is an extremely high amount of stockpiled obsolete pesticides 
(defined as pesticides that are not in current use because they have been banned, have 
deteriorated, have expired, or are not wanted by the current owner).  In 2003, an 
inventory of stockpiles determined there were 344 warehouses containing obsolete 
pesticides.  Many of the warehouses were in an extreme state of disrepair with some 
completely exposed to the elements.  Much of the packaging material, bags and drums, 
for the solid and liquid wastes had deteriorated.  To improve this situation, it was decided 
to centralize the storage of the obsolete pesticides with each of the 37 administrative 
districts having one warehouse.  The warehouses were selected based on a number of 
environmental and safety criteria.  In November 2003, the Ministry of Defense (MOD) 
and the State Department of Emergency Situations (SDES) initiated the repackaging and 
transportation of the obsolete pesticide stocks from the scattered warehouses to the 37 
centralized district storage facilities. This activity has been financed by the Government 
and NATO.  All the material will be transferred to these warehouses by the time the 
project is effective.  It is estimated there will be a total of 3,000 tons of obsolete 
pesticides in storage.  When the obsolete pesticides were originally placed in storage they 
were indiscriminately mixed with each other in bags and drums.  This resulted in a 
mixture of POPs pesticides with non-POPs pesticides and there is no economically, 
viable way of determining the compositions of all the resultant mixtures in the 
repackaged plastic and steel drums.  Representative sampling analysis indicates that the 
average amount of POP pesticides, out of the total stock of obsolete pesticides, is about 
20 - 30%.  
 
Page  3
Regarding PCBs, these are a group of synthetic organic chemicals with varying 
harmful toxic effects to humans and the environment.  PCBs in Moldova are primarily 
used in the energy sector for use as dielectric fluids in power installations, especially 
transformers and capacitors.  According to the inventory undertaken as part of the POPs 
National Implementation Plan (NIP), financed by the GEF POPs Enabling Activity (EA) 
grant, about 20,000 PCB-containing capacitors, now unused and referred to as discarded, 
are located in 20 electrical substations throughout the country.  The substations with 
capacitors are all owned by the two transmission companies "Moldelectrica" and 
"Dnesterenergo" (in the Transnistria region).  Of these, 12,000 discarded capacitors are 
kept in one assembly consisting of 18 capacitor batteries at the Vulcanesti substation.  
About 300 discarded capacitors are kept in closed containers at the station.  In addition, 
two dumps with approximately 1,000 broken capacitors each are located at this 
substation.  All this equipment is about 30 years old and at the end of its life span.  Since 
PCBs can be readily released into the environment via equipment failures, leakages, and 
vandalism, the stockpiles of equipment pose a significant risk to health and the 
environment.  The total PCB content in oils within the capacitors (excluding the pits at 
Vulcanesti) is estimated at 380 tons while the total weight of the capacitors is 
approximately 1,060 tons.  
 
An assessment of the legal and regulatory framework for POPs management has 
determined:  
 
(i) 
Moldovan legislation does not specifically mention POPs and only covers use of 
substances as plant protection products, not, for example, for biocidal or industrial uses;  
 
(ii) 
does not regulate unintentional and by-product POPs;  
 
(iii) 
does not define public and private sector management responsibilities for POPs 
during their life-cycle, from production to disposal, as well as contaminated sites; and  
 
(iv) 
no provision has been made for sound chemical management in general.  
 
Monitoring and enforcement of relevant legislation is weak.  While there are several 
laboratories, centers, institutions and departments involved in monitoring activities 
regarding pesticides (including POPs) and PCBs, the monitoring facilities are poorly 
equipped and staffed; there is no coordination of activities; and no centralized 
information management system.  In the larger sense, there is no national chemical 
management system in place.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of three components:  (1) Management and Destruction of POPs; (2) 
Development of a Regulatory Framework for PCB Management and Control; and (3) 
Institution Strengthening and Project Management.  The project will be financed with a 
grant from the GEF (US$ 6.35 m), counterpart contributions (US$ 3.72 m), and other 
donors (US$ 2.53 m) including US$1.60 million from NATO.  NATO is currently 
seeking financing for a project to complete the disposal of the obsolete pesticides not 
financed by this project.  
 
Component 1.  Management and Destruction of POPs (US$ 8.23 million, of which 
GEF US$ 3.79 m).  
Page  4
This component consists of two sub-components:  (i) Destruction of Stockpiles of 
POPs Containing and Contaminated Obsolete Pesticides; and (ii) Management of PCBs 
and Destruction of Obsolete Capacitor Stockpiles.  
 
Sub-component 1.1.  Destruction of Stockpiles of POPs Containing and Contaminated 
Obsolete Pesticides (US$5.37 million, of which GEF US$1.21 m).  
 
This sub-component will finance the destruction by incineration of approximately 
1,150 tons of stockpiled obsolete pesticides (out of total 3,000 tons) from 10 of the 37 
centralized storage warehouses.   A hazardous waste incinerator operator will be selected 
under World Bank ICB procurement rules, to repackage the pesticides in International 
Bulk Containers (IBC)and transport them to an EU or nationally approved hazardous 
waste incinerator for final destruction.  The contractor would be responsible for carrying 
out the entire operation according to international conventions and EU standards for 
repackaging and transport of hazardous substances.   
 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) conducted during project preparation studied 
each of the 37 centralized storage facilities and ranked them according to an overall risk 
factor which included:  condition of storage buildings; proximity to populated areas, 
agricultural lands, watercourses, forest and pasture; vulnerability to floods; depth to 
groundwater; amount of pesticides stored; and availability of space for storage.  The 
project will finance disposal of stockpiles from the 10 sites posing the largest risk. NATO 
has a proposal to dispose of the remaining stockpiles of obsolete pesticides for which it is 
seeking financing.  
 
Sub-component 1.2.  Management of PCBs and Destruction of Obsolete Capacitor 
Stockpiles (US$2.86 million, of which GEF US$2.58 m).   
 
This sub-component consists of three activities:  (1) establishing an inventory of PCB 
containing or contaminated equipment; (2) destruction of a stockpile of obsolete 
capacitors; and (3) feasibility study of site clean-up at Vulcanesti Substation.  
 
Activity 1.  Establishing an Inventory of PCB Containing or Contaminated Equipment 
(US$0.48 m, of which GEF US$0.28 m).  A detailed inventory of PCB-containing or 
contaminated equipment, with appropriate labeling and identification of premises where 
the equipment is located, is a prerequisite for the future management and disposal of 
PCBs.  
 
Activity 2.  Destruction of a Stockpile of Obsolete Capacitors (US$2.09 m, of which 
GEF US$2.07 m).  The PCB-containing capacitors in the thirteen electrical substations 
are in a condition where leakages due to corrosion are occurring and leakages are 
expected to increase in the coming years.  This activity will finance dismantling of the 
capacitor batteries and packaging of the capacitors in closed containers; and excavation 
of the dumps with capacitor remnants and placing the materials in closed containers.   
This activity consists of three main tasks, which will eliminate some 80% of the likely 
PCBs currently held in electrical equipment in Moldova:  
Page  5
Dismantling of 17,300 obsolete capacitors from thirteen substations (the bulk of them 
are located at one substation, Vulcanesti) and packing in closed containers 
(approximately 899 tons);  
 
Excavation of 2,000 capacitors buried in two pits in the Vulcanesti substation and 
packing in closed containers (approximately 111 tons); and  
 
Shipment of 19,300 capacitors and up to 50 tons of highly polluted soil (approximately 
1,060 tons) to a hazardous waste incinerator for destruction.  
 
In order to simplify the operation and reduce any potential for conflict or delays, a 
single ICB contract will be negotiated with a successful bidder to complete the entire 
operation from dismantling of the capacitors, packaging, shipment and final disposal in a 
hazardous waste incinerator, while meeting EU or US environmental and health and 
safety requirements.  The contractor will be required to meet all international convention 
requirements and applicable national codes for packaging and shipment of the capacitors.  
These will be specified in the contract.  
 
The contractor also will be responsible for excavating 1,000 capacitors from the two 
disposal pits at Vulcanesti.  Specifications have been drawn up and will be included in 
the bidding documents on how this excavation is to be carried out by the contractor. 
Additional information will be provided to the contractor by the contract supervising 
consultant who also will be carrying out the feasibility study under Activity 3 and will be 
performing tests on the disposal pits prior to their excavation.  
 
Activity 3.  Feasibility Study of Site Clean-up at Vulcanesti Substation (US$0.29 m, of 
which GEF US$0.24 m).  The study will assess the technical, financial and environmental 
feasibility of different remediation approaches and recommend a least-cost solution.  A 
long-term ground water monitoring program will also be recommended for the site.  
 
Component 2.  Strengthening the Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building for 
POPs Management (US$2.32 m, of which GEF US$1.27 m)  
 
This component includes actions for modernization of current legislation specifically 
related to the Stockholm Convention and incorporation of provisions for establishing a 
broader chemical safety approach in the country based on EU directives.  Full 
transposition of all relevant EU legal acts shall be achieved.  These activities will include 
drafting of specific regulatory acts and supporting operational guidelines/handbooks for 
practical application.  The project will finance adequate institutional arrangements for co-
ordination of POPs related activities, country-wide and dissemination of experience 
gained for overall chemical safety aspects.  The component consists of two sub-
components:  (i) Modification of the Regulatory Framework; and (ii) Capacity Building 
for POPs Management.  
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Modification of the Regulatory Framework for POPs 
Management (US$0.74 m, of which GEF US$0.61 m)  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to provide a legal basis for POPs chemical 
management under Stockholm Convention requirements and to set-up an overall 
Page  6
chemical safety system in Moldova according to the EU regulation and legislation related 
to handling of dangerous chemical substances and hazardous waste.  
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Capacity Building (US$1.58 m, of which GEF US$0.66 m)  
 
This sub-component finances activities related to training of inspectors involved in 
applying the new regulations relating to POPs. The training will assist them in a clearer 
understanding of their professional and technical roles in the regulation and management 
of POPs, developing inventories for POPs chemicals and identification of contaminated 
sites, as well as strengthening the monitoring, reporting and control of POPs.  This sub-
component consists of two activities:(i) Strengthening of Inspectorates for Enforcement 
of POPs Regulations; and (ii) Upgrading and Strengthening of Existing Laboratories for 
POPs Analysis.  
 
Component 3.  Institutional Strengthening and Project Management Support (US$2.06 
m
of
which GEF US$1.29m)  
 
This component of the project consists of two sub-components:  Institution 
Strengthening and Project Management Support.  
 
Sub-component 3.1.  Institutional Strengthening (US$1.43 of which GEF US$0.74)  
 
This sub-component will strengthen the Ministry of Environment and Natural 
Resources (MENR) capacity for POPs management.  This sub-component will include 
the following activities which strengthen the capacity of the MENR to manage POPs:  (i) 
POPs Information Management and Reporting System for POPs; (ii) POPs Monitoring 
Network; (iii) Identification of POPs Residuals and Mapping of Polluted Areas; and (iv) 
POPs Awareness and Educational Activities.  
 
Sub-component 3.2.  Project Management Support (US$0.64m, of which GEF 
US$0.55 m).  
 
A
project management team (PMT) will carry out the usual project management 
functions of financial management, procurement, auditing, managing, monitoring and 
evaluating project implementation, and dissemination of project results.  The PMT is 
already operational within the MENR.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Preparation of the NIP included a national inventory of POPs which is being used to 
design the project.  The inventory identified the location, quantity, and in some cases, the 
composition of obsolete pesticides throughout the country.  These were found in 
approximately 344 locations scattered throughout the country, including one land fill 
(located near Cismichioi) devoted exclusively for obsolete pesticides, primarily in rural 
areas.  The PCBs to be addressed in the project are primarily those in capacitors.  The 
project will focus on the safe storage of PCBs in 16,000 unused capacitors.  About 90% 
of these are located in one large power substation in Vulcanesti.  All 344 sites as well as 
the 37 centralized facilities now in use for obsolete pesticides and the location of the  
PCBs, as well as the composition and quantity of materials, are available on a map, 
Page  7
produced by the POPs EA grant, which has been widely distributed and discussed, as part 
of NIP preparation, with communities throughout the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main potential negative environmental impacts of the project relate to the public 
health and environmental risks associated with the handling, dismantling, excavating, 
packaging, transporting and disposal of hazardous chemicals and wastes.  The facility 
used for the destruction of the capacitors and pesticides will be required to comply with 
the best international environmental and health and safety standards.  World Bank 
approved bidding documents for packaging, exaction, transport and final disposal of the 
capacitors and pesticides will be advertised internationally, but it is expected that 
hazardous waste incineration facilities in Europe meeting EU standards will be the only 
ones which will have the capacity and the interest to offer bids.  
 
One environmental impact associated with sorting and storage of these chemicals is 
self-ignition.  This is an existing risk given the prevailing conditions of storage but the 
project will reduce such a risk by virtue of the integrity of the containers to be used for 
pesticides and PCBs.  The project also finances improved security devices and guarding 
of the materials to prevent vandalism.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
It is recognized that some obsolete pesticides will require storage until final disposal 
finances become available.  By centralizing and ensuring the safety of storage, through 
improved storage methods and facilities, the threats posed by the over 300 obsolete 
pesticide stockpile locations have already been reduced and the safety of the material 
awaiting final disposal is improved.    
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Government Decision on Transportation of Hazardous/Dangerous goods within 
theTerritory of the Republic of Moldova (No. 672, dated May 28, 2002);  
 
International transport rules:  The European Agreements on the International Carriage 
of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR) and Rail (RID) and the International Maritime 
Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG);  
 
The EU waste shipment rules set out in EU Waste Shipment Regulation (Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 259/93); and  
 
The Basel Convention requirements relating to transboundary shipments of POPs 
containing waste also will be followed.  
 
The MENR and the Ministry of Health are responsible for supervision of the safe 
handling of obsolete pesticides during repackaging. There are technical standards to 
follow.  The actual repackaging and transport is conducted by special units of the 
Ministry of Defense and the Department of Civil Protection, which have some training in 
handling of the materials and are equipped with special protective gear.    The materials 
are transported in specialized military vehicles.  During project preparation, the adequacy 
of these standards, equipment and procedures will be reviewed with project activities 
designed to address deficiencies as needed.  The project will finance training to train staff 
in the use of personal protective equipment and appropriate environmental safeguards for 
handling of obsolete POPs stocks.  
 
The POPs EA Project included an assessment of the legal framework for POPs.  Over 
25 legal and regulatory acts deal with the full life-cycle of managing toxic and hazardous 
substances and wastes, including POPs regulated by the Stockholm Convention.  The 
most important legislation is Environmental Protection (1993), and Sanitary-
Epidemiological Well-being of Population Laws (1993), Ecological Expertise and 
Environmental Impact Assessment Law (1996); Production and Consumption Waste 
(1997), Regime of Hazardous Products and Substances (1997), and Protection of 
Atmospheric Air (1997) Laws.  These Laws are supported by the GoM implementation 
resolutions.  Despite the large number of laws in this sector, a number of deficiencies 
were found as listed above.  The project finances a number of activities to strengthen the 
legal and regulatory framework.  The project will also finance upgrading of the analytical 
laboratory capacities for conducting POPs analyses and identification; strengthening of 
the enforcement capacity to ensure compliance with regulatory controls; and improving 
inter-agency information sharing and information management systems.   
 
Page  9
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders are the Moldovan people likely to directly benefit from the 
project, i.e. those living in the vicinity of POPs sites, totaling about 150,000 people.  The 
process of developing the NIP and the carrying out the Environmental and Social 
Assessment for this project involved a wide group of local stakeholders in government as 
well as NGOs and local communities that have been affected by POPs pollution.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/05/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/29/2005  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  10
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rita Klees 
10/04/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita Klees 
10/04/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Nora Dudwick 
10/12/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
10/17/2005 
Comments:   
