Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/01/2005 
Report No.:  AC1742
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P089124 
Project Name:  Competitiveness Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Irina Astrakhan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 5, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.50
4.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective is to assist Moldova in enhancing competitiveness of enterprises 
through improvements in the business environment and making adequate standards, 
testing and quality improvement services available to enterprises.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be implemented over a four years period and will be financed through 
IDA Credit.  The Japanese Government has also approved a Policy and Human 
Resources Development Grant (PHRD) that will co-finance technical assistance activities 
that will be supported under the project.  
 
The project consists of the following components:  
 
(i)  Business Environment Improvement. This component will contribute to the overall 
government effort in the area of improving business environment and provide strategic 
input, including continuous support for developing regulatory reform strategy, building 
institutional capacity for deregulation, and introducing Regulatory Impact Assessment 
(RIA) in the legislative process of Moldova. It will build on the experience of the so-
Page  2
called "guillotine" law implementation and ensure sustainability of its outcomes. Main 
responsible agency for this component will be the Ministry of Economy.  
 
This component would include institution building activities for the National Committee 
for Regulation of Entrepreneurial Activity, the Working Group, relevant departments of 
the MOE and other entities involved in the regulatory reform implementation, 
management, monitoring, and impact assessment.  It will also support technical 
assistance with review of the regulations and drafting relevant legal documents, setting 
up regulatory registries and information systems.  To build support and understanding 
among stakeholders in the business and government sectors, the project will also finance 
public awareness workshops and seminars, public consultation activities, and study tours 
of key staff to selected countries where such reforms were implemented.  
 
(ii)  Modernization of MSTQ System.  This component addresses product quality 
obstacles faced by enterprises in competing in domestic and international markets related 
to poor MSTQ infrastructure and services.  The objective of the MSTQ Component is to 
strengthen capacity of the MSTQ system to provide internationally acceptable 
(especially, EU-compatible) MSTQ services. This objective will be achieved through 
assistance to the Government in (i) revising and strengthening relevant MSTQ 
regulations and implementing institutional reorganization reform; (ii) building capacity in 
metrology area by upgrading most urgently needed by the industry laboratories in INSM 
and strengthening their institutional capacity; (iii) upgrading standards system through 
adoption and translation of most frequently used standards, strengthening institutional 
capacity of INSM in this area, and revising relevant regulations in line with international 
best practices; (iv) strengthening accreditation and certification capacity of Accreditation 
Center; and (v) improving number and quality of testing services provided by conformity 
assessment bodies (laboratories and certification and inspection bodies) to enterprises. 
The main beneficiaries under this component will be Department of Standards and 
Metrology and its Institute for Standards and Metrology, Accreditation Center, and 
selected conformity assessment bodies.  
 
The project will finance equipment (laboratory and information technology) and 
technical assistance and training for INSM, AC and selected testing laboratories.  
Translation of standards and technical documents will also be included into the project. 
Special attention will be paid to the institutional building activities of the MSTQ 
institutions to ensure sustainability of the reform including reaping full benefit from 
upgraded facilities.  Staff would receive specialized training in operating new equipment 
and software, performing tests, assessments, implementation of ISO 9001:2000, and other 
activities.  An emphasis will be made on building skills among younger specialists and 
strengthening management and industry outreach.  
 
(iii) Facilitation of enterprise access to MSTQ services. This component will help 
promoting the use of MSTQ services by enterprises, especially SMEs through the use of 
the Matching Grants Scheme (MGS).  It will aim to strengthen the competitiveness of 
Moldovan companies, both to increase exports and secure their domestic market position, 
by improving quality of their products and services. The scheme will provide financial 
Page  3
support on a matching basis to enterprises willing to use external technical assistance for 
upgrading quality of their products and services initially by obtaining international 
certifications, such as ISO and HACCP, and, once the scheme is well established, by 
undertaking feasibility studies and upgrading technological processes.  The project will 
provide the grant facility and will support technical assistance, training and some 
administration costs of the administrator. The scheme will be administered by an entity 
that will be selected on a competitive basis by the MOE.  [Moldovan Export Promotion 
Organization (MEPO) that has an extensive experience with the previous matching grant 
scheme financed by TACIS, Chamber of Commerce, and other relevant organizations 
will participate in this tender].  
 
(iv) Facilitation of access to finance.  This component will improve access to finance of 
private enterprises (mostly SMEs) in Moldova by setting up regulatory framework and 
developing expertise for better tracking credit histories and creating capabilities for credit 
risk guarantees industry and its regulation.  It will build on improved financial standing 
and overall liquidity of Moldovan commercial banks, by providing appropriate 
instruments to commercial banks to lend to SMEs thus increasing their loan portfolios 
and the share of lending to SMEs.  Given that the main obstacles at the moment include 
poor collateral on the part of the borrowers and inefficient credit information system, the 
project will help the government in: (i) creating conducive environment for establishment 
of a credit bureau, and (ii) building relevant capacity in administering credit guarantee 
schemes in Moldova as well as promoting among Moldovan financial sector SME 
tailored financial products and services.  
 
(v)  Project Management.  The project would finance costs of project management, 
monitoring, financial management, audits and other activities related to overall project 
management, monitoring and coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in Chisinau.  No civil works will be supported under the 
project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Johnson Appavoo (ECSSD) 
Ms Nora Dudwick (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not Applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not Applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not Applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Irina Astrakhan 
07/22/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Johnson Appavoo 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
 
Comments:   
