Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1308 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 3, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P090673 
Project Name: RISP (APL #2) 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 31, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (74%);General 
industry and trade sector (20%);Sub-national 
government administration (4%);Other social 
services (2%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform 
(P);Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income 
generation (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialist in the task team:       Aleksandar Nacev 
Loan/Credit amount (IDA):                                                                                       $m 14.5 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Government 
Bilateral Co-financing 
Other 
($m) 
0.75 
2.0 
4.75 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The proposed project will be a Phase II of a two-phase Rural Investment and Services Program. The 
Program objective, which remains unchanged, is to provide long-term support to accelerate agricultural 
recovery and growth so that Moldova’s agricultural and rural sectors can play their full role in providing 
the underpinnings for future income growth and poverty reduction.  
 
Under this overarching objective, the project will strive to continue foster the post-privatization growth in 
the agricultural and rural sectors of Moldova by improving access of farmers and rural entrepreneurs to 
commercial financial services. The Phase II will build on success achieved under the Phase I, by: (i) 
strengthening and expanding the rural advisory services; (ii) improving business skills of the to-be 
entrepreneurs and assisting with the legal registration of the new businesses; (iii) upgrading the financial 
sector environment through a range of risk management measures, such as supervision capacity building, 
improved asset collateralization, establishment of a credit bureau, and introduction of new lending 
instruments such as leasing; and (iv) increase the commercial banking sector outreach into rural areas.  
 
C.  Project Description  
The proposed project will have four components: 
 
Component 1: Rural Advisory Services
.
Under Phase I, a decentralized and privately-owned rural 
advisory Service Provider (SP) network was established, creating a national-level advisory, extension and 
Page  2
knowledge-sharing system providing services to some 300,000 new farmers (about half of the farming 
population).  Phase I has demonstrated a high demand for quality services in this field, an ability to 
supply these quality services and the potential for cost recovery. Under Phase II, support to further 
strengthen the SP network will be provided, including assistance in implementation of the medium-term 
strategy, which will be elaborated during the preparation stage with PHRD funding.  
 
Phase II will address sustainability issues. There is a general recognition that continued public funding 
will be needed for several years to provide general basic extension services to a large number of small 
subsistence farmers as these services play an important
 social role under Moldova’s current economic 
conditions. There is justification for continued public funding of services that have more of a “public 
good” component, such as the development of environment-friendly land management in coordination 
with various GEF initiatives. At the same time, there is scope for the increased commercialization of SP 
services, already started on a small scale by marketing SP services to larger private sector companies, and 
it is expected that the emerging, and growing commercial farmers will gradually assume payment for 
specialized advice and services, which will require a strengthening of the professional capabilities and 
increased specialization of the SPs regional and local consultants.  
 
Component 2: Rural Business Development
.
This component will continue to support the creation of 
legally-registered, self-owned and sustainable farmer organizations, agribusinesses, marketing entities and 
other rural businesses with proper legal and operational status in rural areas, through the provision of 
technical assistance, training and operational support for a number of local Development Agencies (DAs). 
This component was primarily financed by a DFID grant under Phase I and further grant funding will be 
sought from the donor. The component complements to some extent the activities of Component 1, and 
plays a critical role in facilitating the disbursement of the credit line for first time borrowers (see 
component 3).  
The component was very successful under Phase 1.  By December 31, 2004, over 700 businesses (2,800 
new jobs) had received some form of assistance from DAs, 85 percent of these businesses had obtained 
loans from PFIs using funds either from RISP or from other sources, and the failure rate had been so far 
very low, around 1.5 percent.  
 
The Component will continue these activities, as the demand for such services continues to be strong. 
Here too the second phase will address sustainability questions. The methodology used for implementing 
this component – contracting a number of DAs and equipping them with knowledge and tools to enable 
them to create sustainable businesses has proved successful, is likely to be similar, but key cost recovery 
elements will be considered. Possible recommendations may
include (i) commercial banks which 
participated in Phase I financing part of the cost of business plan preparation, (ii) a financial contribution 
which may be required from the beneficiaries through a fee or an increased interest-rate spread. 
 
Component 3: Rural Finance
Under the Phase I, the original credit line amount disbursed at a very fast pace, over a period of 18 
months, which attests to the very high demand for loan funds in rural areas. Repayments rates are very 
high. A Supplemental Credit was approved in April 2004, and, although the disbursement pace has 
slowed down, the demand for investment credit in rural areas remains high.  
 
Agricultural lending as a percentage of portfolio is higher in the participating banks than the average in 
the banking sector (35.5% vs. 28%). However, rural lending has not been fully integrated into their 
overall business strategies. It is still limited both in terms of volume and number of clients served. Thus, 
more effort is needed to stimulate further commercial bank lending to agricultural and rural clients. 
 
Page  3
Under Phase II, therefore, the component will continue to answer the demand for investment credits in 
rural areas by providing credit lines through eligible participating financial institutions (PFIs). The focus 
on providing access to commercial banking services to first-time borrowers will be maintained. Project 
preparation will also determine the desirability of including leasing companies among PFIs to help 
alleviate some of the collateral-related constraints for agricultural equipment. The specific terms and 
conditions of the credit facility will be evaluated during the preparation, based on the lessons learned 
from the Phase I.
 
In addition to the credit line itself, the Project will help the Government with additional initiatives to 
strengthen the provision of financial services to rural areas. These initiatives could include (i) the 
establishment of a credit bureau (with USAID), (ii) further pilots to address land parceling and enhance 
land markets, (iii) the restructuring of the Savings and Credit Association industry and the enhancement 
of its supervision (subject to the findings of the implementation of the PHRD grant).  The PHRD will also 
look at the desirability of introducing additional topics such as moveable assets or warehouse receipts (in 
coordination with the Citizen’s Network for Foreign Affairs, or CNFA). 
 
Component 4: Project Management
.
This component will finance the project management function, 
which will be carried out by the Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU).  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand for services and credit. Project activities 
will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive areas. Where potential projects are 
proposed in the vicinity of protected areas or critical habitat, a specific environmental assessment will be 
required.  
 
The GEF-funded Agricultural Pollution Control Project (APCP) is currently under implementation in 
conjunction with the Phase 1 of RISP, to reduce potential nutrient pollution of investment financed under 
it. This collaboration is expected to be continued under RISP Phase 2.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Borrower, through the Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU), has adequate 
capacity for implementation of a project of this type.  The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) has been the 
counterpart of the Phase I of RISP, as well as two GEF-funded projects: Dniestr Biodiversity 
Conservation Project and the on-going Agricultural Pollution Control Project (APCP). CAPMU staff has 
been trained to carry out the evaluation and monitoring of sub-projects according to environmental 
safeguards.  
 
To re-assess the 
Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies, a review and update of the 
environmental review of the Phase 1 of APC will be carried out during the project preparation.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Page  4
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[N] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[TBD ] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[N] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[N] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[N] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[N] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[
]
B
[
]
C
[
X
]
FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA 
category (mandatory): 
 
The Pest Management s
afeguard is labeled as “TBD” for now since it is unclear whether Phase II will 
allow pesticides to be acquired. If the Team decides to include the acquisition of safe pesticides (e.g. for 
financing small nurseries or commercial gardens, etc.), then a simplified Pest Management Plan and 
exclusion list of dangerous pesticides will be prepared. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
The QER is planned for April 30, 2005. Then PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared by the PAD review 
date, planned for October 10, 2005.  
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
A
review and update of the environmental assessment carried out for Phase 1 of APC is planned 
during the preparation stage, and will be financed by the PHRD Grant for the Project. 
 
Overall, no significant environmental impact is anticipated under the project, given the relatively 
small size of most of the sub-projects to be supported. The proceeds of the project will be used to 
finance TA, as well as investment activities through credit lines channeled through selected 
commercial banks, non-bank financial institutions, and leasing companies. Due to the demand driven 
nature of the investment activities, it is not possible to state a priori the exact types of investments. 
However, prior experience under RISP Phase 1 shows that the priority investments are for agricultural 
production and processing, as well as a range of non-agricultural activities in rural areas, such as 
services and trade.  
 
As was the case with Phase I, there will continue to be hundreds of sub-projects financed; with 
specific locations not identified at appraisal.  Therefore, an environment chapter of the project 
Operational Manual will be prepared (bank-requirements for an FI) which includes environmental 
screening criteria, and approaches to identify and mitigate risks.  Materials prepared for Phase I will 
be reviewed by an expert EA consultant to judge whether the previous approach to environmental due 
diligence was followed, whether sector-specific mitigation and monitoring aspects need to be 
strengthened, whether the FI banks (past and proposed) performed correctly, whether their interface 
with environmental officials was adequate, and what modifications are needed in the OM for Phase II 
(both in the text and with respect to training of the FIs). Both the environmental impact assessment 
(EIA) and the guidelines for the loan officers will be discussed in a consultation workshop with the 
stakeholders and local NGOs and disclosed in the country in the local language and in the Infoshop 
prior to the appraisal.  
 
While no other safeguard policies have been triggered by the project, a social assessment for the 
project will also be carried out during the project preparation, to be completed by the PAD review 
date, October 10, 2005. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Pierre Olivier Colleye 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
March 22, 
2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Benoit Blarel 
March 16, 
2005 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
