Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1600 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/14/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P090340 
Project Name: Rural Education 
Task Team Leader: Ana Maria Parchuc de Jeri 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective would be to increase access to quality education for children 
from poor families, particularly in rural areas, to improve efficiency in the use of resources, and 
to strengthen the capacity of the system to plan and manage the delivery of education services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
*
QUALITY LEARNING:  Improve the quality and relevance of learning in rural schools 
through improved curriculum, textbooks, teaching aids, assessment and teacher training of 
students in pre-school and general education, thus ensuring continuity and further development 
of successful activities carried out under the Moldova General Education Project.  Main focus on 
increasing student achievement and new skills.  Focus on (a) strengthening institutional 
arrangements, (b) quality and school-based practices and bottom-up approaches, (c) school-based 
curriculum development and implementation, (d) securing textbooks rental scheme, the extra-
budgetary textbook fund and textbook competition mechanisms, (e) assessment and examination, 
including classroom assessment practices, (f) demand-driven in-service teacher training and 
school-based professional development, (g) training of school directors and raion level 
managers.  
Page  2
*
ACCESS AND EQUITY:  Provide poor rural communities with additional resources to 
improve quality of and access to adequate education services, promote community participation 
(particularly by parents) in the management of education service provision and strengthen social 
accountability mechanisms surrounding teachers and other school staff.  Review subsidies 
system. Focus on provision of resources to rural schools via School-Community Grant program 
targeted to poorer communities.  Horizontal cooperation with Moldova SIF (which has know 
how on community mobilization, community-based procurement, micro-project cycle 
management) and is honest/ experienced agent, trusted by Government and communities alike.  
Possible stipends to particularly disadvantaged children conditional on attendance and other.  
Support for introduction of means-testing to improve subsidies system.  
 
*
EFFICIENCY, PUBLIC FINANCE AND GOVERNANCE:  Improve the efficiency and 
transparency of the system for allocating public money to schools and of the use of resources 
within schools.  Build on the existing formula-funding approach, with emphasis on using the 
signals that it generates to trigger policy action and explore ways of eliminating 'unofficial' 
payments (to teachers, school directors, examiners, etc.) by parents and students, and of 
improving the Ministry's input into the MTEF to strengthen it as the framework for detailed 
planning and budget preparation. Pilot optimization of schools networks with a participatory and 
consultative approach.  Pilot municipality grants, contract of local public transportation 
providers, etc. Formula funding improvements combined with decentralization of authority to 
autonomous schools.  Improve Budget preparation at MES in liaison with the MOF. Strengthen 
the capacity at the central, raion and school levels, as well as communities to plan, manage, 
monitor, and deliver education services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Moldova, especially the rural areas and schools.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Education has implemented and completed the first education project.  It has 
experience in supervision of The Ministry of Education has implemented and completed the first 
education project.  It has experience in supervision of Bank assisted projects.  The proposed 
project will recruit consultant(s), where necessary, to assist the borrower in ensuring proper 
implementation of safeguard policies.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/26/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ana Maria Parchuc de Jeria Figueroa 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
