                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: 111018

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: Dec-12-2016

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Morocco                                   I Project ID : P161893
                                                    I Additional Project ID (if any):
 Project Name: Noor-Midelt Solar Power Project
 Task Team Leader: Sameh Mobarek and Moez Cherif
 Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2017        I Estimated Board Date: July 27, 2017
 Managing Unit: GEE05                          I Lending Instrument: IPF
 Sector: Energy
 Theme:
 IBRD Amount (US$400m.):
 IDA Amount (US$m.):
 GEF Amount (US$m.):
 PCF Amount (US$m.):
 Other financing amounts by source:
 KfW Amount (US$750m)
 European Investment Bank Amount (US$200m)
 Agence Franyaise de Developpement Amount (US$1 OOm)
 African Development Bank Amount (US$260m)
 Clean Technology Fund Amount (US$50m)
 Environmental Category: A
 Simplified Processing              Simple []               Repeater []
 Is this a transferred project      Yes []                   No [X]

B. Project Objectives:

The PDO is to increase (a) installed capacity (megawatt) and (b) electricity output (megawatt-hour),
especially during peak hours, of the Noor-Midelt Solar Complex.

C. Project Description:

The Project is expected to adopt an innovative hybrid solar CSP/PV plant design to combine the benefits
of both technologies to deliver firm power to the grid. The feasibility study indicates that this type of
hybridization is an attractive solution as it increases the load factor and reduces intermittency, compared to
pure PV solutions. At the same time, it also reduces upfront investment cost and the levelized cost of
energy, compared to pure CSP solutions. The Request for Qualification (RFQ) for Phase 1 was issued on
July 26, 2016, indicating that the CSP technology could be parabolic trough or tower, similar those used in
the Noor-Ouarzazate Solar Complex.

The first phase ofNoor-Midelt is expected to consist of two separate plants, each with 150-190 MW CSP
capacity and a minimum of 5 hours of thermal storage. The capacity of the PV component, which is
expected to provide daytime generation, is left to the bidders' discretion, but cannot exceed night-time net
capacity from CSP by more than 20%. Bidders are expected to optimize their design based on expected
plant performance criteria that will be provided in the RfP. The actual capacity will depend on the
technical specifications MAS EN will develop in the RfP stage, and bidders' proposed technical
optimization to meet the RfP requirements. The common and associated infrastructures includes access
roads, on site drainage infrastructure, raw water infrastructure (including water intake, treatment, storage
tank, pipes), power transmission line and on-site substation, and telecom infrastructure. All common
infrastructure will be developed by MASEN, except the transmission lines and substation for evacuating
power that are considered to be associated infrastructure and will be developed by national power utility
ONEE.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of environmental
and social risks and impacts (if known):

The future Noor-Midelt site is administratively located in the Midelt Province and comprises a total surface
of 4141 ha. The site is located on the Haute Moulouya Plateau approximately 20 km Northeast from the
town of Midelt. The site is accessible from the Route Nationale RN13, which links Meknes with Midelt.
2714 ha is communal land and belongs to the two ethnic communities of Ait Oufella and Ait Rahou Ouali,
while around 1427 ha of forest land belongs to the Water and Forests Administration. MASEN had planned
and started the process of acquisition of the land through willing buyer - willing seller arrangements.
Currently (November 2016), the ownership titles of the different plots constituting the site are contested in
court, so the acquisition will now be obtained through expropriation. For this, the compensation rates agreed
upon during negotiations with the communities will be used. According to MASEN, the court case should
be resolved in the first half of the calendar year 2017. Should the situation not be clarified prior to the
preparation of the involuntary land acquisition planning documents, the different scenarios of legal
outcomes will have to be included in the safeguards assessments.

The Noor-Midelt site has been selected for the following reasons: i) the site has an excellent potential for
solar power production; ii) the site is close to the Hassan II Reservoir (11 km) for its water needs; iii) there
is a nearby electric transmission line; iv) there is easy access via the RN13; v) the site is very flat and
favorable for a solar power plant; vi) there are no people living on the site; vii) the vegetation is very sparse
so that the site is barely used for livestock grazing; viii) environmental impacts and risks are minimal; ix)
there are no physical cultural resources within a radius of 3 km; and x) the site is located outside a natural
zone and outside any protected tourist area.

The project site preparation, project construction and operation will require a total of more than 4000
hectares (ha) of permanent land acquisition. Additional land acquisition will be required for water supply
and transmission lines. Access roads to the project site will not require land acquisition, as existing right-
of-way are used, and existing rural roads are upgraded without enlargement. The sandy and arid terrain
allow only for small scrubs to grow. The land acquisition for the project will have limited impacts on the
livelihood of local communities: the land is having only very sparse vegetation, and is used only barely for
livestock grazing. Transhumance seems to occur mostly along the river crossing the site, along which a
corridor will be kept open that can be used for livestock. The importance of the site for livestock rearing
will be quantified during a socio-economic assessment during project preparation. Local population
confirmed the low intensity of use for temporal pastoralist activities. The area to be acquired covers around
10% of the available land of the communities, but much less in terms of income-generating assets.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The Borrower (MASEN) has gained considerable experience during the implementation of the ESMPs for
the Noor-Ouarzazate I, II and III projects. The Noor-Midelt solar power project is expected to be very
similar, and MASEN has adequate capacity to implement the project in compliance with World Bank
Performance Standards and Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines. During the construction of the
CSP Tower of Noor III in Ouarzazate, there was a lapse in the application of the Health & Safety
Procedures, leading to a fatal accident. The Health & Safety System for Noor II and III has since then been
significantly strengthened and is now in compliance with international standards.

MASEN has prepared and managed land acquisition for similar projects before, in particular for the NOOR
Ouarzazate projects, where conditions for land acquisition are similar. No particular issues have been
reported regarding land acquisition, which is implemented by a division under the Ministry of Interior. A
team of two staff is currently assigned to deal with the land acquisition and E&S management under the
Midelt project. Land acquisition will follow initially national procedures. The RAP being prepared will
follow WBG and other donors' requirements to ensure implementation is up to international best practices.
MASEN followed the same principles for the Ouarzazate projects.

The main responsibility for the adequate preparation and implementation of the Framework Environmental
arid Social Assessment (FESIA), Construction Environmental and Social Management Plans (CESMPs)
and the Health and Safety Plan (H&S Plan) will be with the Developer and the Contractors, which is similar
to the 3 Ouarzazate solar power projects. The Developer and the Contractors will have the required capacity
for the implementation of the Construction ESMPs (CESMPs) and H&S Plan. During project preparation,
attention will be paid to PS2, in particular regarding working conditions, management of labor influx, etc.
Requirements for th~ application of PS 1, PS2, PS3, PS4, PS6 and PS8 by the developer and contractor will
be managed through bidding documents and contracts, and MASEN will monitor all safeguards plans.

MASEN has prepared and shared with the Bank's technical project task team in draft form a FESIA,
including the environmental impacts and mitigation for the possible solar technologies, water intake, water
pipeline, raw water treatment plant and access roads, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the project main
and extension sites (land acquisition plan 1, LAP 1) for the two phase 1 plants, and a due diligence report
for the access road. The RAP for the main project site will be revised by MASEN and resubmitted to the
Bank and other borrowers in early 2017. No land acquisition will be needed for the access road. A third
RAP will be prepared later in 201 7 and cover land acquisition for the water supply infrastructures for the
project operation. The RAP will be prepared after the alignment of these water supply infrastructures is
finalized. The ESIA and RAP for the transmission lines to connect the site with the national power grid will
be prepared as associated facilities by ONEE, the national energy utility. A separate ESIA and RAP in
compliance with the applicable World Bank Safeguard Policies will be prepared for those lines by ONEE
and reviewed by the Bank and the other IFis and disclosed in-country and the Bank's website.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Africa Olojoba, Lead Environmental Specialist
Markus Vorpahl, Sr. Social Development Specialist
Robert Robelus, Sr. Environmental Consultant
II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

 Performance Standards (please explain why)                                    Yes           No           TBD
 PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and                           x
 Social Risks and Impacts
      A Draft Framework Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (FESIA) has been prepared for the
 Midelt Project and was shared with the World Bank for technical review. For each Solar Power Technology
 that is used, a full ESWCESMP will be prepared, cleared and disclosed in-country and the Bank's website
 prior to Appraisal and implemented during project construction and operation. For the water intake, the
 water pipeline, the water treatment plant and the access roads, which all have a very low environmental and
 social impact and risk, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared as part of
 the FESIA. The Developer and Contractor will be required to prepare and implement a Construction ESMP
 (CESMP) and a Health and Safety Plan (H&S Plan) in compliance with international best practices.
 PS 2: Labor and Workin2 Conditions                                             x
      Labor conditions and Health and Safety aspects during construction and operation will be managed in
 compliance with PS2 by all sub-contractors, contractors, developers and MASEN.
 PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                             x
      Pollution prevention and other environmental management responsibilities will be part of the FESIA,
 ESMPs and CESMPs and will be implemented by the Developer, the Contractors, sub-contractors and
 supervised by MASEN.
 PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                                   x
      Influx of non-local labor into local communities during construction will have to be managed. It is
 expected that non-local labor will be living off-site in existing townships and travel daily to the construction
 site, so social risks to local communities should be moderate and manageable. Recruitment of local labor
 will be the responsibility of Agence nationale de promotion de l 'emploi et des competences (ANAPEC).
 The same approach as for the 3 Ouarzazate projects will be followed, which worked well. The nearest
 village is 7 km from the project site, which means that negative environmental and social impacts on
 villages will be limited. However, positive environmental and social impacts may be substantial during
 construction and operation through the implementation of a local development plan by MASEN within the
 nearby villages, currently being prepared as part of MASEN's Corporate Social Responsibility and the
 implementation of the RAP.
 PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                           x
      Around 4000 hectares of land are to be acquired involuntarily. Local communities have been consulted
 on the land acquisition for the project site and compensation standards have been agreed upon. At this stage,
 the ownership of the land is contested between local communities, the public entity managing forest land -
 some of the land, although arid, is classified as forest due to specific vegetation patterns - and individual
 members of the local communities. While the matter is being settled through the court system, the
 compensation will be placed in an escrow account. A resettlement plan has been prepared by MASEN and
 will be revised to be in line with PSS.
 PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                    x
 of Living Natural Resources
      There are very scarce living natural resources at the project site, no endemic or endangered species. The
 environmental and very limited biodiversity impacts are expected to be mainly only on the project site,
 which has been assessed and determined in the FESIA.
 PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                                  x
      Additional information is needed.
 PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                       x
      No Cultural Heritage has been discovered within a radius of 3 km from the project site. However, a
 chance finds procedures will be included in all relevant Contracts.

OP 7.50 regarding Projects on International Waterways and OP 7.60 regarding Projects in Disputed Areas
are not triggered.
 III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be disclosed
        and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

        March 25, 2017

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for preparing the
   PAD-stage ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing 1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
           o FESIA: Launched, draft FESIA has been sent to the World Bank for technical review and
               has been approved by other IFis for disclosure. The FESIA includes an ESMP for the
               water intake, water supply pipes, raw water treatment plant, and access roads. The
               preparation time frame for the ESIA for the transmission line is not known. Also the time
               frames for the preparation for the ESIAs/ESMPs for each solar energy technology is not
               yet known, since the developers have not yet been selected.
           o Resettlement Action Plan for the project site: Launched, to be completed by QIII, FY 17
           o Resettlement Action Plan for the water supply lines and water treatment plant: To be
               launched after alignment and design of the infrastructure has been finalized.
           o Socio-economic analysis: Ongoing, to be finalized in QIII, FY 17

IV. APPROVALS

    Si ned and submitted b :
    Task Team Leader:

                                                   Nina Chee
      Comments:
    Practice Mana er:                              Erik Fernstrom
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
