                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            (FCPF READINESS FUND)
                               CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 104244
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 15, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Mozambique             Project ID: P129413
                                            Additional Project ID (if any): P129413
Project Name: MZ - FCPF REDD+ READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT
Task Team Leader: André Aquino/ Karin Kaechele
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A               Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending Instrument: Grant under the Forest
                                            Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF)
Sector: Forestry (100%)
Theme: Climate Change (100%)
FCPF Amount (US$): 5 million
Environmental and Social Category: B – Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing              Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [ ]                  No [ X ]

B. Project Objectives:
   1. The Project Development Objective remains unchanged from the original grant. It is to
      contribute to the adoption of national REDD+ strategy and of the national legal and
      institutional framework for REDD+.

Key Results

   2. In addition to the three results indicators identified for the original US$3.6 million grant,
      it is proposed that 2 new results indicators are added. The additional results indicators
      reflect aspects of the National REDD+ Readiness Process that were not fully addressed in
      the US$3.6 million grant but that would be addressed under Additional Funding.

   3. The achievement of the original PDO are being measured through the following results
      indicators:
         I.   A national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
              (REDD+) is prepared and validated by national stakeholders;
        II.   The legal and institutional framework for the implementation of the strategy is
              prepared and validated by national stakeholders; and
       III.   A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) including an
              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) are prepared and
              validated through participatory stakeholders’ consultation.
                                                                                              1
      4. The achievement of Additional Funding objectives would be measured through the
         following additional results indicators:

             I.    The R-Package is prepared and validated by national stakeholders
            II.    Two landscape programs would be designed
           III.    The national Reference Emissions Level is submitted to the UNFCCC.

C. Project Description:

      5. This Additional Funding Grant complements the US$3.6 million Second Grant
         Agreement (signed on July 15, 2013). Activities under the original Readiness Preparation
         Grant (original grant) were satisfactorily completed as of the Mid-Term Review on June
         30, 2015. As of October 31, 2015, 81 percent of the original grant has been committed
         and 52 percent already disbursed. Mozambique’s Request for Additional Funding in the
         amount of US$5 million was approved at the 20th FCPF Participants’ Committee
         meeting in November 6, 2015.

      6. This grant would allow the country to finalize the preparation of the R-Package1,
         specifically for the preparation of the national Reference Emissions Level (REL);
         Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) system; strengthening the REDD+
         Strategy through information from landscape Programs that are being designed;
         maintenance of the Technical Unit of REDD+ (UT-REDD+); promotion of
         communication activities; and public consultations. The proposed additional activities
         seek to complete the ongoing REDD+ Readiness process. The grant would have a
         Closing Date of December 31, 2018.

      7. Drawing on the mid-term evaluation of the REDD+ process conducted in June 2015 by
         an independent consultant hired by the GoM, Mozambique self-assessed its REDD+
         Readiness as satisfactory, and identified the remaining technical gaps and associated
         financial needs towards the preparation of a R-Package. Detailed information on progress
         achieved under the original grant and the rationale for additional funds are contained in
         Mozambique’s Mid Term Progress Report (MTR) and Request for Additional Funding,
         available at the FCPF website2.

      8. In the beginning of 2015, the government of Mozambique created a new Ministry of
         Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER) which brought together the
         previous Ministry of Coordination of Environmental Affairs (MICOA) and part of the
         previous Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG). The main mandate of this new ministry is to
         lead, plan, coordinate, monitor and ensure the implementation of policies related to the
         management and administration of lands, forests and wildlife, the environment,
         conservation area and rural development, including REDD+. The UT-REDD+, which

1
 The Readiness package (or R-Package) is produced by countries at the end of the first phase, and is a collection of
documents required by the World Bank’s Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) at the end of the readiness
phase. It consists of 5 core elements: 1) a REDD strategy; 2) an Implementation framework; 3) a Monitoring
Reporting and Verification (MRV) system; 4) a Reference Level scenario (REL); and 5) safeguards.
2
    https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2015/September/Mozambique%20MTR%20Final_Sept4.pdf
                                                                                                                  2
       was coordinated by both a director of the previous MICOA and a director of the previous
       MINAG is now under this new ministry, and is directly attached to the Unit that manages
       international funds, which in turn is linked directly to the Minister. This proposed
       Additional Funding Grant would be implemented by this unit. There are no new
       safeguards policies triggered and the Environmental Assessment (EA) Category remains
       B (partial assessment).

   9. The additional funds would support the National REDD+ Readiness process activities in
         three R-PP components, namely:
      i.     Readiness organization and consultation
     ii. Reference emissions level/reference levels
    iii. Monitoring systems for forests and Safeguards

       Table 1. FCPF Additional Funding components/activities and budget
  Components/activities supported with FCPF additional funds        Amount
                                                                    (USD)
  1. REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangement, Legal                       2,500,000
   Framework and Preparation of Pilot Projects
  1.1. Support to REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangements,                 900,000
  communication and consultation activities
  1.2. Strengthening Mozambique’s Forest Governance                        400,000
  1.3. Preparation of Emissions Reductions Landscape Programs            1,200,000
  (studies, safeguard instruments, consultations, communication,
  coordination of activities, and team hiring, etc.)
  2. Reference Emissions Level/Reference Levels                           1,700,00
  2.1. Development of an updated national lu/lc base map                   200,000
  2.2. Development of historic land covers change maps                     150,000
  2.3. Design and implementation of the national forest inventory          960,000
  2.4 Improved tools and methodologies for estimating carbon pools         250,000
  2.5 Development of FREL/FRL                                              140,000
  3. Monitoring Systems for Forests                                        800,000
  3.1. Preparation of MRV                                                  500,000
  3.2. Purchase of equipment                                               300,000
  TOTAL                                                                  5,000,000

Component 1. Strengthen the REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangement, the National
Legal Framework and Pilot Landscapes Programs (US$2.5 million)
   10. Under the original grant, the Government of Mozambique made significant progress on
       developing a national REDD+ Coordination Unit (UT-REDD+) composed by 9 technical
       experts, and establishing a multi-stakeholder national steering committee for the REDD+
       Readiness Process (Comite Técnico de Revisao - CTR), all created and governed by a
       national Decree. Progress has also been made in conducting multi-stakeholder
       consultations and communication activities.
   11. The Additional Financing would support i) the REDD+ Readiness Management
       Arrangements, communication and consultation activities; ii) the Strengthening

                                                                                            3
        Mozambique’s Forest Governance; and iii) the Preparation of Emissions Reductions
        Landscape Pilot Programs.
    12. The outputs related to this components are: 9 technical staff hired at the National Level
        UT-REDD+3; 9 technical staff hired at the Zambézia Province and 9 technical staff hired
        at the Cabo Delgado Province4. At least 3 meeting per year with the CTR; consultations
        with local communities on the REDD+ Strategy and the design of the Landscape REDD+
        Programs; communication activities at both national and local level; and studies to
        support the forest sector reform and the design of the landscape programs. An Emissions
        Reductions Program Document (ER-PD) will also be prepared, and submitted for FCPF
        approval.

1.1. Support to the REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangements, communication and
consultation activities (US$0.9 million)
    13. The AF grant would cover the consultant fees and operational costs of the National UT-
        REDD+; and the technical meetings of the National Steering Committee (Comité Técnico
        de Revisão). Communication activities that could be supported by this additional funding
        are the maintenance of the REDD+ website and blog; media campaigns; radio and TV
        spots; and publications. Consultations activities are planned to be undertaken during the
        whole period covered by the grant, involving key stakeholders at the national, province
        and local levels.

1.2. Strengthening Mozambique’s Forest Governance: Update legal framework related to
deforestation and forest degradation (US$0.4 million)

    14. As part of the reform in the forest sector to confront the challenges of forest exploitation
        and poor governance, the Government of Mozambique is developing a Forest Policy and
        Strategy (2016-2026). This Policy will focus exclusively on forest resources, separate
        from the previous Forest and Wildlife Development Policy and Strategy. The new Policy
        will promote the protection and use of forest resources in a sustainable, responsible and
        transparent manner, and will address national capacity building, transparency and
        accountability, and climate change resilience. A new Forest Law will also be established,
        and will re-evaluate current models of forest exploration, and strengthen the systems of
        law enforcement and control, amongst others.

    15. The Additional Funding would be used to support the revision of the Forest Policy and
        Strategy and Forest Law, such as through analytical studies and assessments of the
        conditions for implementation. AF would also support the enabling conditions for their
        effective implementation, which could include dialogues with stakeholders in the forest
        sector, components of Projecto Floresta Em Pé, and others as they arise.

    16. The GoM has also proposed revisions to the National REDD+ Decree, in order to
        improve the environment for REDD+ project development and to define the sharing of


3
  At the national level: General Technical Assistance; REDD+ Strategy Coordinator; Pilot Project Coordinator;
Financial Assistant; Procurement Assistant; Communication officer; Safeguard Specialist; 2 MRV specialists.
4
  At each program in the Province level: Provincial Coordinator; MRV expert; and focal points for each of the 7
districts of the program.
                                                                                                                  4
        benefits from revenues. AF could support analytical work that would contribute to the
        revision process.

1.3. Preparation of Emissions Reductions Landscape Pilot Programs (US$1.2 million)
    17. The Government of Mozambique, through the UT-REDD+, is preparing integrated
        landscape management programs as a way to reduce deforestation while promoting rural
        development. Currently, two initiatives are being developed: the Cabo Delgado
        Integrated Landscape Management Program, and the Zambezia Integrated Landscape
        Management Program. The latter has been provisionally approved into the FCPF Carbon
        Fund pipeline at the FCPF Carbon Fund meeting in October 2015 5. These programmes
        would allow REDD+ to be implemented at the provincial level, bring several
        stakeholders together around a common vision for the management of the landscape, and
        strengthen cross-sectoral coordination. These programs would also generate lessons for
        the implementation of the national strategy of REDD+.

    18. The AF would cover consultant fees and operational costs of the provincial UT-REDD+
        in Zambézia and Cabo Delgado provinces; the establishment of district-level landscape
        units; operational costs of multi-stakeholder forums that have been established in both
        Provinces; the preparation of the Zambezia ER-PD and other relevant studies for both
        Zambezia and Cabo Delgado programs; public consultations in the areas of projects;
        communication activities in the local level; meetings; and seminars.


Component 2. Reference Emissions Level/Reference Levels (REL/RL) (US$1.7 million)
  19. The establishment of REL/RL basically comprises two areas of activity: the activity data
      analysis (area of forest cover changes; deforestation, forest degradation, for the selected
      reference period) and the determination of emission factors (carbon stocks changes
      resulting from forest cover changes). For the emission factors estimation a National
      Forest Inventory is being prepared (tier 3, carbon stocks inventory).
  20. The Additional Funding would finance the following activities: i) Development of an
      updated national LU/LC base map; ii) Development of historic land cover change maps;
      iii) Design and implementation of the national forest inventory; iv) Improved tools and
      methodologies for estimating carbon pools; v) Development of FREL/FRL.
  21. The output of this component is forestry inventory completed in selected provinces; and
      the REL is submitted to the UNFCCC.

2.1. Development of an updated national lu/lc base map (US$0.20 million)
    22. This activity aims to develop an updated and recent land cover map to assess the extent of
        forest cover prior to initiating REDD+. It will be conducted by a new MRV Unit, under
        the UT-REDD+, as a 'learning-by doing' activity, whereby national experts will be
        trained and supervised by the MRV specialist. To start the work, the best corrected/ortho-
        rectified Landsat 8 mosaic for 2013/2015 will be produced by the South African National
        Space Agency (SANSA) at Hartebeesthoek (formerly CSIR-Satellite Applications
        Center) through CENACARTA. An automated classification will be undertaken using the
5

https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/2015/October/Final%20Resolution%206%20Mozambique%
20ER-PIN.pdf
                                                                                                        5
       ground truth surveys from a current JICA project (completing this dataset if needed). The
       classification results will then be refined, validated (CENACARTA), and compared with
       other available datasets (e.g. the recent LULC maps from the national agro-ecological
       assessment project the recent forest cover maps of Cabo Delgado and Gaza by JICA).
       This map will be used as a benchmark for FREL/FRL establishment and designing
       national forest inventory (in 8 provinces) and completion of the required information for
       development of REL/RL.

   23. This additional funding will be used to pay ground data collection, consultant fees, per
       diem, training, validation (desk and field checking) and workshops. The preparation of
       the national mosaic of Landsat 8 images (2013-2015) shall be engaged as a service
       through CENACARTA to the South African National Space Agency (SANSA) at
       Hartebeesthoek (formerly CSIR-Satellite Applications Center).

2.2. Development of historic land covers change maps (US$0.15 million)
    24. A statistical approach and a supervised classification on a multi-temporal Landsat mosaic
        are proposed. This activity would be implemented by the new MRV Unit under UT
        REDD+. A supervised change detection using stable and change training points will be
        preferred (semi-automatic change detection). The use of continuous time series
        (evolution of one index over several dates to identify unusual behaviors) compared to
        discrete time periods (compare the beginning and end dates) also will enable to detect
        reliable change. This approach would be run and tested to establish a good “Forest/ Non
        Forest Change Mask?, according to a current national Forest Mask (it could be used the
        result of the previous activity, the national base map, Gaza and Cabo Delgado forest
        cover maps, currently almost available, or the upcoming GFC 2010, or GlobeLand30-
        2010, currently available).

   25. For this purpose a grid of sampling points will be allocated over potential change areas
       using Hansen data (Deforestation/Forest Gain GFC:2000-2014) and other relevant
       sources of information (e.g. drivers of deforestation/forest degradation analysis
       conducted by Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Palsar FNF coverage changes
       2007/2010, etc.). These points will be interpreted using Collect Earth tool (free available
       in the web) and all the High/Medium Resolution Imagery free available in the web
       (Google Earth -Digital Globe and SPOT-, Bing and Here maps), to visually assess if they
       correspond to forest change (Deforestation/Forest Gain). These training data will be
       plugged into a supervised classification routine to perform forest/non - forest change
       detection within the Google Earth Engine API.

   26. This supervised change detection needs input from expert national knowledge. Therefore
       a 15 years reference period (2000 to 2015) should be used for activity data assessment for
       deforestation and forest gain by forest type. It is expected that with this approach
       development of activity data at national level will be concluded in less than a year (end
       2016). The same kind of exercise, using Collect Earth and visual interpretation, could be
       run to detect forest degradation (visual interpretation of pre-identified hotspots of
       degradation: Historical Landsat NDVI analysis). This approach should be completed with
       other methods (PALSAR/LIDAR) including a Participatory MRV (PMRV) for assessing
       experimentally forest degradation by forest type.
                                                                                                6
   27. The funds will be used to finance on the ground data collection, consultant fees, per diem,
       training, and validation workshops.


2.3. Design and implementation of the national forest inventory (US$0.96 million)

   28. The inventory will be designed and implemented in eight provinces following the same
       methodology that in Gaza and Cabo Delgado but under a national design approach and
       adding extra variables/parameters as those related to other relevant carbon pools and
       safeguards information. A forest cover map (updated LU/LC map 2013/2015) would be
       used to design and allocate the samples. This activity will cover the entire ground data
       collection activity. It will allow the Forest Inventory Unit to carry out a NFI that meets
       REDD+ requirements and collect information on four pools: above ground, litter,
       deadwood and soil carbon pools. The below-ground carbon pool will be estimated using
       root-to-shoot ratio. This activity will also address how to gather additional parameters
       related with environmental and social issues belonging to the safeguards information
       system, in close collaboration with the safeguards specialist from UT-REDD+.
       Additionally, this amount is foreseen to also cover a Quality Assurance/Quality Control
       (QA/QC) team which will visit 10 percent of the field sites to ensure data quality.

   29. The additional funding will be used to pay consultant fees, training, equipment, vehicles
       renting, fuel, camping gear, and consulting services (database analysis and reporting),
       daily subsistence allowances (DSAs). Also, some funds would be used to purchase
       missing field equipment and to purchase replacements, as needed.

2.4. Improved tools and methodologies for estimating carbon pools (US$0.25 million)
    30. This sub-component will support new research activities and collaborations to improve
        biomass estimates and identify potential technologies to detect forest degradation. It is
        expected to prepare and launch a national call for research proposals on selected topics
        after an analysis of gaps in available tools and methodologies. This call for research
        proposals will target national research and academic institutions, in potential partnerships
        with national or international companies and institutions.

Data collection and analysis for measurement of carbon stock
   31. Collection and analysis of other data such as the development of Carbon Conversion,
       Expansion Factors, Wood Density and Root/Shoot Ratio are also key for estimating
       emission factors. The activities should include: (i) generation of national factors through
       a process of destructive sampling; (ii) implementation of targeted sampling and surveys
       to establish national factors; and (iii) development of factors for carbon conversion,
       expansion factors, wood density for key species, root/shoot ratio based through
       destructive sampling program. A database and an analysis on tools needed to measure
       carbon stocks (allometric equations, biomass models, expansion factors, wood densities,
       root/shoot radios, soil carbon models) will be done.

Identify potential technologies to detect forest degradation

                                                                                                  7
   32. At the moment it is unclear if forest degradation is significant (preliminary analysis
       shows it might not be).The additional FCPF fund will be used to cover gaps in this
       component, namely:

      Acquire relevant data from national data sources and local studies on the use of patterns
       of fuel wood, charcoal and timber to test different proxy data for forest degradation
       processes;
      Include an assessment of monitoring forest degradation using Landsat-type data or for
       selected areas with higher-resolution data (study of feasibility to see whether areas
       affected can be detected accurately); and
      Assess and integrate satellite-derived fire and burnt area data records.

   33. This additional funding would support consultancy services on improved tools and
       methodologies for estimating carbon pools.

2.5. Development of FREL/FRL (US$0.14 million)
    34. This activity would support an analysis of historical forest emission trends. Different
        scenarios will be constructed (historical averages, linear projections and modelling) and
        an analysis of required time points and time periods will be undertaken. Also, national
        circumstances will be assessed, looking at other countries’ experience. This work will
        build on a historical land cover change assessment (AD) and emission factor analysis
        (based on a secondary information analysis, tier 2, and finally on National Forest
        Inventory information, tier 3). It will be developed a stratified (by vegetation types) step-
        wise approach regarding pools, activities and accuracy.

   35. The additional funding grant would be used to pay consultant fees, per diem, training,
       and validation workshops.

Component 3. Monitoring Systems for Forests (US$0.8 million)

   36. The additional funding grant would finance the: Preparation of MRV and Acquisition of
       Equipment and others.
   37. The output related to the component is the national MRV system operational, producing
       annual forest cover change maps according to internationally-recognized methodology.

3.1. Preparation of the national Monitoring Reporting and Verification system (US$0.5
million)

Operationalization of the monitoring system
   38. The main objective of this activity is to design a complete MRV system for the country;
       considering four levels of implementation: (i) National Level with an operational remote-
       sensing/GIS forest/land-use monitoring unit (MRV Unit under UT-REDD+ to be
       integrated in the near future in FIU), (ii) Provincial Level (iii) District Level and (iv)
       Community Level, with small forest (agroforest) information units. JICA is currently
       designing jointly with the FIU the heart of this system: the Forest Resource Information
       Platform. But it is also needed and urgent to design the access systems to the platform,

                                                                                                   8
       editing and consultation permits, apps and data entry forms, communications system and
       operation of base and intermediate units for information and validation processes.

   39. For this purpose it is necessary to develop the following sub-activities: (i) Needs
       assessment for training and capacity building, (ii) Assess existing data storage and
       management systems relevant for MRV and design and implement management solutions
       for key elements of the MRV system, (iii) Develop a data sharing policy for internal and
       external usage, (iv) Technical Staff Recruitment for the MRV Unit under UT-REDD, (v)
       Procurement of IT expertise to provide system management and IT support throughout
       project. There are also other MRV sub-activities to be funded and implemented under this
       item. To check the viability of this system it is necessary to design, implement and test on
       a pilot basis a Participatory MRV system. For this purpose and in close collaboration
       with the UT-REDD safeguards specialist, the MRV Specialist will develop the following
       activities: Review of International/National MRV Practices, Design the community based
       MRV system, Develop an operational manual for MRV tasks, Conduct training of
       trainers on the developed MRV system and Support testing of the applicability of the
       local MRV system on field level in selected communities of 15 districts of Zambezia and
       Cabo Delgado (ERs Programmes). These activities will be developed in close
       collaboration with the Natural Resources Management Committees, Associations,
       Individual producers and Community Entrepreneurs. Finally it is considered necessary to
       create a technical group of stakeholders, MRV Task Force, consisting of representatives
       of institutions and associations related to MRV at the local, provincial and national level,
       to accompany the process of creating the system. This advisory body will meet quarterly.

   40. Additional funding will be used to pay consultant fees, per diems, trainings, meetings,
       vehicles, fuel, equipment and consumables.

Information System for Multiple Benefits, Other Impacts, Governance, and Safeguards
    41. Mozambique has started to develop a safeguards instruments, and plan to develop a
        safeguards information system and the monitoring of non-carbon benefits resulting from
        the implementation of REDD+. The AF will support the operationalization of an
        information system for safeguards.


3.2. Acquisition of equipment and others (USD0.3 million)
    42. This activity would support the purchase of all furniture, material and equipment
        necessary to prepare the REL and the MRV system. Basically: 5 workstations and 1 GIS
        Server, GIS and RS software for these 6 computers, 1 printer, 1 plotter, wireless net,
        desks, and chairs.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

   43. Activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in
       Mozambique do not include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. The


                                                                                                 9
      FCPF support is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation
      processes at the national and sub-national levels.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguards Policies:

       IV.    The execution of the national REDD+ Readiness Process will be led by the
              Technical Unit for REDD+ (UT-REDD), at the Ministry of Land, Environment
              and Rural Development (MITADER). A National Steering Committee (Comite
              Tecnico de Revisao) provides advisory role to the UT-REDD+ under the overall
              strategic direction from CONDES.

        V.    The National Directorate for Environmental Assessment (DNAB) at MITADER
              is responsible for development of policies, review environmental and social
              impacts studies and mitigation plans, issue environmental permits. Environmental
              and Social inspection and auditing is now being overseen by AQUA (National
              Agency for Environmental Quality) a statutory body under MITADER mandate.
              MITADER has long lasting proven experience and expertise in managing World
              Bank funded operations, particularly in climate change and natural resources
              management sectors. Overtime, the World Bank has been providing series of
              social and environmental safeguards training workshops that helped to improve
              both the perception of safeguards policies, as well as other crosscutting issues
              related to gender and vulnerable groups inclusion and way of adequately
              implementing them. Nonetheless, the SESA/ESMF and RPF already being
              prepared will specify supplemental training and capacity building needed to
              accompany MITADER and participating government agencies to adequately
              implement safeguards measures.

       VI.    MITADER has recently hired two Social and Environmental Safeguards Focal
              Points (SESFP) based at the Project Management/Technical Implementation Unit
              (PMU/PTIU) who will be under overall guidance from the World Bank Social and
              Environmental Safeguards Specialists. They will provide day-to-day supervision
              of the SESA/ESMF and RPF preparation. Training workshops will be gradually
              organized for all actors involved in the implementation of social and
              environmental safeguards policies as well as gender and vulnerable groups
              inclusion at central, provincial, district and local level. SESA/ESMF and the RPF
              are expected to be prepared in the first quarter of 2015.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava         Social Development Specialist, GSURR
Paulo Sithoe                     Environmental Specialist, GENDR

II. SAFEGUARDS POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

   44. In light of the proposed project activities, mainly oriented towards technical assistance
       and capacity building, this project will trigger the following fours safeguards policies,
       namely) OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats),
                                                                                             10
      OP/BP 4.36 (Forest) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), whereby both OP 4.09
      (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) have been marked up
      as TBD for now until further details are provided during project preparation.

  45. The readiness preparation phase is primarily meant for technical assistance and capacity
      building activities. The grant will not finance any implementation of REDD+ activities
      on the ground (i.e. investments, pilot activities). In order to identify the potential negative
      consequences from the implementation of the National REDD+ Strategy, the GoM will
      carry out a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), which should
      ensure: i) the systematic integration of social and environmental considerations into the
      final REDD+ Strategy; ii) a participatory process for the preparation of a national
      REDD+ strategy; and iii) the establishment of both an Environmental and Social
      Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or
      Process Framework, along with a grievance redress mechanism to support the country in
      adequately managing and mitigating potential future negative consequences from the
      implementation of the REDD+ strategy. Likewise, the SESA/ESMF will make provision
      for addressing issues related to both Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP
      4.36).


Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes           No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
In line with the nature of the REDD+ Readiness preparation activities, the Government of Mozambique
will use a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as the applicable safeguards
approach. The strength of the SESA for REDD+ is that it will combine analytical work and
participatory consultations to inform the preparation of the REDD+ strategy. The SESA will help
ensure compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies by integrating key environmental and social
considerations relevant to REDD+ including all those covered by the safeguard policies. The SESA
will help the Government of Mozambique to formulate their REDD+ strategy in a way that reflects
inputs from key stakeholder groups and addresses the main environmental and social issues identified.
The SESA includes an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as a distinct output,
which provides a framework for managing and mitigating the environmental and social risks related to
investments and carbon finance transactions in the context of the future implementation of REDD+.
The future investments and carbon finance transactions will still require specific environmental and
social assessments, but these will benefit from the strategic context created by the SESA and ESMF.
The ESMF will include stand methods and procedures, along with appropriate institutional
arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing and monitoring specific ESMPs to prevent
adverse impacts as well as cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                        X
The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous environmental services and
products that natural habitats provide to human society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the country puts in place an effective strategy to
reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues related to natural habitats and potential
impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be included in the ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                 X
Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on forests in the country,
in that the main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while
contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent communities. Potential impact of the National
                                                                                                     11
 Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No           TBD
 REDD+ Strategy on natural forests will be assessed through the SESA and included in the ESMF. The
 SESA and associated ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy regarding
 forest management, in particular as these relate to the establishment of plantations.
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                        X
 This policy could be triggered depending on the final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
 Agricultural intensification and reforestation activities, for instance, could trigger this policy,
 depending on the methods employed by concrete activities on the ground to manage pests. The SESA
 will address critical issues related to pest management, as necessary, and these will also be included in
 the key elements for the ESMF.
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                         X
 This policy could be triggered if REDD+ activities promote actions in areas containing sites deemed
 physical cultural resources by communities living there (e.g. holy sites such as sacred groves, sacred
 forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the grant will have negative impacts on any such sites,
 the existence of any such sites and the corresponding need to trigger this policy will be determined
 once the National REDD+ Strategy is completed.
 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                            X
 REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary Resettlement in situations involving land acquisition and/or
 involuntary restrictions of access to legally designated parks, land acquisition, protected areas, or forest
 management / reforestation areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent
 feasible, or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts in cases where
 resettlement or other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA process, any issues
 related to land acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a Resettlement Policy
 Framework and/or Process Framework will be prepared. To help identify and mitigate restriction of
 access to natural resources in protected areas, a Process Framework will be prepared.
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X

 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                    X

 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: March 2017
A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
   needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
   ISDS:
   46. The SESA/ ESMF and RPF are expected to be prepared by March 2016, then reviewed
       by the Bank and disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
   47. This additional funding will not finance any concrete investment activities and therefore
       is expected to have no direct environmental and social impacts on the ground. In addition
       to a SESA, an ESMF and the RPF/PF will be prepared in view of the addressing possible
       key environmental and social issued associated with the future implementation of
       REDD+ strategy/projects.




                                                                                                           12
IV. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:                  Andre Aquino          Date: Dec 15, 2015
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Hanneke Van Tilburg          Date
                                                           January 26, 2016
 Practice Manager:                  Magdolna Lovei               Date
 Comments:                                                December 2, 2015




                                                                               13
