Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1551 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/29/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mozambique 
Project ID: P093165 
Project Name: Smallholder Development in the Zambezi Valley 
Task Team Leader: Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Es 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 26, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: April 18, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Animal production 
(20%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);Crops (20%);Agricultural extension and research 
(20%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
3.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main project development objective is to increase the income of smallholder farmers in 
selected districts by empowering communities, building community organizations, increasing 
on- and off-farm production and productivity, and facilitating farm access to markets.  Project 
activities would be demand-driven, and closely linked to government's decentralization strategy, 
agricultural policies, and other donor activities in the project area, as appropriate.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to achieve the development objectives, the proposed project would apply innovative 
mechanisms for integrating location-specific inputs for the acceleration of agricultural growth 
through decentralized institutional development, technological change, support to small-scale 
infrastructure development, and increased private sector participation.  However, the project 
would not finance all the sub-components and activities listed below.  The strategy will be to 
Page  2
look for partnerships with relevant organizations active in the region.  The nature of the project 
means that there would be a heavy emphasis on concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the 
project impact and outcomes.  
 
Component 1:  Institutional Development  
 
The focus of this component would be to strengthen local institutions and develop capacity and 
introduce participatory processes to accelerate the decentralization process.  This component 
entails the following sub-components:  (i) develop grass-roots or self-help farmer associations, 
(ii) promote savings mechanisms amongst groups supported by the project, i.e. drawing upon 
successful experiences in Mozambique and explore linkages to the IFAD Rural Finance Support 
Program, (iii) support to local civil society organizations, (iv) enhance the district level planning 
capacity, and (v) address risks related to HIV/AIDS.  
 
Component 2:  Infrastructure Provision  
 
To ensure viability and sustainability of farming operations, smallholders need access to a range 
of infrastructure facilities. This factor is generally quoted as the key constraint to productivity, 
and includes the risks associated with variation in rainfall and access to rural roads linking 
production areas to markets.  The objective of this component would be to provide critical 
infrastructure to smallholders to reduce their risks and increase their productivity.  Sub-
components are:  (i) small dams for irrigation, (ii) access roads, (iii) wholesale and retail market 
facilities, (iv) market information and communication network, and (v) private sector linkages.  
 
Component 3:  Agricultural Technology  
 
The main thrust of this component would be to increase availability of cost-effective 
technologies to enable farmers to intensify and, where appropriate, diversify production systems 
in a sustainable manner.  Specific activities to be supported would include the following sub-
components:  (i) demand-led technology adaptation, (ii) community-based seed production 
systems, (iii) value addition through improved post-harvest management systems, (iv) small-
scale mechanization and (v) on-farm water management.  
 
Component 4: Community Investment Fund  
 
The project would encourage communities to submit proposals for financing from a 
Community Investment Fund.  The focus of this component would be to finance demand-driven 
agricultural activities in the project area, including the following sub-components: (i) 
institutional support to producer organizations, (ii) agriculture related goods and services, and 
(iii) training opportunities for on-farm and non-farm income generating activities (for example, 
agricultural extension, processing and marketing activities, development of small enterprises).  It 
is expected that this approach would encourage competition between districts and provinces for 
additional funds.  Communities would be actively encouraged and assisted in preparing 
proposals based on their needs.  Funds would be allocated in response to demand generated and 
the expected effectiveness of utilization by the participating groups.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would be located in the central region of the Zambezi Valley, possibly 
encompassing four districts in three provinces:  Mutarara (Tete Province), Morrumbala and 
Mopeia (Zambezia Province), and Caia (Sofala Province).  It would complement investments of 
Page  3
the Bank and other donors in the area, namely, the "Sena Railways Line" and the "Moatize Coal 
Mining" operations, thus contributing to the rapid economic development of the area.  A final 
decision will be made during preparation, taking into account the project area's growth potential, 
socio-economic and institutional factors, and synergies with other donor activities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is weak.  Capacity building is foreseen 
under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An ESMF is anticipated to ensure that minor civil works are implemented according to good 
environmental practice, and to consolidate requirements under other OPs - i.e., 4.04, 4.09, 11.03, 
4.12 screening (if needed), and 4.37.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Impacts to natural habitats are not expected.  Provisions to ensure protection of natural 
habitats will be included in the ESMF   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Project activities may involve the use of pesticides and promotion of IPM.  The need for 
PMP is anticipated.  It will be included in the ESMF.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Impacts to cultural property are not expected.  Provisions to ensure protection of cultural 
property will be included in the ESMF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Minor civil works (small dams, market facilities) may involve land acquisition and 
compensation if it is done involuntarily.  The need for an RPF will be determined during project 
preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Small dams for irrigation may be funded by the project.  Provisions to ensure they are 
properly engineered and built will be included in the ESMF.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/28/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguards policies requirements will be confirmed during the first project preparation 
mission, and followed up as appropriate. Members of the safeguards team are included in the 
preparation team.  Previous Policy frameworks prepared for other Bank funded projects  in 
Mozambique will be used and adjusted to the context of this project.  The Sector Manager 
will be responsible for clearance of safeguard requirements, as the project is labeled a 
"transferred project".  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered due to Component 2 (Infrastructure 
provision) that might entail land acquisition and possibly involuntary displacement of 
population.  Because sub-projects and their location are not known at this stage, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.  In relation 
to OP/BP 4.12, in the PAD-stage ISDS, further mitigation instruments will be specified for 
sub-projects that will cause displacement or/and land acquisition during implementation, i.e. 
Land Acquisition Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans.  
 
Launching activities:  August 2005  
 
Completion: October 2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jeeva A. Perumalpillai-Essex 
06/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/29/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard G. Scobey 
06/29/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
