Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/08/2005 
Report No.:  AC1518
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Mozambique 
Project ID:  P071465 
Project Name:  Transfrontier Conservation Areas and Tourism Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P076809 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);General 
industry and trade sector (10%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Other environment and natural resources management 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.77 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
3.72 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
0.75
5.24 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Development Objective of this project (PDO) is to Increase community-revenues 
from growth in environmentally sustainable tourism in three TFCAs.  The project's 
Global Environment Objective (GEO) is to Increase the area, connectivity, & 
effectiveness of biodiversity conservation in three TFCAs.   
 
3. Project Description 
Building on the achievements of the first phase, Component 1 will strengthen the 
enabling environment for TFCAs.  It will help create the policy, legal and institutional 
framework for the GOM to implement its strategic choices:  i.e.  improve regional 
collaboration for management of transboundary resources, promote interagency 
collaboration and vertical linkages between central and decentralized governments, build 
the capacity of public sector institutions at all level and communities to manage 
biodiversity and natural resources, and to form productive partnerships with the private 
Page  2
sector.  Community land and natural resource ownership and use rights will also be 
addressed.  
 
The TFCATDP will finance consultation, workshops, study tours as well as edition, 
publication and dissemination expenditures to help GOM draft, approve and diffuse (1) a 
national conservation policy, (2) legal framework for TFCA, protected area and wildlife, 
(3) guidelines for tendering conservation concessions, (4) the protected area and wildlife 
institutional reform, (5) the regulation of the new tourism law, (6) guideline for tendering 
tourism concessions, (7) four transfrontier agreements.  
 
Component 2 : Integrated District Development Planning ($2.26 M) - IDA: $0.75 M;  
GEF $0; PHRD $1.44 M  
 
The establishment and management of TFCAs is centered around participatory land use 
and economic planning that allow for a balance between the conservation of biodiversity 
and the sustainable use of natural resource assets in a defined spatial development 
context.  The success of the TFCAs will depend on the degree to which (1)  these plans 
are mainstreamed into the GOM?s economic development plans and (2) the commitment 
and capacity of GMO and its partners at the local and central level to implement these 
plans.  In TFCATDP a proactive approach to integrated planning at the district level is 
adopted to increase the chance of success and sustainability of the TFCAs.  The process 
identified is called Integrated District Development Planning (IDDP) and focuses on 
defining and implementing a series of practical steps to ensure that biodiversity and 
natural resource based assets are mainstreamed in District Development Plans (DDP).  
 
Component 2 is divided into two Subcomponents: (2.1.) National capacity building and 
stock taking, and (2.2.) IDDP per se. Subcomponent 2.2. will follow these steps: (1) 
Capacity building and initial consultation at provincial, district and local levels; (2) 
District diagnostic, including (a) basic data gathering and consolidation, (b) tourism 
planning, (c) conservation priority setting; (3) Spatial Development Planning; and (4) 
Production, adoption and diffusion of the DDPs.  
 
Component 3 : Community and Private Sector-Led Tourism Development ($12.07M)  - 
IDA: $7.70 M; GEF: $2.20 M; PHRD $1.94 M  
 
The IDDP sets the foundation for sustainable tourism development in the TFCAs and 
key tourism districts.  Component 3 is designed to both develop the capacity of the 
tourism sector (government, communities and the private sector) to participate in the 
preparation and implementation of the IDDPs, and in the formulation of the tourism 
master plans for key tourism districts that will be informed by the IDDP.  The IDDP 
process will guide the identification of tourism land for private sector investment.  This 
component will support MITUR to establish a comprehensive and clearly defined set of 
procedures to implement an A-Z process for land concessioning, from land identification 
to on the ground investment.  It will also support MITUR to implement legislation 
allowing them to ?recuperate? land allocated for tourism investment where the 
investment period has expired so that this land can be marketed to appropriate investors.  
Page  3
Component 3 is divided in three subcomponents: (1) Capacity building of DINATUR 
and FUTUR, (2) Minimum infrastructure platform in Matutuine and Vilanculo, (3) 
Community-based conservation and tourism development.  Subcomponent 3.1. will 
support building capacity of DINATUR, DPC, FUTUR to develop and implement (1) 
tourism micro planning at district level, (2) business development and financing, (3) a 
tourism statistic account.  Subcomponent 3.2. will provision about $4.2 million for 
minimal tourism infrastructure platforms for the key tourism hubs of Vilankulo and Ponto 
do Oro as prioritized by the IDDP.  Subcomponent 3.3. will support to communities 
through (1) a Community Equity Grant Facility for organized communities to enter into 
joint venture partnerships with private investors to realize tourism or conservation related 
investments such as creation of community reserves in interstitial areas, game ranches, 
lodges, etc., and (2) the participatory and compensation process to improved natural 
resource management and land acquisition.  
 
Component 4 : Protected Areas management ($15.10 M)   IDA: $7.10 M;  GEF: $6.50 
M
This component will support the identification, monitoring and protection of the most 
significant and vulnerable biodiversity assets within the three TFCAs, through the 
establishment/rehabilitation and management of a network of National Parks and 
Reserves under the direct management of DNAC.  This will begin a long term process of 
major improvement of the Maputo Special Reserve, including the gazettement of the Futi 
corridor and of a new marine reserve; support to Bahine National Park and the 
Chimanimani Special Reserve.  Modest support, will be provided to Limpopo National 
Park, to supplement current Peace Park Foundation (PPF), KfW & AFD efforts, and to 
Zinave National Park.  
 
Component 4 is divided in two subcomponents:  (4.1) Capacity building and applied 
research, (4.2) Biodiversity conservation in formal protected areas.  Under 
Subcomponent 4.1. (a) DNAC capacity will be reinforced, (2) survey, inventories and 
applied research will be carried out.  For targeted parks or reserves, Subcomponent 4.2. 
includes (a) improvement of park design and planning, (b) increasing the area under 
protection, (c) build or rehabilitate essential infrastructure, (d) procurement of essential 
equipment required for management (e) deployment and capacity building of staff, (f) 
improvement of communication and information, (g) launching effective law 
enforcement, (h) carrying out research and monitoring and evaluation, (i) increase the 
revenue generation capacity.  
 
Component 5 : Project Management, Communications, and Monitoring and Evaluation 
($4.72 M) - IDA : $3.48 M;  GEF: $ 0.90 M; PHRD $0. 34 M  
 
This component will finance the project management costs including project 
procurement, accounting and monitoring as describe by their respective manuals.  It will 
strengthen the capacity of the TFCA Unit to coordinate TFCA program, and will support 
its related operating costs.  This includes recruiting a few additional long-term staff for 
Page  4
the Unit, including TFCA Coordinators based in the field in order to support the shifting 
of planning and implementation to the Provincial and local level.  
 
The component includes the implementation of an M&E system to track and assess 
project implementation and impacts, and a system for adaptive management based on this 
information; and the development and implementation of an information system and a 
communications strategy to ensure timely flow of accurate information among the 
implementing agencies, and to increase awareness and understanding about ecosystem 
management and TFCAs nationally, regionally and worldwide.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project Location  
 
To a large extent the location of intervention has been determined in the first phase of 
the Project. T FCA processes are well underway in the Greater Limpopo and 
Chimanimani TFCAs, whereas in the Lubombo TFCA international protocols have been 
signed, but the degree of complex and multifarious interventions in this area have delayed 
focused and concerted action. All these three TFCAs will continue to be supported under 
the Project.  In these TFCAs, the project will be implemented in 7 to 9 districts of 4 
Provinces:  Ihambane (Vilankulo District), Maputo (Matutiune District), Manica 
(Sussudenga District), and Gaza (priority 1: Chicualacuala, Massingir, Mabote, 
Massangena; priority 2:  Chigubo, Mabacane).  In the 3 TFCAs, the protected areas 
targeted are Chimanimani Special Reserve, Maputo Special Reserve, Limpopo NP, 
Banhine NP, and Zinave NP.  In addition, the beach tourism towns of Vilankulo and 
Ponto do Oro will see their infrastructure environment improved.  
 
Context  
 
Mozambique's natural resources are of global interest and significance. Natural resource 
based activities - agriculture, fisheries, mining and tourism - contribute about 45 percent 
of GDP and 70 percent of total exports.  Forestry and forestry related activities, such as 
the production of charcoal and timber play a significant role in the local economy, and in 
the degradation of the natural resource base.  Traditional energy (largely woodfuels) still 
contributes more than 90 percent of Mozambique's total energy consumption.  The 
resource base is seriously threatened by population growth, extreme poverty, poor 
management and utilization and lack of financial resources. Desertification affects more 
than half of the ten provinces, and 20-30 percent of Mozambique's population lives on 
fragile land.  Coastal erosion is a major problem.  The uncontrolled exploitation of the 
natural resource base, in the absence of an adequate planning and implementation of the 
regulatory framework represents a serious threat to the sustained economic growth that 
the government is seeking.  The link between environmental degradation and poverty has 
not been clarified or absorbed into the political decision-making process. Although weak 
environmental management is an issue threatening sound private sector investment, this 
perception is unlikely to prevail under the present circumstances. Furthermore, the 
essentially exploitative nature of many of the larger scale private sector investments (e.g., 
Page  5
gas, mining, coastal tourism, energy), requires even greater vigilance in terms of ensuring 
both social and environmental sustainability.  
 
The TFCATDP, to deal with this situation, will focus less on the negative consequences 
of present rates of environmental degradation and poor management, and more on a 
proactive approach in mainstreaming environment into the development process. 
Demonstrating that sound environmental management can play a significant role in 
facilitating private sector investment and stimulating growth will require that 
environmental concerns are addressed in a sound development-planning framework 
designed to attract high-quality private sector investment. At the same time, conservation 
priorities need to be recognized, and the intrinsic value of the maintenance of the 
country's high biodiversity should not be lost. Not all high value conservation areas will 
be able to be justified for management and protection on economic grounds.  
 
Biodiversity  
 
Mozambique is part of the Zambezian Biogeographic Region, a region known for its 
high degree of biodiversity. The country's extensive coastline and large land area makes 
it unique within the Biogeographic Region as it includes such a wide variety of 
ecosystems, including 22 vegetation habitat types. Within this region are areas of 
particularly outstanding biodiversity from a global perspective, such as the Gorongosa 
Mountain Rift Valley Complex, Cheringoma Plateau, Zambezi Delta grasslands and 
swamps, Great Inselberg Archipelago, Chimanimani Massif, Maputaland Centre of 
Endemism, Coastal Bamer Lakes, Pebane Evergreen Coastal Forests of Zambezia, and 
Lake Malawi/Niassa/Nyasa. Forest cover of nearly 20 million hectares has been 
identified as having high and medium potential for forestry production. As a consequence 
of the long period of armed conflict, together with the vast size of the country, lack of 
trained personnel and operational support, large areas of Mozambique are poorly 
documented from a biological perspective. The current conservation status of 
Mozambique's flora is still poorly understood: of the 5500 plant species recorded for 
Mozambique, some 247 plant species in 67 families may be of conservation concem. 
Areas with large numbers of endemic plants include Afromontane areas (Chimanimani 
TFCA and Gorongosa mountain) and southern Mozambique (Lubombo TFCA). 
Mozambique's rich plant biodiversity is also a critical resource for traditional medicines, 
the primary first (and often only) medical treatment for the vast bulk of the population.  
 
The fauna of Mozambique aside from mammals and birds is also poorly documented. 
Moz is characterized by a rich diversity of mammal fauna with 211 terrestrial mammal 
species. Large mammals have been sharply reduced.. Gazetted Wildlife Areas cover 
87,000 sq kIn, or about 11% of the country. With the exception of Niassa Reserve (which 
has three endemic species), these areas suffered drastic declines in wildlife, although 
signs of regeneration are now seen in several of these areas, notably Gorongosa, Maputo 
Elephant Reserve, and the National Parks of Banhine and Zinave. Mozambique has the 
third largest coastline in Africa, with a diversity of ecosystems including estuaries, 
wetlands and coastal lakes. The Coastal Zone is considered unique in the East African 
Marine Region in terms of the quality, diversity and species richness of its habitats. These 
Page  6
ecosystems support 18 species of marine mammals, mainly dolphins and whales, and 
Mozambique is thought to have the largest population of dugongs along the East African 
coast (these are, however, extremely threatened). It is the only country in the region 
where all five species of threatened and endangered sea turtles occur and breed.  
 
Local populations are exceptionally dependent on the country's biodiversity to fulfil 
their daily survival needs. Wildlife provides a major source of protein to about 70% of 
the population. Woodlands and mangroves are an essential source of construction 
material for housing and fishing boats, and fodder for domestic animals ( particularly in 
times of drought).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The TFCATDP focuses on conservation and sustainable use of Mozambique's immense 
natural habitat estate.  It seeks institutionalizing ecosystem management, and 
mainstreaming it into development planning processes.  As such it is expected to have 
significant environmental and social benefits relative to a no-project situation.  The 
project also has the objective of promoting environmentally sustainable tourism and other 
sustainable land uses such as game farming.  The project will operate in the context of a 
highly dynamic socio-economic and political landscape.  GOM is keen to promote 
private sector investment and is also responsible for a sizable public sector investment 
program, so the project will require adaptable experiential learning processes rather than 
blueprints.  
 
OP4.01 is triggered because of the potential impact of some local infrastructures--such 
as tracks, fence, housing, offices, lodges in formal PAs, outside PAs and on the coastline-
-on the environment.  OP4.40 on Natural Habitat and OP4.36 on Forest are triggered 
Page  7
even though the project is expected to have significant positive impact on the country 
natural habitat and forests.  Still, with the economic development triggered by the project 
and, some of the infrastructure built, there may be negative impact locally. Infrastructure 
which will be identified as part of the IDDP, will be built in Ponto do Oro and Vilankulo 
to increase these towns' basic facilities and make them attractive to tourism investors.  
The impact of these construction will need to be monitored. Still, the project is not 
expected to induce major or irreversible impacts.  The development of Mozambique's 
coastline and interior is expected whether or not the project is implemented.  
 
The project is intended to mitigate that environmental and social impact by providing a 
framework for promoting sustainable development, through an ecosystem management 
approach:  the IDDP.  The ESMF proposes the IDDP has process to identify and avoid, or 
mitigate, negative impact of individual project investments.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 related to Involuntary Resettlement and Land Acquisition: Two major 
factors have led to the triggering of OP/BP 4.12.  
 
The first factor is the restrictions and the incompatibility of local communities' 
livelihoods activities with the objectives of the TFCAs and PAs.  TFCATDP in protecting 
the natural environment and supporting biodiversity conservation and natural resource 
management in the TFCAs include the establishment of boundaries, the potential for 
establishing new PAs, and the development of regulations, criteria, procedures and 
institutional structures for planning, management and development.  These imply the 
restriction of access to natural resources by the local communities inside the PAs and in 
buffer zones.  Communities living in TFCA interstitial areas are also potentially affected 
insofar as these multi-resource use areas will be included in zoning and development 
plans for sustainable resource use that may include community-based informal PA 
creation.  To avoid such a negative effect on the population and avoid unnecessary 
conflicts, a Process Framework has been commissioned and completed.  The purpose of 
the framework is to describe the process by which potentially affected communities will 
participate in resource planning and management.  Once developed, an Action Plan 
should become part of the natural resources management plan.  
 
The second factor that contributed to the triggering of OP/BP 4.12 is the objective to 
promote and link conservation and nature tourism development activities to community 
participation and access to direct and indirect benefits, as well as to encourage 
communities? land delimitation to strengthen their rights bases.The development of 
nature tourism activities may require land acquisition to build and develop infrastructure, 
and buildings.  The project may also cause displacement of people from their homes and 
areas as a result of the threat of wildlife.  Because presently, the location, nature and 
scope of possible land acquisition and displacement are not yet know, a Policy 
Framework (PF), as a mitigation measure, has been completed.  The PF establishes the 
policy principles to be used for the development of specific RAPs.  During project 
implementation, when the details of land acquisition and involuntary resettlement are 
fully known, a or several Resettlement Action Plan(s) (RAPs) will be defined, prepared, 
Page  8
and implemented.  Burial and sacred sites will be protected and documented and recorded 
in the management plans and the RAPs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As mentioned above, the areas in question are very large and are subject to an enormous 
range of activities, including mining, forestry, electricity, roads, coastal development, 
even gas pipelines. However, these are not project activities. Rather the project is 
designed to improve the way in which ecosystem management is carried out, with 
emphasis on the whole spectrum of planning and development processes taking place in 
the areas concerned.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The main alternatives considered were: (1) having no follow-up to the first phase TFCA 
project; (2) a simple sectoral approach, such as a traditional conservation project, a 
conventional CBNRM program for the non-protected areas of the TFCAs, or a tourism 
sector support program, and (3) a multisectoral project covering five TFCAs.  Alternative 
2
and 3 both lead to environmental outcome equivalent to the alternative adopted.  
However, in comparison to alternative 2 and 3, the alternative selected, which is also 
more realistic, should lead to an outcome that is more sustainable and more anchored into 
the country development strategies.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The TFCAU Unit has prepared and is currently disclosing an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), a Process Framework (PF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF).  The Ministry of Environment Affair (MICOA) has the mandate to 
monitor safeguard in Mozambique.  However, because it lacks capacity, the project will 
finance consulting firms, NGOs or individual, as the case may be depending on the nature 
and scope of the assistance, to implement the frameworks.  MICOA's role will be limited 
to prior and post reviews as per their national mandate.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders for the project are communities, the private sector, government at 
all levels (districts, provincial and national), neighboring countries (for international 
agreements, shared infrastructure, joint tourism planning), NGOs and other donors.  
 
Local populations living within the Limpopo, Lubombo and Chimanimani TFCA 
districts are the main target population. These populations occur in the provinces of 
Maputo (Matuituine District), Gaza (5 to 7 districts), Manica (Sussundenga District) and 
Inhambane (Vilankulo District).  Local populations around protected areas falling within 
these TFCAs will benefit through the establishment of more clearly defined access rights, 
land titling and the development of sustainable economic activities. Additionally, the 
Project will target local private sector and develop a set of incentives for joint venture 
Page  9
arrangements between international private sector, local entrepreneurs and local 
communities.  
 
The project was prepared and will be implemented from a participatory perspective 
where all stakeholders, in particular the local communities play a central role.  From the 
beginning, the participatory process identifies local priorities through local stakeholders 
workshops and consultation meetings to produce SEAs and spatial zoning plans.  The 
IDDP formulation process will result in comprehensive development strategies for each 
TFCA.  IDDP implementation will involve the establishment and management of multi-
use conservation areas (including formal and informal core PAs, appropriate buffer and 
support areas); and the initiation of economic alternatives (environmentally sustainable 
tourism development, co-management, private sector partnerships in community based 
tourism etc.) to unsustainable, destructive use of natural resources by local communities.  
 
Further, a community strategy will be a key tool for creating awareness, for consensus 
building, for generating participation in processes of change and development, for 
making informed decisions and for resolving conflicts.  At community level, the 
communication strategy will focus on the needs to ensure access to information for all 
local stakeholder groups; and to strengthen the ability of all stakeholders to articulate and 
disseminate information, and make their own informed decisions.  It is expected that the 
communities will feel empowered and will effectively and gradually develop an 
ownership in the TFCA development programs.  
 
The project includes a significant nature tourism component focusing on gradually 
involving local communities in co-management of PAs as well as promotion of business 
partnerships to obtain direct concrete benefits from tourism initiatives in the PAs and 
buffer zones.  The project will also support the improvement of the communities? 
livelihood and the resilience of the vulnerable groups. This will involve programs with 
focus on capacity building (in particular acquisition of income generating skills, 
leadership and community planning skills), reproductive health awareness raising, 
institutional development, and, to the extent feasible, development of priority community 
services and infrastructure.  
 
Disclosure of the ESMF, PF and RPF will be carried out in Maputo, by announcement 
in newspapers that the documents are available for consultation at the district council 
office.  They will also be disclosed in each targeted districts. There, announcements will 
be published in local newspapers and on the local radio that the documents are available 
for consultation at the district council office.In addition, in each district, the TFCA 
regional coordinator will organize a half-day information sessions where the main 
stakeholders will be invited.  Around each targeted protected areas, the park managers, 
with the TFCA provincial coordinator will also organize half-day information sessions in 
"center villages", i.e. villages where it is convenient for communities representing several 
villages to meet.   
 
Page  10
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
No 
Page  11
provisions for certification system? 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
06/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
06/08/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
06/08/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
06/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard G. Scobey 
06/08/2005 
Comments:   
