               96596




May 11, 2015
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

     It is proposed tltat tlte MDTF grant will support Myanmar EITI implementation activities
in tlte amount of US $490,000 to run for approximately 8 montlts from May to December
2015. The $490,000 will be both recipient executed (RE) and Bank executed (BE). This is to
accommodate the fact that Myanmar's financial regulations require that grants be documented in
the budget and spending can only legally occur once the budget is approved. The MDTF funds
will be included in the 2015 mid-year budget, with the implication that spending can only occur
following the passage of the mid-year budget, in August 2015. Of the $490,000, $200,000 will
be BE and $290,000 will be RE.

The Project includes the following activities:

   a. Secretariat Operations
   - staffmg, including a senior technical expert, communications officer, and training expert
   -operational expenses, including consumables, printing, phone charges, and transportation
   - meeting costs for MSG and MSG Sub-Committee

   b.. Scoping Study and First EITI Report
   - Scoping study, covering oil, gas, and mining, including jade and gemstones
   - development of reporting templates
   - first EITI Report
   - dissemination of report

   c. Communications and outreach
   - development of a communications strategy and plan
   - maintaining the MEITI website and library
   - dissemination ofthe EITI report

   d. Training
   - training needs assessment
   - development of training plan and materials
   - training activities

D. Project location a_nd salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):                             ·
The project will not finance any physical works and none of the planned activities are expected
to impact the environment.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
This has not been assessed as the project does not trigger safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
WB East Asia and Pacific region team: Ruxandra Floroiu (Safeguards Specialist).
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain wily)               Yes           No        TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                          X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                  X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                           X

Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                                      X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                       X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                    X

Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X

Pro.iects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                            X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Safeguards considerations will be embedded into all relevant activities to be conducted by
   the National Secretariat, including consultants and other recipients of.MDTF funding.
   Relevant WB Safeguard Policies are referenced in relevant ToRs for all consultants
   undertaking EITI MDTF -related work.

B. The proposed project seeks to facilitate and support Myanmar, an EITI Candidate country,
   implementing the EITI Standard. The overarching goal of the EITI process is to promote
   transparency and accountability in the management of public revenues from extractive
   industries. As a key player in the EITI process, relevant civil society representatives in
   Myanmar, such as Indigenous Peoples communities, Indigenous Peoples organizations, and
   local NGOs, should be afforded, early on, opportunities to actively and fully participate in
   the implementation of the EITI Standard in the country. This requires, in line with relevant
   World Bank Safeguard Policies, that such civil society representatives:.(i) are appropriately
   and fully represented, and have their views taken into account in the MSG; (ii) have access to
   all relevant EITI-related information in a culturally appropriate and accessible form, manner
    and language; and (iii) operate in an enabling environment where they are allowed to be an
    integral part of the EITI-related debate.

C. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: This is not applicable

D. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: The project is a recipient executed small-grant and there is no plan for a QER.

E. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing 1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
   This is not applicable

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                                Name Morten Larsen                                                 Date:

 Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Adviser:                    Name Surl Gautam, Acting RSA, EAP                                 Date:
                                                                 ~aL                                              4/2712015
                                                            -.
                                                                           ~
    Comments:                                                    l
  Sector Manager:                                 Name Paulo De Sa                                                   Date:


    Comments:




1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country~ at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
