Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC900 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 5, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Namibia 
Project ID: P070885 
Project Name: Namib Coast Biodiversity 
Conservation and Management 
(NACOMA) Project 
Task Team Leader: Christophe Crepin 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity, OP#2 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: August 1, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other 
environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: John Boyle 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
4.8 
DENMARK: DANISH INTL. DEV. ASSISTANCE (DANIDA) 
0.8 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
6.0 
LOCAL GOVTS. (PROV., DISTRICT, CITY) OF BORROWING 
COUNTRY 
1.2 
RECIPIENT (Government of Namibia) 
2.8 
B.  Project Objectives  
The project development objective is
:
to support sustainable coastal zone management by 
building institutional and technical capacity of regional councils and by supporting targeted 
investments for biodiversity conservation in critical ecosystems.  
The project global objective is:
 to maintain and improve key coastal ecosystem processes and to 
effectively conserve biodiversity in target areas for intervention
1
.
1
The global objective builds 
directly on Strategic Objective 6 of the NBSAP, which is to ‘Strengthen the 
implementation of Constitution of Namibia (Article 95L) by adopting measures to improve the protection of coastal 
and marine ecosystems, biological diversity and essential ecological processes, and to improve knowledge, 
awareness, and the sustainability of resource use. 
Page  2
2
As a result of the project, barriers for mainstreaming biodiversity in coastal management and 
development planning will be removed and a strategic approach to address root causes of 
biodiversity loss and coastal degradation will be in place so that the environmental and economic 
potential of the coast will be sustained and coastal biodiversity conserved. The project will 
develop and strengthen a policy and legal framework for sustainable coastal zone management 
and promote integration with related regional development planning initiatives. The project will 
further make a direct impact on institutional capacity and availability of skills available for 
environmental management, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use in Regional Councils. 
Consequently, Regional Councils will be enabled to play a stronger role in regional decision 
making in key sectors as well as sector dialogue with key stakeholders, including private sector 
and communities, on the coast.  
 
C.  Project Description  
The project is expected to generate local, national and global environmental benefits inline with 
its project development and global objective through three components: 
Component 1:  Policy and Planning Framework for Sustainable Ecosystem Management of the 
Namib Coast and targeted capacity building.
 Based on a participatory process engaging a broad 
range of local, regional, and national level stakeholders, the project will support 
development of 
a
collaborative national vision for the coastal zone of Namibia 
as a basis for the preparation of a 
national coastal zone policy. The main output of this component would be a 
White Paper Policy 
Document on Development and Management of the Namib Coast
 and corresponding Action 
Plan. In addition, an update of legislation related to coastal management and development would 
be facilitated and preparation of a 
comprehensive Coastal Zone Act
,
which draws currently 
fragmented relevant acts and regulations together, could be initiated. In order to successfully 
translate the coastal vision and policy into collaborative action across sectors at regional level, 
the project will support the Regional Councils with planning, regulating, and monitoring 
activities in Namibia’s coastal zone with a view to mainstreaming biodiversity conservation into 
regional development planning and management. This would specifically include: (i) 
coastal 
spatial planning and zoning
 (as to determine preferred locations for strict biodiversity 
conservation, for limited access and controlled use of biodiversity and the natural resource base, 
for sustainable low to medium-impact use, such as recreational purposes, and for sustainable 
economic development), and (ii) 
coastal development assessment and regulation
 (as to promote 
and restrict the various human impact according to defined coastal zoning). Taking into account 
the ongoing devolution and decentralization process from central to regional and local level, the 
project would support national and regional governments (a) to clearly define roles and 
responsibilities of national, regional, and local institutions with view biodiversity conservation 
and management (i.e. roles of central line-ministry offices, regional line-ministry offices, 
Regional Councils), and (b) define the level of institutional strengthening and capacity building 
(i.e. for zoning techniques and GIS) needed at various institutional levels. Targeted institutional 
support would be provided to the four Regional Councils and other line Ministries as represented 
in the  Integrated Coastal Zone Management Committee (ICZMC) endorsed to co-ordinate and 
facilitate the process
2
.
The project will further support especially MET but also the Regional 
2
The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Committee (ICZMC) and its Secretariat will facilitate and coordinate 
the policy and planning process. The ICZMC is representing the four Regional Councils of the coastal regions of 
Namibia as well as the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, the Ministry of Regional Local Government and 
Page  3
3
Councils with developing, adapting, monitoring and evaluating key ecosystem indicators to 
determine ecosystem processes and trends and to develop a tool to guide integrated coastal 
planning and management. 
Component 2: Targeted Investments for Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Use in 
Critical Ecosystems. 
The project will provide targeted investments for implementation of 
projects and activities in regional and local development and land use plans. Investments will 
focus particularly on proposed and emerging projects and activities for conservation and 
sustainable of  biodiversity in hotspots in each region. 
Component 3: Project Management and Performance Monitoring
.
The project will provide 
capacity building and infrastructure support for the ICZMC’s Secretariat housed in one of the 
Regional Councils and also serving as the project management unit (PMU). The PMU will also 
be responsible for performance monitoring, evaluation of project progress, and M&E reporting. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The project target area extends 
along the entire coast of Namibia 
from the Northern boarder with 
Angola marked by the Kunene 
River to the Southern boarder 
with South Africa marked by the 
Oranje River. The project areas 
extends between the Namibian 
coast and inland towards the 
Namib Escarpment as far as the 
area of the two coastal biomes, 
the Namib Desert Biome and the 
Succulent Karoo Biome. The 
project area is not intended to 
extend into the near- or offshore 
waters in order to avoid overlaps 
with the Benguela Current Large 
Marine Ecosystem Project, also 
financed by GEF.  
Housing, the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, and the Ministry of Mines and Energy
.
The ICZMC’s 
Secretariat is currently located in the Erongo Regional Council. 
200
0
200
Kilometers
Biomes
Lakes and salt pans
Nama Karoo
Namib Desert
Succulent Karoo
Tree and shrub savanna
Communal conservancies
Protected areas
Namibia
N
E
W
S
Page  4
4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Government of Namibia, specifically the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, has gained 
experience with applying safeguard policies for project development based on another recently 
approved project for which an Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Plan, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Indigenous Peoples Development Plan were prepared and 
disclosed by the MET. Adequate technical and legal capacity and expertise exists in Namibia for 
carrying out environmental assessments, developing mitigation and management plans, as well 
as relevant environmental monitoring.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The Environmental Assessment Policy applies as the project includes a number of 
sub-projects that will be determined during project implementation. Despite 
overall long term objectives for biodiversity conservation and management, some 
of the yet to be determined sub-projects may have very limited, site-specific 
environmental impact 
–
mainly due to small works, such as upgrading of 
environment information centers as part of the sub-project investments. Most sub-
projects would not involve works or construction. 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
5
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[
]
B
[X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01 ‘Environmental Assessment’ applies to this project. The 
project may have minimal, site-specific, easy to mitigate environmental impact that is technically 
and institutionally manageable. In fact, the project is aimed to have an overall positive impact on 
the environment by building capacity for environmental planning, by raising environmental 
awareness with regard to coastal biodiversity, and by enabling strategic zoning for development 
activities as per regional development plans. Minimal environmental impact as a result of this 
project may be caused by some on-the-ground investments financed through micro-projects 
(Component 2). These micro-investments have not yet been identified, but would need to support 
the above project objectives in order to be eligible for funding. None of these micro-projects 
would include major works or other constructions with relevant environmental impact.  The most 
sensible approach to be taken would be to apply Namibia’s Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) policy as per emerging Environmental Management Bill to this project. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  
November 2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  
Not applicable 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed: 
A
short comparison of the Bank Safeguard requirements and the Namibian Environmental 
and Social Impact Assessment procedures will be undertaken. 
The safeguards review and 
clearance responsibilities for this project have been transferred to the Sector Manager.
 
IV.
 
APPROVALS
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Christophe Crepin 
July 7, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
July 7, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Richard Scobey 
July 7, 2004 
Comments 
