Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/16/2005 
Report No.:  32361
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Namibia 
Project ID:  P070885 
Project Name:  Namib Coast Conservation and Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Christophe Crepin 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 30, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.90 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.80 
 
DENMARK: DANISH INTL. DEV. ASSISTANCE (DANIDA)  0.80 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
6.00 
 
LOCAL GOVTS. (PROV., DISTRICT, CITY) OF BORROWING COUNTRY
1.20
10.80 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development (and global) objective and key indicators  
 
Project development/global objective  
 
The Project development/global objective is: Conservation, sustainable use and 
mainstreaming of biodiversity in coastal and marine ecosystems in Namibia strengthened.  
 
Outcome indicators  
 
i. X km2 and number of terrestrial and marine  biodiversity hotspots under effective 
management as defined by NAMETT  by year 5 compared with baseline situation.  
 
Page  2
ii. Flow of local economic benefits from activities linked to ecosystem and biodiversity 
management on the coast has increased by year 5 compared with baseline situation.  
 
iii. Biodiversity related aspects are incorporated into all up-coming sector policies 
(tourism, fisheries, mining, urban development and water management) at national, 
regional and local levels by year 5.  
 
(c) How would the project contribute to: The recipient's higher level objectives for the 
sector and for poverty reduction? The relevant CAS objective(s)?  
 
The proposed Project will contribute to the objectives of Namibia's National 
Development Plan (NDP) 2  and Vision 2030, including cross cutting issues, such as 
enabling capacity-building of stakeholders and institutions, and most importantly - 
environmental sustainability. In particular, the Project will support efforts under NDP 2 
to mainstream biodiversity conservation and sustainable use in the emerging 
decentralization process by developing relevant institutional capacities of regional and 
local government as well as key national level players.  
 
The Rural Profile and Strategic Framework (RPSF), prepared by the Namibia National 
Planning Commission with the EU as a governing framework for rural development 
programs in Namibia, identifies decentralization of rural institutions as a key area, which 
requires the close attention of the Government. The Project will address the issue of 
decentralization of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use-related functions by 
serving as a pilot for decentralization of specific functions of the MET and contributing 
strongly to implementation of the MET Department of Environmental Affairs' (DEA) 
biodiversity and desertification programs in coastal areas.  
 
While there is no country assistance strategy (CAS) for Namibia at present, the Bank is 
working with the Government of Namibia to prepare a Country Economic Memorandum 
(CEM) that will support the Government's objectives by providing in-depth analysis and 
guidance to develop a pro-poor growth strategy that will address the concerns related to 
inequality as well as growth. Such a framework would also strengthen the partnership 
between the Bank and Namibia and form the basis for addressing the key challenges of 
achieving sustainable growth, and reducing poverty and inequality by capitalizing on the 
achievement of the Government and the comparative advantages of the Bank. The 
NACOMA Project is in line with the CEM framework as it contributes to the dialogue 
between the Bank and the GRN, promotes the building of capacity amongst national and 
local governments and broadens the income base within the coastal regions.   
 
3. Project Description 
Below is a summary of the four interlinked components and sub-components of the 
NACOMA Project:  
 
Component 1:  Policy, Legal and Institutional Framework for Sustainable Ecosystem 
Management of the Namib Coast  
 
Page  3
Sector issue addressed, expected outcome and main activities:  
 
The objective of this component is to fill the current gap for mainstreaming of 
biodiversity conservation and management into policy, legal and institutional structures 
affecting the sustainable development of the coastal zone. Such a policy should fall 
within existing national, regional, local and sectoral frameworks, i.e. Vision 2030, NDP2, 
RDPs, NBSAP and NAPCOD, all of which call for sustainable development of the 
coastal zone of Namibia. This component focuses on enhancing Namibia's policy, legal 
and institutional framework resulting in the development of a coastal zone policy, a 
formal White Paper, that sets out the rationale for a national coastal policy, comprising a 
common vision for Namibia's coast, policy context and objectives and strategies for 
implementation based on the principles of biodiversity conservation and integrated 
coastal zone management.  The Namibia Coastal Management White Paper will provide 
an overarching and comprehensive framework to support integrated planning and 
decision-making affecting coastal lands and waters, based on the carrying capacity of the 
Namibian coast as a whole. It will be based on a highly participatory approach involving 
the identified stakeholder groups in multiple consultations and meetings.  
 
Primary target group:  
 
National (mainly MET, MFMR, MME, MAWRD, MWTC, MRGLH), regional and 
local governments involved in CZM.  
 
Sub-components:  
 
I.1. Review of Existing Laws and Support for Appropriate Legislation  
 
I.2. Clarification of Institutional Mandates  
 
I.3. Development of Policy Framework  
 
I.4. Development of Coastal profiles  
 
Specific outcomes:  
 
(i) Policy and legal framework relevant to coastal zone management clarified and, 
following a prioritization process, harmonized.  
 
(ii) Roles and mandates of line ministries, RCs and LAs clarified with regard to 
conservation and sustainable use of coastal biodiversity and definitions in place for 
coastal zone planning and management.  
 
(iii) A collaborative vision for the conservation and sustainable use of the Namib coast 
developed and used as basis for a draft comprehensive coastal zone policy framework, 
the Namibia Coastal Management Green Paper and a first draft White Paper.  
 
(iv) Regional coastal information available and used regularly in local and regional 
decision-making processes.  
 
Page  4
(v) Increased budget allocations for ICZM related issues by relevant line ministries, 
including from improved capture of the rent linked to the resource base.  
 
Component 2: Targeted Capacity-Building for Coastal Zone Management and 
Biodiversity Conservation  
 
Sector issue addressed, expected outcome and main activities:  
 
Capacity building has been identified as one of the main bottlenecks for sustainable 
development in Namibia (see Vision 2030, NDP 2 mid-term review and National 
Capacity Self Assessment (NCSA) reports).  Moreover, it is widely recognized that the 
lack of capacity at the national, regional and local levels for biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable use, including its mainstreaming, stems from (i) a shortage of qualified staff 
and restricted budget for additional positions; (ii) limited resources and time for training 
activities; (iii) uncoordinated sectoral efforts; (iv) the slow decentralization process; (v) 
limited understanding of coastal biodiversity and linkages to development planning and 
management; and, finally, (vi) weak and fragmented communication channels between 
the various stakeholders.  
 
This component will fill the capacity gap at the local, regional and national levels in 
support of integrated coastal zone management biodiversity conservation and sustainable 
use, including mainstreaming of coastal biodiversity and resources into development 
planning and key economic activities.  
 
Primary target group:  
 
Local, regional and national government (MME, MET, MFMR, MRGLH, MWTC, 
MAWRD), ICZMC members and RDCCs involved in CZM.  
 
Sub-components:  
 
II.1. Training for ICZM  
 
II.2. Biodiversity Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism  
 
II.3. Coastal Biodiversity Knowledge Management  
 
Specific outcomes:  
 
(i) Capacity and resources of RCs, LA, MET, MME, MAWRD, MFMR and MWTC are 
strengthened to undertake functional and strategic coast-relevant planning and decision-
making process conducive to biodiversity conservation and mainstreaming thereof into 
RDPs, NDPs and investment decisions (e.g. by RDCCs).  
 
(ii) The ICZMC has been strengthened and is fully operational.  
 
Page  5
(iii) Enhanced knowledge related to coastal biodiversity and sustainable use including 
mainstreaming into development planning and coastal zone management through 
improved communication channels at local, regional and national level.  
 
(iv) Enhanced awareness of the importance of coastal zone resources and ICZM among 
stakeholders and local communities.  
 
Component 3: Targeted Investments in Critical Ecosystems for Biodiversity 
Conservation, Sustainable Use and Mainstreaming  
 
Sector issue addressed, expected outcome and main activities:  
 
The Project has been designed to seek a balance between support for an enabling 
environments (e.g. management plans) for investments in established and new 
conservation areas and mainstreaming efforts in coastal and marine production 
landscapes through the participatory approach supported by the ICZMC and at the 
regional level by the RDCC, making use of the regional coastal profiles and existing 
national, regional and local development and biodiversity priorities (e.g. RDPs, NBSAP) 
and their implementation.  
 
This component uses targeted investments and activities to address on-the-ground gaps 
in coastal biodiversity conservation and sustainable use throughout the Namib coastal and 
marine ecosystems rooted in under- and un-protected biodiversity hotspots. These 
activities will be complemented by MET's SPAN Project, which addresses management 
and sustainability issues in targeted national terrestrial parks.  
 
The Project, through this component, will focus on a combination of coastal and marine 
biodiversity priority sites:  
 
1.
Terrestrial coastline hotspots that are currently under-protected or un-protected 
including Ramsar sites and other wetlands of biodiversity value that lack tools for 
management; and  
 
2.
The creation of marine protected areas; though none currently exist, they are urgently 
needed and other unprotected islands and near-shore sites.  
 
Primary target group:  
 
Local, regional and national government (MET, MAWRD, MFMR, MME, MWTC) 
involved in CZM, local communities and private sector around biodiversity hotspots.  
 
Sub-components:  
 
III.1. Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Management Plans  
 
III.2. Implementation of Priority Actions under the Management Plans  
 
Specific outcomes:  
 
Page  6
(i) Strengthened and mainstreamed network of costal and marine conservation areas 
with defined and improved management plan and under implementation.  
 
(ii) Enhanced biodiversity status in critical ecosystems of Namibia's coastal and marine 
area.  
 
(iii) Co-management of conservation areas (including buffer zones) consistent with 
conservation and sustainable uses objectives.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Performance Monitoring  
 
Sector issue addressed, expected outcome and main activities:  
 
This component reflects the incremental need for an operational project coordination 
structure. The Project, through this component, will support the establishment and 
operationalization (through staffing, office infrastructure and Project management-related 
capacity building) of a slim Project Management Unit (PMU) housed in the Erongo 
Regional Council. The Erongo Regional Council hosts currently the ICZMC Secretariat 
as well as the NACOMA preparation coordinator.  
 
Primary target group:  
 
Project Management Unit staff.  
 
Sub-components:  
 
IV.1. Project Office and Management  
 
IV.2. Project Reporting and Information  
 
Specific outcomes:  
 
A
successful Project implementation according to Project Implementation Manual, EMP 
and annual work plans.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The following proposed definition of an intervention zone aims to provide a workable 
scale for coastal planning and management, in particular related to aquaculture 
expansion, terrestrial mining concessions, downstream fish processing, expansion of 
settlements, salt refining, tourism and agriculture upstream from important river mouths.  
 
NACOMA's proposed intervention area runs the full length of the coast, following 
Namibia's current international northen and southern borders. The western and eastern 
boundaries have been defined to include all identified biodiversity hotspots, critical 
species habitats, coastal ecosystems and distinctive coastal landscapes, and include the 
main areas where current and predicted activities and development cumulatively impact 
Page  7
on coastal ecological function and biodiversity.  At sea (western boundary), the 
NACOMA intervention area follows an internationally-recognized boundary  (territorial 
sea at 12 nautical miles) as it is extensive enough to include the biodiversity-rich near-
shore islands and rocks to the north and south of L?deritz, including the furthest one 
(Hollams Bird Island, 10.7 nautical miles from land). It also encompasses the areas most 
likely to be affected by the mainly near-shore activities and processes identified during 
NACOMA Project preparation, e.g., shore- and shallow-water diamond mining out to a 
depth of 150m. This provisional limit will be re-assessed during the first year of 
NACOMA implementation to take account of possible coastal impacts from offshore oil 
drilling, fisheries and other processes or activities in the EEZ, as well as marine impacts 
from coastal activities.  On land  (eastern boundary), the intervention area will be 
delimited by the eastern boundary of coastal urban municipalities and outside urbanized, 
by an arbitrary line around 2-3 km from the coast. This needs to be adjusted to take in 
fragile habitats (e.g. unprotected dune belts) as well as important landscape features. In 
estuaries and river mouths, areas of jurisdictional and management uncertainty, the 
boundary will need to extend at least to the limit of salinity and if necessary, further 
inland. The riparian 'strip' will be broad enough to include associated wetlands and fragile 
watersheds and areas subject to riparian mining concessions or major agriculture. One 
option would be to follow the boundaries of local authorities with territory adjacent to 
these rivers.  
 
IBRD 33701   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental. The classes of eligible micro-activities under component 3 together with 
the list of ineligible activities, identified by stakeholders during project preparation, 
indicate project-funded activities that are likely to have no adverse impacts on the 
Page  8
environment, or minimal impacts that are site-specific, easy to mitigate, and technically 
and institutionally manageable. These activities will largely focus on biodiversity 
conservation and rehabilitation, sustainable use of prioritized ecosystems, targeted IEC 
activities and targeted research activities, all supporting the project's aim to positively 
affect the environment. However, as small-scale physical works may be funded by the 
project, NACOMA is classified as an environmental safeguard category "B" project. As a 
consequence, an EMP was requested by ASPEN to ensure that the project's on-the-
ground activities are carried out in line with World Bank EA Policy OP4.01 and similar 
Namibian EA requirements, and to ensure that all possible negative impacts are 
considered and mitigation measures are spelled out prior to the implementation of any 
on-the-ground activities.  
 
Social. Following comments made during Project preparation regarding the possibility 
of involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12) following the establishment of new protected areas, 
it has been concluded that the recipient should prepare no process framework at this 
stage. This conclusion was based on the following:  
 
i. The purpose of OP 4.12 is largely served by the Project's Participation Plan (PPP), 
which provides for full and informed participation by all stakeholders, including minority 
groups, in the development of management arrangements for the coastal resources, such 
as designation of new protected areas, if any, and changes in the uses and restrictions of 
those that already exist.    
 
ii. It is not certain whether the project will even include any activities that would 
necessitate a process framework.  
 
It was further agreed that in the unlikely event where any such activities be included in 
the project, the PPP could be supplemented with additional elements of a process 
framework, specific to the particular area in which access is to be restricted. These would 
consist of: (a) a process whereby compensatory measures will be formulated and agreed 
on for persons whose livelihoods are adversely affected; (b) grievance procedures; (c) 
legal/administrative procedures; and (d) monitoring arrangements.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Project-funded activities are likely to have no adverse impacts on the environment, or 
minimal impacts that are site-specific, easy to mitigate, and technically and institutionally 
manageable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  9
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The recipient has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which was 
reviewed and approved by ASPEN, and will be disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop 
and in-country prior appraisal. The EMP has been developed on the basis of preparatory 
stakeholder workshops held during project preparation in Namibia, review of documents 
relating to the NACOMA project, World Bank EA Policy OP4. 01 and similar Namibian 
EA requirements, and consultations with key stakeholders in the coast.  
 
To ensure that the intent of OP 4.12 is indeed carried out through the PPP, an additional 
item will be built into the PPP and implementation arrangements. That will  be a 
grievance or appeals process, with an agency identified to receive appeals (the Project 
Management Unit), in case there is a group of stakeholders that feels its interests are 
being curtailed by a restriction on access, and that the additional elements of a process 
framework should be formulated and agreed on.  If the complainant is not thus satisfied, 
he or she would then have recourse to a disinterested agency that has responsibility for 
protecting the rights of citizens in the area. Bank supervision will include a special effort 
to determine whether any such situations have emerged and, if so, whether they have 
been properly handled according to OP 4.12.  
 
The Government of Namibia, specifically the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 
has gained experience with applying safeguard policies for project development based on 
another recently approved project (the Integrated Community-based Ecosystem 
Management - ICEMA project), for which an Environmental and Social Assessment and 
Management Plan, a Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan were prepared and disclosed by the MET. Adequate technical and 
legal capacity and expertise exist in Namibia for developing mitigation and management 
plans, as well as relevant environmental monitoring.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As described in section A.3 (Project Description), key stakeholders are National (mainly 
MET, MFMR, MME, MAWRD, MWTC, MRGLH), regional and local governments 
involved in CZM, as well as the private sector around biodiversity hotspots. Additional 
key players in the project are research institutions, which will be considered as members 
of a newly established CZ scientific group, providing technical input to the SC as well as 
training institutions, CBOs and NGOs.  
 
The mentioned above, stakeholders have taken an essential role in project design 
through numerous meetings and workshops, in which project design was decided upon 
and related decisions took place. To ensure that the project engages in effective 
information dissemination, consultation, and stakeholder participation during 
implementation, a Project Participation Plan (PPP), describing stakeholder involvement 
and participation processes per component, will be finalized during project appraisal, 
following which it will be disclosed in country and integrated into the PIM. A draft annex 
describing the PPP is available and is annexed to the Project Document.   
Page  10
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christophe Crepin 
02/23/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
05/16/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard G. Scobey 
02/23/2005 
Comments:   
