                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (ISDS)
                                                Appraisal Stage




Date Prepared/Updated: 04/26/2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                          Nepal                          Project ID:               P161929
                                                                  Parent Project ID:        N/A
 Project Name:                     Second Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program (BIMP-II)
 Region:                           South Asia
 Estimated Appraisal Date:         05-09-2018                     Estimated Board Date:     Jul-10-2018
 Practice Area (Lead):             Transport & Digital            Financing Instrument:     PforR
                                   Development
 Borrower(s)                       Government of Nepal represented by Ministry of Finance
 Implementing Agency               Department of Roads
 Financing (in USD Million)
    Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                        63.0
 International Development Association (IDA)                                                              133.0
 Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies
 LOCAL BENEFICIARIES
 Financing Gap
 Total Project Cost                                                                                       196.0
 Environmental Category            A - Full Assessment (For IPF TA Component). The project is hybrid (PforR
                                   and IPF TA)
 Decision
 Other Decision (as needed)
 Is this a Repeater project?       No
 Is this a Transferred project?    No
 (Will not be disclosed)
B. Introduction and Context
  Country Context
  1.    Over the past decade, Nepal’s economy has performed reasonably well. Growth averaged 4.3 percent
  (at market prices) over 2005-15. Although declining as a share in the economy, agriculture continues to
  play a large role, contributing one third of value-added. The service sector has grown in importance,
  accounting for more than half of value-added in recent years. Industry in general, and manufacturing has
  grown more slowly and its relative share in the economy is falling. Similarly, exports continue to struggle,
  while imports are fueled by remittances that exceed 30 percent of GDP. Inflation was in single digit for
  most of the past decade, with the peg of the Nepalese rupee to the Indian rupee providing a nominal anchor.
  Fiscal balances remained sustainable owing to strong revenue growth and modest spending. The incidence
  of poverty measured against the national poverty line fell by 19 percentage points from 2003/04 to 2010/11,
  and in 2010/11, 25 percent of the population was counted as poor. Most multidimensional indicators of
  poverty also showed improvements across regions in Nepal. However, these gains remain vulnerable to
  shocks and setbacks, like the 2015 earthquakes which were followed by trade disruptions resulting in the
  lowest economic growth in 14 years in 2016.

  2.    Economic activity, which rebounded strongly in FY2017, following two challenging years, has once
  again been disrupted by floods affecting more than one-third of the country. Rebound in FY2017 stemmed
  partly from a base effect, as well as a favorable monsoon boosting agricultural output and earthquake
  reconstruction gathering speed to raise investment. High inflation in the past two years has moderated
  sharply and has decelerated to 2.7 percent (y/y) in July 2017. Government revenue continued to perform
  well, and spending has also picked up significantly in FY2017 compared to previous years. Nevertheless,
  ambitious expenditure targets envisioned in the budget have not been met and the quality of spending has
  not improved with 60 percent of capital spending occurring in the last quarter. Meanwhile, rapid credit
  growth in early 2017 has slowed but deposits growth has continued to decline, pushing up the interest rates.
  On the external side, the cumulative effect of a sharp trade balance deterioration and a slow growth of
  remittances, has put some pressure on current account. Economic activity, which was expected to progress
  well in FY2018, has been affected by the worst floods in decades particularly affecting the agriculture
  output. A new constitution that defined Nepal as a federal democratic republic was promulgated in
  September 2015. With the formulation of the new Constitution, Nepal is now migrating to a federal state
  structure with autonomous sub-national governments. One major impact of the transition is the redundancy
  of the district offices and their sub offices to be replaced by the newly elected local governments. The
  country will now have 7 Provinces and 753 Municipalities. Funds, functions and functionaries hitherto
  managed through the 75 District Development Committees will move to new local governments. While
  the proposed 753 Municipalities are expected to provide better outreach and services, they will likely take
  significant time to become fully operational. In addition to fresh general elections, Nepal is aiming to elect
  a new provincial tier of government by December 2017.

  3.    A new constitution that defined Nepal as a federal democratic republic was promulgated in September
  2015. With the formulation of the new Constitution, Nepal is now migrating to a federal state structure
  with autonomous sub-national governments. One major impact of the transition is the redundancy of the
  district offices and their sub offices to be replaced by the newly elected local governments. The country
  will now have 7 Provinces and 753 Municipalities. Funds, functions and functionaries hitherto managed
  through the 75 District Development Committees will move to new local governments. While the proposed
  753 Municipalities are expected to provide better outreach and services, they will likely take significant
time to become fully operational. In addition to fresh general elections, Nepal will also elect a new
provincial tier of government by December 2017.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

4.    Nepal’s physical and economic integration as a country depends on bridges along the Strategic Roads
Network (SNR) that enable year-round connectivity between the federal provinces. The SRN consists of
12,142 km of roads and 1,773 bridges. It carries the vast majority of passenger and goods transport
throughout Nepal. It also provides critical connections to India which is Nepal’s largest trading partner and
primary conduit for third country trade. The bridges that stitch together different sections of SRN roads
represent critical infrastructure for Nepal’s development given the number of river crossings and drainages
that Nepal’s Himalayan topography creates. Where bridges have yet to be built, or prove vulnerable to
climatic conditions such as flooding, communities and entire sections of Nepal can lose connectivity to
other internal regions, social services, and markets. Absent or lost connectivity impedes poverty reduction
– particularly in Nepal’s rural areas.

5.    Nepal’s Department of Roads (DOR) within the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport
(MoPIT) develops and maintains roads and bridges along the SRN. The SRN and its management is a
national concern with resources allocated from Nepal’s Consolidated Fund via the national budget.
Implementation of SRN works is managed by 34 Divisional Road Offices as well as Kathmandu-based
units that operate across divisions. A central Kathmandu-based Bridge Branch within the DOR has overall
jurisdiction over bridge assets and uses 4 regionally based Bridge Sectors to maintain field presence. It
directly manages complex bridge works using a dedicated engineering team. For less complex bridge
works, Divisional Road Offices implement works under the Bridge Branch’s supervision and technical
guidance.

6.    The geographical configuration of the SRN is significant to Nepal’s transport connectivity
challenges. Nepal’s busiest highway, known as the East-West Highway traverses “Terai? districts and
provides a transportation link that runs in parallel to Nepal’s southern border with India. This road crosses
numerous large year-round and seasonal rivers that drain hill and mountain catchments. As a result,
approximately 40% of Nepal’s existing bridge stock (by meters) is found on the East-West Highway.
North-south feeder roads branch off the East-West Highway and provide access to the difficult topography
of Nepal’s hill and mountain districts. SRN roads and bridges that comprise Nepal’s national road network
provide the physical linkages that integrate Nepal as a single country. The maintenance and replacement
of aging bridges along Nepal’s East-West Highway is particularly critical to the reliability of this
connectivity.

7.    Monsoon flooding during the summer of 2017 demonstrated that many bridges in Nepal, particularly
along the East-West Highway are vulnerable to natural events. The International Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), suggests that that Himalayan regions like Nepal will experience significant changes in weather
patterns due to climate change. The Association’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening tool further
confirms high risks of extreme precipitation and landslides facing SRN roads and bridges. Strengthening
the resilience of Nepal’s road and bridge network, particularly through greater consideration for resilient
engineering designs will be important for adapting to whatever eventualities climate change will bring for
Nepal. Strengthening maintenance systems is also essential for achieving greater resilience as well as cost
effectiveness of Nepal’s SRN bridge investments. Regular bridge maintenance is critical to enhancing
resilience and extending the useful life of assets at levels of costs that are typically well below bridge
replacement. There is also a need to enhance the resilience considerations reflected in initial bridge designs
that DOR deploys in Nepal.

8.    SRN roads and bridges suffer from insufficient road safety features and the rate of road transport
related fatalities in Nepal is amongst the highest in the world. In part, this reflects a historical focus on
prioritizing expansion of connectivity ahead of the quality and safety of that connectivity. Bridge rail,
proper markings, approach barriers, and features to protect non-motorized transport are typically basic and
insufficient to provide for safety. The design and construction of bridges for inclusive and safe access is
an area where Nepal can improve development results from bridge investments.

9.    The SRN remains both incomplete and inadequate with respect to the transportation services that
Nepal requires for poverty reduction and increasing shared prosperity. For example, only about 54% of
SRN roads feature some form of bituminous surface. Similarly, there are 372 identified gaps (totaling
approximately18,861 meters) on SRN roads that require new bridge construction for improved all-weather
connectivity. Historically, the SRN’s development has been constrained by GON’s fiscal capacity and the
inherent technical challenges of Himalayan geology. Increasingly, however the SRN’s development is
constrained by governance related issues and the limited ability of GON’s programs to deliver their
intended results to international standards of safety, reliability, and cost effectiveness. The IDA-supported
Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program (BIMP-I) made considerable progress but more work
remains to be done. Sourcing the overall quantum of investment needed for improving SRN road and
bridge infrastructure will remain a formidable challenge. However, the foremost obstacle to addressing it
will be improving results from the money that will be spent along the way. Supporting the GON to further
advance both infrastructure availability and the capabilities of its SRN bridge program (hereafter the
Program) is a high development priority for Nepal.

10.   Women are unrepresented in Nepal’s engineering professions and the ministries / departments that
manage the road network which represents a clear gender gap in Nepal’s transport sector. Rough estimates
suggest that female engineers comprise about 6% of the DOR’s technical staff. Despite being a low
proportion overall, this may be slightly more than other roads sector institutions in Nepal. For example, in
2013 the Department of Local Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Roads reportedly employed
only 7 female engineers (out of approximately 1,000).1 At present, there is only one female “class 1?
government officer2 assigned in the entirety of Nepal’s roads sector. Nationally, of the total number of
people employed in the transport, storage and communications sector in Nepal, only 3.5% are women.3
This may in part reflect cultural norms and preferences. However, anecdotal evidence also suggests that
female engineers within road sector institutions are often allocated organizational rather than technical task
which may reduce job satisfaction and limit opportunities for advancement. Sourcing more female
engineers, enhancing their technical skills, and elevating their role in technical programs can help
strengthen GON’s road sector institutions and Nepal’s overall engineering community. This will be a key
objective of a new Design and Advanced Technologies Cell (DATC) that the proposed operation will
support.



      1 https://blogs.adb.org/blog/meet-nisha-tripathee-female-engineer-nepal
      2 “Class 1? officers are able to hold the rank of Director General and Deputy Director General level posts. They are also potential
      candidates for Secretary-level positions in Nepal’s ministries.
      3 Based on ILO data, using a three-year moving average
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 11.  The Program Development Objective is to provide safe, resilient, and cost effective bridges on
 Nepal’s Strategic Roads Network. The following three indicators will serve to measure the PDO’s
 achievement:

 Key Results
 PDO level results and indicators are as mentioned below:

  PDO level result              PDO level indicator
  Safe bridges                  PDO 1: Reduced likelihood of road departure crashes on Program bridges.
  Resilient bridges             PDO 2: Enhanced DOR capabilities for developing resilient bridge designs.
  Cost effective bridges        PDO 3: Estimated road user cost savings achieved by Program interventions
 D. Project Description

  PforR Program Scope - As the ISDS is not necessary for the PforR operation, the PforR component of
  the project has not been described here.

 IPF Component – TA, Advanced Resilience & Inclusion Designs, & Institutional Development:
 12.   The IPF TA component will support, among other things, studies that concern potential impacts and
 requirements for site specific mitigation plans under the Association’s system, and advanced designs for
 enhanced resilience and inclusion that could be included in future IDA-supported operations. The IPF
 component will thus support baseline assessments, engineering studies, feasibility studies, and technical
 designs for preparing future projects on the SRN as government priorities crystalize and DOR identifies
 the specific projects. The risk level of each future proposed project or bridge for which relevant studies
 will be prepared under the IPF component will be confirmed in accordance with the screening criteria as
 per Bank’s OP 4.01 as well as country’s legislative requirements and the DOR’s Environmental and Social
 Management Framework that guides their implementation. Model Environmental Impact Assessment
 (EIA) and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) Terms of Reference (TOR) have been prepared, reviewed,
 cleared by the Bank and publicly disclosed. During implementation, model TOR will be customized to
 site-specific interventions. During implementation, site specific EIA and SIA TOR as well as EIA and SIA
 report(s) for each high-risk intervention will be reviewed and cleared by the Association. The site-specific
 assessment reports and prepared plans shall be reviewed and cleared by the Bank, approved by the
 concerned GON authorities, and be disclosed by the Association and DOR (/Implementing Agency) at
 least 120 days prior to the execution of assignments.

 13.  For environmental risk management, OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural
 Habitats, OP/BP 4.36 Forests, and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources are triggered for the IPF
 component because one or more of the bridges to be developed with support from the TA may have adverse
 consequences relevant to those aspects, depending on the location and details of the proposed intervention/
 bridge.

 14.    For social impacts, OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement)
 are triggered. Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) inclusive of Indigenous People's issues
 (or an independent Indigenous Peoples' Plan (IPP) where necessary) will be developed as may be applicable
  based on findings of social impact assessment (SIA) for each bridge-site. Similarly, a Resettlement Action
  Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will be prepared for each project requiring
  permanent acquisition of private assets (land, structures, etc.) based on SIA findings. Further, adversely
  affected persons/families will be supported in livelihood restoration and/or enhancement through
  preparation and implementation of a VCDP for each high-risk bridge site.

  15.   Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
  supported operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the
  existing program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS
  ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Affected
  communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which
  determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and
  procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
  World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
  on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit
  http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
  Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

  E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
  known)
  16.   The IPF Component is a TA and will include support, inter alia, for the preparations of future projects
  on the Strategic Roads Network; advanced bridge designs for enhanced resilience and inclusion; and other
  technical support outlined in the project description.

  17.   Specific locations of projects applicable to the IPF component are not yet to be known. The designs
  that will be prepared under the IPF TA Component are likely to be for bridges located on the Strategic
  Road Network (SRN) of Nepal, and in some cases, in close vicinity of existing bridges. The road network
  under SRN spread across Nepal – hills/ mountains, and plain terrains. Some sections of roads in the SRN
  pass through sensitive sites including protected areas or close to such sites and/ or forest areas as well as
  through or close to settlements.

  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Drona Raj Ghimire, Sr. Environment Specialist - GEN06
  Caroline Mary Sage, Sr. Social Development Specialist – GSU06
  Annu Rajbhandari, Environmental Specialist – GEN06
  Govind Prasad Bhatt, Social Development Consultant – GTI06
  Dron Pun, Environmental Consultant - GENDR


II. IMPLEMENTATION
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
18.  DOR’s Bridge Branch will lead Program implementation as well as the implementation of the hybrid
operation’s IPF component. Six other entities within the Department of Roads will have key roles in
supporting the Program’s functioning. Table 1 summarizes the roles of these different entities.
Table 1: Roles / Responsibilities of Internal DOR Entities

 DOR Entity         Program role
                    ▪ Overall stewardship of Bridge Management System (BMS) and Bridge Site
                       Monitoring System (BSMS), management of BMS / BSMS data and software
                    ▪   Implementation of complex works (e.g. high / long bridges, innovative designs,
                        advanced maintenance and repair methodologies)
                    ▪   Oversight of implementation by Divisional Road Offices (for less complex
                        works)
                    ▪   Coordination of site supervision by independent consultants
 Bridge Branch
 (Lead entity for   ▪   Management of design consultants and international experts
 Program            ▪   Implementation the Program’s complementary component on technical
 delivery)              assistance, advanced resilience & inclusion designs, and institutional
                        development
                    ▪   Design approval, planning, monitoring, and development of Program
                        investments
                    ▪   Undertaking quality monitoring and evaluation of worksites
                    ▪   Coordination of all PforR Program and IPF activities and primary point of
                        contact with the Association’s task team
 Divisional         ▪   Procurement and contract management of less complex works
 Offices
                    ▪   Coordinating of monitoring and reporting to Bridge Branch of bridge works by
 Bridge Sectors         Divisional Offices within their respective geographical remits
 (Regional
 Directorates)      ▪   Direct monitoring and reporting to Bridge Branch on Program bridge works
                        within their respective geographical remits.

                    ▪   Compilation of work plan and annual budget for the Program (which are
 Planning Branch        subsequently proposed to MoF for consideration / inclusion in the national
                        budget)
 Financial
 Administration     ▪   Financial control and reporting for the Program within DOR
 Section
                      ▪   Lead overall management of environmental and social aspects of the Program
                      ▪   Social and environmental assessments and development of safeguards
                          instruments in accordance with the DOR’s Environmental and Social
                          Management Framework, and other legislative provisions of GON
                      ▪   Ensuring environmental and social consideration are adequately incorporated in
Geo-Environment           project designs, bidding documents, bills of quantity, contract monitoring
and Social Unit           systems, and other elements of contractual packages
(GESU)
                      ▪   Environmental and social compliance assurances – including planning,
                          implementation, monitoring and supervisions; and seek/grant
                          approvals/concurrences as applicable
                      ▪   Management of DOR’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) focusing on
                          social and environmental impacts
Maintenance           ▪   Development of Annual Road Maintenance Plans (which also include bridges)
Branch
III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                 The TA under IPF component will support the
                                                         preparation of new road project and advance
                                                         engineering design of major bridges that will require
                                                         parallel Environmental and Social Assessments. Some
                                                         of existing SRN Roads pass through National Parks/
                                                         Protected Areas and forests. The roads and bridges
                                                         that may be proposed might be located in the
                                                         mountainous/hilly as well as in the plain terrains.
                                                         Cultural sites are found in many of the rivers over
                                                         which bridges may be constructed. After completion
                                                         of the preparation/ engineering design under the IPF
                                                         TA, subsequent construction of the road or bridges
                                                         may have impacts on the natural environment, human
                                                         health & safety, and cultural resources. The road and
                                                         some bridges, depending on the location, scale, and
                                                         type of activities, may be of high risk (risk level of
                                                         each cannot be ascertained now because precise
                                                         location, scale and type of activities are not known).
                                                         Given that the details of investments are largely
                                                         unknown at this stage, a draft EIA TOR has been
                                                         developed, which includes the development of
                                                         required environmental management plans where
                                                         necessary. The TOR will be adapted for site specific
                                                         assessments and plans for each future project as
                                                         needed.

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            Yes              Some of SRN Roads pass through National Parks/
                                                         Protected Areas. The new road project that may be
                                                         prepared under the IPF TA could also pass through the
                                             protected area/ natural habitat. Some rivers, over
                                             which bridges may be designed under the IPF TA
                                             component, could be important habitat for fishes,
                                             riverine ecosystems and aquatic species.
                                             The currently prepared EIA TOR will be adapted for
                                             site specific assessments and required plans for each
                                             future project as needed.

Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes    Some of SRN Roads pass through forest areas. The
                                             new road project that may be prepared under the IPF
                                             TA could also pass through the forest area. The
                                             bridges designed under the IFP TA could also be
                                             located in or adjacent to forests.
                                             The currently prepared EIA TOR will be adapted for
                                             site specific assessments and required plans for each
                                             future project as needed.

Pest Management OP 4.09               No     The proposed operation will not use any herbicides or
                                             pesticides. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes   Depending on the locations of the activities, there is
                                             possibility of existence of cultural sites within or close
                                             to rights of way or project influence area: some could
                                             be of national/ international significance.
                                             The currently prepared EIA TOR will be adapted for
                                             site specific assessments and required plans for each
                                             future project as needed.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes    Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in Nepal reside in various
                                             parts of the country and are likely to be present in the
                                             proposed project/program area as well because the
                                             road and/or bridge project that may be prepared under
                                             the IPF TA may pass through the IP area. Thus, they
                                             (IPs) are potentially affected people by the project
                                             activities, triggering this policy. Given that the details
                                             of project investments are largely unknown at this
                                             stage, a draft model Social Impact Assessment TOR
                                             has been developed, which includes the development
                                             of an indigenous peoples/vulnerable community
                                             development plan with IP issues, where necessary.
                                             The TOR will be adapted for site specific assessments
                                             and plans for each future project as needed.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes    Involuntary taking of land might be required as the
                                             road and/or bridge project that may be prepared under
                                             the IPF TA might pass through the settlements,
                                             agricultural lands, etc. affecting assets and/or
                                             livelihoods of the people. Therefore, the policy is
                                                             triggered. Given that the details of investments are
                                                             largely unknown at this stage, a draft Social Impact
                                                             Assessment TOR has been developed, which includes
                                                             the development of a Resettlement Action Plan where
                                                             necessary. The TOR will be adapted for site specific
                                                             assessments and plans for each future project as
                                                             needed.

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No                 No dams will be constructed or upgraded for the
                                                             project, and no project investments depend on existing
                                                             dams.

 Projects on International Waterways No                      No dams will be constructed or upgraded for the
 OP/BP 7.50                                                  project, and no project investments depend on existing
                                                             dams.

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No                    The project does not include any activities in disputed
                                                             areas.



IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
 any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The IPF Component does not include the construction of civil works and will include support for: (i) preparing
 future projects on the Strategic Roads Network; (ii) technical auditing by NVC; (iii) advance bridge designs for
 enhanced resilience and inclusion; (iv) training (domestic and international) and capacity development; (v)
 supervision oversight consultancies; (vi) mobilization, equipage, and development of a Design and Advance
 Technology Cell; and (vii) capacity development for Environmental and Social Risk management, including
 support to improve OHS practices and DOR’s capabilities for implementing Nepal’s new Labor Act (2017).

 However, some aspects of the IPF component, such as the preparation of feasibility studies/ future projects and
 advance bridge designs relating to major SRN road could be of significant social and environmental risk depending
 on the nature, scale and location of the activity. The location of the future project that may be prepared under the
 TA is not-known at this stage. The advance design of the bridges on the SRN will be located in the existing
 Strategic Roads, and potentially, in close vicinity of existing bridges. The roads under SRN are in the hilly/
 mountain as well as plain terrains, and some of SRN Roads pass through National Parks/ Protected Areas as well
 as from forest areas. Some rivers, over which bridges may be designed under the IPF TA component, are important
 habitat for fishes and aquatic species, and heritage sites are often located in the river banks. For these reasons,
 OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.36 Forests, and OP/BP 4.11
 Physical Cultural Resources are triggered. The IPF Component will, together with technical preparation and
 engineering design, support the carrying out the environmental and social assessments, including stakeholder
 consultations meeting the requirements of the applicable Bank policies.

 For social impacts, OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) are triggered.
 For analytical and engineering works relating to the preparation of major SRN road and bridge projects, Social
 Impact Assessments (SIA) will be conducted in tandem with engineering works (feasibility studies, and
preparation of designs and DPRs) and required social management plans (resettlement, Indigenous
Peoples/vulnerable community development, etc.) shall be prepared in parallel with such engineering works in
accordance with applicable Policies and Procedures of the World Bank (including OP/BP 4.10, 4.12, etc.) and
those of the GON (Land Acquisition Act; Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, etc.; and the
DOR’s ESMF - which has been prepared with support of the World Bank environment and social safeguard teams
under Bank-supported Road Sector Development Project (RSDP), and is in alignment in general with the
applicable social and environmental policies of the Bank).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area:
This is not-known at this stage. The EIA, SIA and other assessments that will be carried out during implementation
of the TA, in tandem with technical studies/ assessment, will assess any potential indirect/ and/ or long-term
impacts and will incorporate relevant mitigation measures. Generic TOR for EIA and SIA have been reviewed and
cleared by the Bank. The generic TOR will be customized for each intervention during implementation of the TA.
The customized TOR for each high-risk intervention will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Alternatives will be explored during study/design/DPR stage as well as by the EIA and SIA. The TOR for EIA and
SIA will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Implementing agency, the Department of Roads (DOR) is the lead agency in planning and developing the Strategic
Road Network (SRN) including bridges on the SNR in Nepal, and has experience of implementing donor
supported projects including World Bank supported projects. The DOR is familiar with the Bank’s
social/environmental requirements, as it has been engaged with the Bank funded projects including RSDP,
NIRTTP, RSSP and BIMP-I (predecessor of the proposed Program). The department has established a Geo-
Environment and Social Unit (GESU) to deal with environmental and social aspects of roads: it has played an
important role in mainstreaming environmental and social considerations in road and bridge planning and
development.

GON / DOR has prepared a sectoral Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF 2007), which is
being applied in the Bank funded ongoing RSDP, NIRTTP, etc. DOR issued a bridge addendum to the ESMF in
2013. The ESMF together with the bridge addendum have been prepared considering the government’s legal
requirements as well as the World Bank’s safeguard policies. ESMF and the addendum provide a comprehensive
framework for the assessment of different risks, development of safeguards instruments, and overall management
of impacts. Besides, the DOR has developed several documents such as a manual and reference book for helping
internalize environmental and social aspects. Over the years, DOR has improved environmental and social
management through strengthening GESU. However, DOR has limited experience of independently handling/
managing higher risk projects. The IPF TA component of the proposed project will support in further
strengthening the environmental management capacity and system of the DOR/GESU, particularly the assessment
and management of environmental and social risks and impacts of high-risk projects.

The existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of DOR will be used as a general
guidance document. The client has prepared generic TOR for the EIA and SIA (Road and Bridge) for use during
the TA implementation, which have been cleared by the Bank. Based on the generic TOR cleared by the Bank, the
client -during implementation- will prepare specific/customized TOR for EIA and SIA for each IPF supported
design work. The specific/customized TOR (for EIA and SIA) for high-risk interventions will be reviewed and
cleared/agreed by the Bank, in which specific requirements for the proposed bridge/road to comply with the Bank
safeguard policies will be defined. It is envisaged that the EIA and SIA will be undertaken at the same time as the
more complex designs being supported by the TA. Where such interventions are screened as high-risk
interventions (i.e. screened as Category ‘A’ interventions), each EIA and SIA TOR will be subject to consultation
and disclosure as required by the World Bank safeguard policies as well as clearance from the Bank. In addition,
an Environmental and Social Screening will be carried for each IPF intervention. The Screening and
Categorization Report will also include an early environmental and social assessment of the potential impacts and
risks providing early inputs to engineering planning and design. The Bank will review and clear each of the
screening and categorization reports for Category ‘A’ interventions. The Bank will also review and clear each of
the draft EIA and SIA Report of Category ‘A’ interventions.

Environmental and social safeguard documents, including detailed EIA, SIA and various required plans as per
GON and World Bank provisions, will be prepared during the implementation of the TA, in tandem with
engineering works (feasibility studies, and preparation of designs and DPRs). The aim is for the EIA and SIA
steps and engineering steps to be carried out together so that there is good integration of both environmental/ social
assessment and engineering planning and design processes and outputs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Road and Bridge Specific Stakeholders will be identified during the EIA and SIA process. EIA/SIA, as described
above, will be undertaken during the implementation of the TA (in tandem with technical studies). Specific TOR
for the EIA and SIA will include requirements for the stakeholders’ consultations and disclosures and will be
reviewed and cleared by the Bank.


B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is
triggered)
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other.
Date of receipt by the Bank (ESMF)                                                        December 29, 2017
Date of receipt by the Bank (EIA Model TOR)                                               April 17, 2018
Date of submission to InfoShop (ESMF)                                                     December 29, 2017
Date of submission to InfoShop (EIA Model TOR)                                            April 17, 2018
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the      NA
Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal (ESMF)                                                                  December 19, 2017 (Re-
                                                                              disclosed integrating
                                                                              Bridge Addendum)
Nepal (EIA Model TOR)                                                         April 17, 2018
Comments: The ESMF of the Implementing Agency (DOR) has been prepared with support from the
World Bank. It is generally in-line with environmental and social safeguard policies and procedures of
the Bank and is inclusive of provisions for screening, planning, and developing actions and guidance to
address safeguard issues arising from implementation of project activities. The ESMF is being applied
in the ongoing Bank supported projects. Generic TOR for EIA and SIA have been prepared, and
cleared by the Bank. Specific/customized TOR for EIA and SIA will be prepared based on the generic
TOR cleared by the Bank. The specific TOR for each Category ‘A’ interventions will also be reviewed
and cleared by the Bank. The Screening and Categorization Report will also be reviewed and cleared
by the Bank.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank (ESMF)                                                     December 29, 2017
Date of receipt by the Bank (SIA Model TOR)                                            April 17, 2018
Date of submission to InfoShop (ESMF)                                                  December 29, 2017
Date of submission to InfoShop (SIA Model TOR)                                         April 17, 2018
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal (ESMF)                                                                December 19, 2017 (Re-
                                                                            disclosed integrating
                                                                            Bridge Addendum)
Nepal (SIA Model TOR)                                                       April 17, 2018
Comments: The DOR ESMF contains RAF and has provisions complying with Bank policies and
procedures that will be followed during the EIA / SIA and in preparation of the RAP and other plans as
required adhering to applicable GON and World Bank standards/provisions. Generic TOR for EIA and
SIA have been reviewed and cleared by the Bank. EIA and SIA TOR for specific interventions will be
prepared during implantation of the TA, and specific/ customized TOR for each Category ‘A’
intervention will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank during implementation of the TA.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank (ESMF)                                                     December 29, 2017
Date of receipt by the Bank (SIA Model TOR)                                            April 17, 2018
Date of submission to InfoShop (ESMF)                                                  December 29, 2017
Date of submission to InfoShop (SIA Model TOR)                                         April 17, 2018
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal (ESMF)                                                                 December 19, 2017 (Re-
                                                                             disclosed integrating
                                                                             Bridge Addendum)
Nepal (SIA Model TOR)                                                        April 17, 2018
Comments: The DOR ESMF contains IPF and has provisions complying with Bank policies and
procedures that will be followed during the EIA / SIA and in preparation of the IPP/ VCDP. Generic
TOR have already been reviewed by the Bank. Intervention specific TOR will be reviewed and cleared
by the Bank ensuring that Bank policies are fully complied with in conducting the SIA and preparation
of required management plans (VCDP/IPP, etc.).
Pest Management Plan: NA
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
NA
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
project decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered)
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including
                                                              Yes   []    No      []    NA       [x]
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or
 Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA              Yes   []    No     [X]    NA        []
 report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
                                                              Yes   [X]   No      []    NA        []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or
                                                              Yes   []    No      []    NA       [x]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
                                                              Yes   [X]   No      []    NA        []
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 POP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management
                                                              Yes   []    No    [X]     NA        []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?
                                                              Yes   []    No     [X]    NA        []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
                                                              Yes   []    No      []    NA       [x]
 included in project design? If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to
                                                              Yes   [X]   No      []    NA        []
 cultural property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
                                                              Yes   [X]   No      []    NA        []
 the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in                  Yes   []    No     [X]    NA        []
 consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
                                                              Yes   []    No      []    NA       [X]
 safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
 design been reviewed and approved by the Regional            Yes   []    No     [X]    NA        []
 Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been            Yes   []    No   [X]   NA    []
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
                                                              Yes   []    No   []    NA    [x]
 safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?
                                                              Yes   []    No   []    TBD   [X]
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or
 access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or     Yes   []    No   []    TBD   [X]
 other means of livelihoods)
 OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional
                                                              Yes   []    No   [X]   NA    []
 issues and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
                                                              Yes   []    No   []    NA    [X]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
                                                              Yes   []    No   [X]   NA    []
 so, does it include provisions for certification system?
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to
                                                              Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
 public place in a form and language that are
                                                              Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of     Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
                                                              Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
 project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and      Yes   []    No   []    NA    [X]
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately        Yes   [X]   No   []    NA    []
 reflected in the project legal documents?

V. Contact point
     Contact 1:       Dominic Pasquale Patella
     Title:           Sr. Transport Specialist
     Tel:             +1 (202) 458 4619
     Email:           dpatella@worldbank.org

     Contact 2:       Oceane Keou
     Title:           Transport Specialist
     Tel:             +1 (202) 473 7130
     Email:           okeou@worldbank.org
Borrower/Client/Recipient
Contact:       Mr. Kewal Prasad Bhandari
Title:         Joint Secretary, International Economic Cooperation Coordination Division
Tel:           +977 4211837
Email:         ieccd@mof.gov.np

Implementing Agencies
Contact:      Mr. Gopal Prasad Sigdel
Title:        Director General, Department of Roads
Tel:          +977 15529075
Email:        dgdor@dor.gov.np

For more information contact:
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


APPROVAL

                                 Dominic Pasquale Patella
 Task Team Leader(s)
                                 Oceane Keou

Approved By
 Regional Safeguards Adviser     Maged Mahmoud Hamed                May 17, 2018

 Practice Manager                Karla Gonzalez Carvajal            May 18, 2018
