                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                               Report No: AC590
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/28/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: NEPAL                                                 Project ID: P040613
Project: Health Sector Program Project                         Task Team Leader: Jagmohan S. Kang
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 20, 2004                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: August 31, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m): 60.00
Managing Unit: SASHD                                           Sector: Health (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Population and reproductive health (P);
Status: Lending                                                Fighting communicable diseases (P); Health system
                                                               performance (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The objective of the proposed project is to assist, along with other donors, His Majesty's
Government of Nepal (HMGN) in (i) implementing a prioritized, accessible and affordable
essential health services package (EHSP); (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity of the
Ministry of Health (MOH); and (iii) undertaking supportive policy reform.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The program project will have four components: (i) strengthening service delivery; (ii)
organizational and institutional development; (iii) policy reform; and (iv) other priority
health activities.

Strengthening Service Delivery. The project will support the decentralized delivery of an
essential services package focused on safer motherhood, child health, communicable
disease control and strengthened out-patient services. A key strategy will be to reorient the
public service delivery to make it community-based against the present largely
facility-based delivery. Existing successful NGO safer motherhood and neo-natal survival
strategies will be reviewed during the preparation to design/modify EHSP interventions,
and different approaches to service delivery, including the use of informal providers, will
be piloted. Further, service delivery by the peripheral facilities would require an effective
referral system and strong back up by well-functioning hospital services which will require
additional inputs. In addition to routine monitoring, Service Delivery Surveys will be
conducted in alternate year to measure progress, especially to obtain client perceptions
about the quality and adequacy of services. Demand generation through culturally relevant
behavior change communication strategies will be a priority to improve service coverage
for the poor and under-served populations. Limited infrastructure inputs to fill the critical
gaps in under-served geographical areas will be provided.

Organizational and Institutional Development: A key constraint to develop and
implement an ambitious sector program is the limited planning and management capacity in
the MOH and the Department of Health Services (DOHS), and limited implementation
capacity down the line. However, externally aided projects have been supporting

                                                         2
                                                                                                          ISDS


strengthening of the support systems such as that of the health management information
system. The project will build on such work. It is expected that support systems of
planning, human resource management and development, management information system,
behavior change communication, procurement and logistics, would need strengthening.
Following a comprehensive institutional review of the MOH and DOHS structures, and a
review of each of the key support systems, selective organizational strengthening will be
undertaken.

Policy Reform: Under the program, at least three significant reforms will be achieved: (i)
move towards a coherent, cost-effective sector-wide approach against the present
fragmented approach; (ii) emphasis on essential health services; and (iii) decentralized
management of service delivery. The project will also achieve improved allocation of
public resources with: (i) allocation of at least 65% of public resources to EHSP; and (ii)
progressively increasing allocation to quality-enhancing non-salary recurring costs to over
35% of the recurrent budget. In addition, pilots will be undertaken to increase the use of
essential health services by the poor and underserved populations; in: (i) public private
partnerships; (ii) health insurance; (iii) private sector regulation; and (iv) financial
protection against catastrophic illness. The pilots will be implemented in a phased manner
and their results will provide a base for subsequent reform. Successful pilots may be taken
up for replication in a possible follow-up program project.

Other Priority Health Activities: The focus will be on the decentralized service delivery.
There are several other essential parts of the program i.e., medical education, mental
health, occupational health, tertiary care facilities, medical waste management, indigenous
systems of medicine, etc. This component will merely support the maintenance of these
activities without significant fresh investments. Since resources are extremely scarce,
wherever feasible, allocation will be reduced on lower priority activities among this set of
activities.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The proposed project would cover the entire country.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:

Medical waste management strategy will be a part of the project under the fourth component, i.e., other health
activities. A Medical Waste Management Assessment has been commissioned; its findings and
recommendations will be used during the preparation.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                            Yes    No    TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                    Yes    No    TBD

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No       TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No       TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No       TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No       TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No       TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The mismanagement of healthcare waste (HCW) poses risks to people and the environment. Healthcare workers, patients,
waste handlers, waste pickers, and the general public are exposed to health risks from infectious waste (particularly sharps),
chemicals, and other special HCW. Improper disposal of these wastes , including open dumping and uncontrolled burning
increases the risk of spreading infections and exposure to toxic emissions from incomplete combustion. For these reasons, a
healthcare/ medical waste management has been included in the project.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

None.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

Not required.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

A Health Care Waste Management Assessment was commissioned during the project preparation and the
findings will be reflected in the project design. Medical waste management strategy will be a part of the
project under the fourth component, i.e., other health activities. The strategy includes three action plans and
will implement in three phases: short term (2003-2004), medium term (2004-2007) and a long term
(2007-2017). During the project period, the borrower will establish coordinating committee, prepare detailed
guidelines, prepare training and information materials, prepare training programs, feasibility study on
treatment, and implementation and procurement of equipment and monitoring.

A social assessment has been undertaken to better understand the needs of women, children and the
marginalized groups. The findings of the social assessment will be reflected in project design for the
improvement of service delivery, training, information, education and communications (IEC) and community

                                                       4
                                                                                                           ISDS


participation. The action plan for each program components to mitigate adverse impacts has been prepared
which focuses on (i) how to overcome the cultural barriers and gender discrimination to create and increase
demand for health services; (ii) how to maximize the inclusiveness of women and disadvantaged/
underprevileged sections in decisions related to improving access to essential healthcare; (iii) how to promote
the role of client and community in achieving more accountable health services.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

A participatory process has been used for developing the sector strategy and similar approach will be used
for developing the sector program. Other key stakeholders to be involved during the preparation process
will be:
i) Technical program divisions and program support divisions under the ministry of health, relevant sectors,
i.e., local development, physical planning, education, etc., local academic and training institutions,
professional medical and nursing councils and associations and the para-professional level training bodies;
ii) Donors working in the health sector, especially the technical agencies.

A donor sub-group has been involved from the beginning to ensure that the program
is sound in content and quality, that the government has the capacity to implement it,
and that preparation is on track.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
           management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
           technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
           projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
           issues.

                                                     5
                                                                                                     ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                              6/3/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                          7/7/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                              4/7/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                          6/2/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Jagmohan S. Kang                                   January 12, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Asif Faiz/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Warren Waters/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Pramod K. Agrawal                                       January 28, 2004
Comments
Cleared.

Sector Manager                        Anabela Abreu                                      January 27, 2004

