Page  1
PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  
AC922
 
Project Name 
HEALTH SERVICES EXTENSION AND MODERNIZATION 
SWAP  (2nd APL) 
Region 
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 
Sector 
Health (100%) 
Project ID 
P078991 
Borrower(s) 
REPUBLIC OF NICARAGUA 
Implementing Agency 
Government of Nicaragua 
Environment Category 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ]  
Safeguard Classification 
[
]
S
1
[
]
S
2
[
]
S
3
[
]
S
F
[
]
TBD (to be determined)
 
Date PID Prepared 
June 23, 2004 
Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Authorization 
September 20, 2004 
Estimated Date of Board 
Approval 
March 15, 2005 
1.  Key development issues and rationale for Bank involvement 
Nicaragua has among the lowest MDG health indicators in Latin America. Although there has 
been considerable progress in improving these indicators over the last ten years
—particularly 
infant and child mortality rates—it is unlikely that Nicaragua will achieve either its maternal 
mortality or its chronic malnutrition MDG goals for 2015, unless significant additional efforts 
are made to accelerate current trends. The fertility rate, one of the highest in LAC at 3.2, is a 
particularly pressing social problem: Nicaragua’s adolescent fertility is the highest in the region. 
 
Current 
Goal for 2005 
PRSP 2015 
Indicator 
Status (2001)
Target 
On track 
Target
Likelihood of Achieving
Infant Mortality 
31 
32 
Yes 
20
Possible 
Child mortality 
40 
37 
Partly 
24
Possible 
Maternal mortality 
125 
129 
Yes 
40
Unlikely 
Chronic Malnutrition
17.8 
16 
Yes 
7
Unlikely 
Global Fertility Rate
3.2 
Source:  PRSP, LSMS 2001, PRSP First Progress Report, Poverty Assessment 2003. 
 
Moreover Nicaragua’s national health indicators hide tremendous inequities in the level of health 
status that exist within the country, as well as in the progress that has been made in the past few 
years. As may be seen in the graph below, there is a direct relationship between the amount of 
improvement that was made between 1998 and 2001 in household income quintile and the rate of 
reduction in the (a) infant mortality rate, (b) the under-five mortality rate and (c) the prevalence 
of chronic malnutrition among children 12-59 months old. The poorest benefited the least from 
the improvement of health indicators, the wealthiest benefited the most.  As a result, these health 
problems have become increasingly concentrated among the poor.  The prevalence of poverty 
and the absolute number of poor are found disproportionately in the rural areas of the North and 
the Atlantic Coast.  As a result, as these health problems have become increasingly concentrated 
Page  2
among the poor, they have concomitantly become increasingly concentrated in these geographic 
areas of the country.  The graph on the following page shows how:  
Rates of Reduction in Nicaragua's Key Health MDG Indicators
Between 1998 and 2001 by Household Income Quintile
2%
24%
30%
36%
37%
7%
22%
26%
33%
35%
7%
1
2%
31%
35%
47%
0
%
5
%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Q1-Lowest
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5-Highest
Household Income Quintiles
Infant Mortality Rate
Under 5 Mortality Rate
Chronic Malnutrition
Source:  DHS 1998 and 2001 data. 
With a 2002 per  capita GNI of US$710, Nicaragua is one of the poorest countries in LAC (WDI, 
2003).  Although the rate of poverty declined between 1993 and 2001, the absolute number of 
Nicaraguans in poverty increased by nearly 300,000 (World Bank, 2003:3).  Poverty and health 
are transactionally related. Nicaragua’s 2003 Poverty Assessment empirically established the 
importance of living conditions, health inputs and demographic factors as key determinants of 
health status in Nicaragua.  Living conditions that characterize impoverished populations are 
important factors contributing to poor health, at the same time that poor physical and mental 
health, poor health practices —including premature births, short child-spacing intervals and large 
family size—and high out-of-pocket expenditures on health impede the ability of a family to rise 
up out of poverty.  For Nicaragua to make better progress in reducing poverty, it will need to do 
a
better job in improving health status. 
 
The GON is fully committed to the 2001 PRSP, and is now preparing its second stage PRSP. The 
Bank’s CAS main rationale is to support the GON’s PRSP. Two of the four PRSP pillars are 
closely related to the proposed project: (i) greater and better investment in the human capital of 
the poor, and (ii) better protection for vulnerable populations. The largest financial support of 
IDA to Nicaragua is the budget support provided by the PSAC and PRSCs. These credits include 
health conditionalities that are fully aligned with the PRSP, whose achievement is supposed to be 
supported by a new health investment project which corresponds to the second phase of the 
current health project, the Health Modernization Program, which is an adjustable programmatic 
loan (APL).
1
The MOH has recently completed the 
National Health Policies 2005-2015
,
in which it formally 
presents its vision of how it intends to achieve the health goals established in the PRSP. The 
Ministry is now working on the elaboration of a long-term 
National Health Plan: 2005-2015
,
and a more detailed and operational companion document, the 
Five-Year Implementation Plan, 
2005-2009
.
2
Five Cooperating Agencies and the MOH have a signed agreement that the 
1
Phase I of the current project ends in December 2004, at which time it is anticipated that 100 percent of project 
funds will have been spent. 
2
The Ministry is committed to completing these documents by August 2004 and November 2004, respectively. 
Page  3
Ministry’s 
Five-Year Implementation Plan, 2005-2009 
will be the operational framework for 
the proposed SWAp (sector wide approaches), thereby assuring that the SWAp will be 
fully aligned with Government policy. 
The first phase of the APL has consisted of a substantial number of pilots, as have the projects of 
the IDB and Sweden.  Evalu
ations have already been completed of the Women’s Centers (
Casas 
Maternas)
,
the 14 primary health care interventions and of the health policies of 1997-2002.  
Additional evaluations are currently in various stages of preparation, including:   hospital 
modernization, primary care extension via the purchase of NGO services and via the Maternal-
Child Insurance Fund, the institutional modernization of MINSA and the community-based 
nutrition program.  The Ministry is planning to use the evaluations to aid it in making strategic 
decisions as to how best to harmonize donors’ programs and to design the SWAp.  Several of 
these evaluations, for instance, will provide input into the design of the Integrated Health Care 
Model that the Ministry is currently constructing, and that it intends to use as the implementing 
vehicle of the National Health Plan. The lessons learned in the modernization of hospital 
management of the first phase will be consolidated into a formal hospital management model 
that will be extended under the second phase of the project to the rest of public hospitals. 
Likewise, the institutional modernization evaluation will provide lessons to adjust those efforts, 
which will also be continued throughout the second phase of the project.  
 
Nicaragua has been recipient of a massive amount of foreign aid, particularly after natural 
disasters such as Hurricane Mitch (October 1998). Without denying the contribution that this aid 
has made in helping to bridge the gap in health services availability and the health financing 
shortfall in the country, it is evident that this amount of foreign resources has come at a price. It 
has resulted in 36 distinct projects, with different purposes, priorities and strategies. No less 
important, this proliferation in foreign projects has limited the leadership and stewardship role of 
the MOH,  and, by virtue of the lack of adequate coordination, it has contributed substantially to 
inefficiencies in the health sector, at the same time that it has foisted excessive demands for 
project supervision and monitoring on the Ministry. This has been a major motivation for the 
Ministry’s efforts over the past two years to promote a health SWAp, together with the support 
of the like-minded group of donors. This particular moment—when IDA, IADB and Sweden (a 
major donor in the health sector in Nicaragua), are all in similar phases of the traditional project 
cycle and need to define their investment support to the health sector for the next four to five 
years—provides a unique opportunity to develop a health SWAp under the leadership of the 
MOH. Other donors with ongoing health projects—the Netherlands and Finland--have expressed 
their willingness to participate in the SWAp both with additional funds and by progressively 
aligning their own projects within the same operational framework, while USAID and Canada, 
who have been participating in the preparatory workshops, have also stated their interest in 
having their projects and country strategies supporting the SWAp. UN agencies, including 
UNFPA and PAHO/WHO, have been approached by the MOH and IDA and have indicated their 
interest in supporting the sectoral approach. Finally, the MOH is seeking to integrate a bilateral 
donors’ fund (Canada, Finland and DfID), which is currently devoted to sexual and reproductive 
health, into the overall SWAp.   
 
The GON requested a PHRD grant for the preparation of the second phase of the APL, which 
was approved in February 2004 and signed-off on in May 2004. The PHRD will be managed by 
Page  4
the MOH, and its action plan is fully consistent with this PCN. Under the PHRD, a financial 
analysis of the sector will be prepared in the next few months and a detailed estimation of the 
cost of the Five-year Implementation Plan for the National Health Plan will be developed. These 
analyses will provide a sectoral economic and financial framework that will identify the required 
financial contributions of the Government and its SWAp partners.  
 
Much preparatory work for the SWAp has already been done.  Over the course of the past year 
and a half, IDA, IADB and the Nordic countries have conducted four joint missions, which have 
included the development and signing of joint 
Ayuda Memorias
.
In addition, there have been 
two SWAp workshops, including a week long event in May 2004, to clarify and to define goals, 
objectives, expectations and methods.  These have been important, Ministry-led events with 
substantive, technical discussions and the active participation of Ministry line personnel and 
donor representatives.  This process has helped to harmonize donors and has nurtured good 
working relationships between all involved.   
 
Some of the groundwork that has been done for the SWAp has been the product of the 
institutional modernization that has been achieved in the past three or four years, particularly in 
the area of financial planning and management, and in the development of information systems 
for monitoring and evaluation.  The SWAp is now feasible, in large part, because of these 
significant developments. The development of the SIPLA
—an algorithm-based health activity 
planning tool—and the SIAFI—a program- and activity-based budgeting and accounting 
system—are major accomplishments. Furthermore, they have been implemented in a manner that 
has made an important contribution to the decentralization of MINSA. It is noteworthy that the 
design of the SWAp is helping to further institutionalize the use of these tools and will be based 
on a decentralized plan that will be constructed from the bottom-up.  
 
2. Proposed objective(s) 
The Health Sector Modernization Program (HSMP), of which this project is the second phase, 
seeks to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and equity of the Nicaragua health system by: (i) 
strengthening first level care and nutrition; (ii) modernizing the hospital network; (iii) developing 
the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Health; and (iv) supporting the social security reform. 
The second phase of this APL will seek the attainment of this program’s objective by: (i) 
focusing on the extension of the integral model of health care to the poorest areas of the country; 
(ii) improving delivery and management of hospital services and Women Centers related to the 
extension of services; (iii) strengthening the MOH capacity to steward and evaluate a more 
equitable and efficient health system; and (iv) expanding coverage and quality of services 
guaranteed by the social security. 
 
3. Preliminary description 
The SWAp will finance the Five Year Plan of the National Health Plan. The Ministry’s National 
Health Plan will identify the specific health priorities and goals, and will establish specific 
benchmarks for each SILAIS—regional health units.  Each SILAIS will, in turn, use the SIPLA 
together with the SIAFI to develop annual operating plans for achieving its benchmarks. The 
plans will consist of specific types and quantities of activities and services, and their required 
inputs and estimated costs. The sum of these plans will provide an estimate of the cost of a major 
component of the Five Year Health Plan (it will not include the hospitals’ component or the 
Page  5
MINSA Central Office component). It would be a relatively straightforward process to transform 
these individual SILAIS annual operating plans into management agreements/contracts with the 
SILAIS, since all SILAIS and municipalities are now working under these management 
agreements, thereby enabling the introduction of performance-based contracting for some 
portion of the Phase 2 activities later on. 
 
Within the abovementioned planning framework, the SWAp will support three major sets of 
activities or investment areas: (1) the expansion of coverage of the basic health services to the 
most vulnerable populations, (2) integration of the health care network so as to strengthen 
institutional birthing services and (3) institutional strengthening 
 
 
Investment Area #1:
 
Though the specific targets have not yet been identified, we foresee a substantial amount of 
money going to support specific MCH activities in targeted SILAIS. 
The focus of the SWAp 
will be the expansion of basic health and nutrition services to most vulnerable populations 
using the new Integrated Healthcare Model (IHCM)
.
The IHCM will include and integrate 
successful piloted programs such as PROCOSAN
3
,
FONMAT
4
,
NGO’s contracted services
5
,
PHC management model
6
,
reproductive and sexual health
7
,
Women's centers
8
and PROSILAIS
9
.
The model will be implemented through different tailored strategies, such as contracting NGOs 
in remote areas or through demand-incentives to public facilities (where they exist). The IHCM 
will include  two components, one focusing on health  services and one focused on management 
systems.  The health care component will define the package of services, the outreach strategy, 
the professional team and service standards as well as the system of referral to specialized care. 
The management component will entail the consolidation of service agreements, performance 
monitoring mechanisms, payment and reward systems, as well as conditions essential for 
strengthening the stewardship and contracting roles of the SILAIS and the MOH.  Finally, the 
IHCM will incorporate social participation and social control mechanisms to assure that care is 
responsive to local priorities and expectations.  
 
Investment Area #2:   
3
Programa Comunitario de Salud y Nutrición. PROCOSAN is the program which was piloted by the APL first 
phase and, as of June 2003,  became the national nutrition and child growth program integrating other donors’ 
nutrition programs. 
4
Fondo de Maternidad e Infancia Segura, sponsored by the IADB loan promotes increased production of MIC 
services through an incentive scheme to public and private providers in eligible geographic areas. 
5
Pilots sponsored by the World Bank credit contracting basic health services with NGO’s in two very remote areas 
in the North and Atlantic Coast. 
6
A
management model implemented under the APL first phase, which involves better managerial practices and 
services agreements with health centers.  
7
There is now a National Sexual and Reproductive Health Program which integrates previous separate programs. 
The new National Program is being funded by three bilateral donors and administered by MOH with technical and 
administrative support from UNFPA. The MOH has committed to include this program and funding within the 
sector-wide program.  
8
Community managed shelters located next to health centers that provide housing for women immediately before 
and after birth delivery. These centers also provide health education, family planning advise and other gender 
empowerment counseling. 
9
A
long lasting program sponsored by Sweden and PAHO which promotes strengthening of primary health care 
services and management capacity at decentralized MOH offices (SILAIS). 
Page  6
The SWAp will also include targeted investments in hospital services as well as the expansion of 
Womens’ Centers (which after being evaluated have become a national strategy to increase 
institutional deliveries in remote areas). Investments in hospitals will be related primarily to the 
strengthening of maternal and child care, predominantly in areas of the extension of services, and 
general hospital support services (laboratories, maintenance, waste management, water and 
steam supply, etc.).   
 
Investment Area #3:  
Another SWAp priority will be the continued support of the institutional reform of the MOH. 
Priorities for the second phase will likely be the human resource policies, the expanded 
implementation of the Health Management Information System (SIMINSA) prepared under 
phase 1, and the complete implementation of the Financial Administration Information System 
(SIGFA). The project will also need to beef-up the MOH’s procurement capacity. Human 
resource policy, the implementation of SIGFA and strengthening Government’s procurement 
capacity, together, form part of the objectives of another World Bank project (PSTAC) aimed at 
strengthening GON public management and working on them simultaneously is likely to yield 
synergistic gains in terms of impact. 
 
It is also expected that the SWAp will support core MOH programs, namely the prevention and 
control of HIV/AIDS and vector-borne diseases, together with the population policy action 
program. 
 
A
likely third portion of investment area #3 will consist of the continued expansion of efforts to 
extend coverage of the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute (INSS), and the provision of services 
by the Previsional Health Firms (Empresas Médicas Previsionales, EMPs) which INSS currently 
contracts to provide services. 
 
4.  Safeguard policies that might apply 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
The expansion of basic health and nutrition services 
to most vulnerable populations using the new Integrated Healthcare Model (IHCM), the 
investments in hospital services, the expansion of women centers, as well as the continued 
support of the institutional reform of the MOH, will lead to an increase on the generation of 
Health Care Waste and are expected to generate environmental impacts during construction 
activities. These events will require the development of a set of guidelines and procedures for 
new facilities, in order to mitigate environmental impacts caused by construction on any 
sensitive areas. The health care waste management plan will focus in a set of guidelines and 
procedures to enhance the quality of sorting, managing, transport and disposing of the hospital 
waste at National and Regional level. The plan will include training activities for involved 
personnel and institutions. Indicators to monitor its implementation will be developed and 
enforced through Bank supervision activities.  
Indigenous Peoples
(OD 4.20
)
Given that the Swap will target the most vulnerable groups 
including the Indigenous and Afro-descendants, an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be included. 
The social assessment for the Health Services Extension and Modernization Swap includes a 
stakeholder evaluation and beneficiary assessments of ongoing services (Women’s Centers, 
PHC, Hospital services) in order to capitalize on good practices and lessons learned. Particular 
attention is being given to most vulnerable regions (Jinotega, RAAN, RAAS, Río San Juan and 
Page  7
other) and high-risk groups (women and children ages 0-5). The social strategy for the project 
will ensure a participatory strategy and social auditing mechanisms are in place for the project 
components. The strategy will include the participation of Central and Regional MOH, NGOs, 
Women’s Associations, community networks, midwive’s and health promotor’s networks, etc. 
Based on the positive experience with Women’s Centers (particularly on the Atlantic Coast and 
isolated areas) the project will support Government’s efforts to expand on 100 new locations 
country-wide.
 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
)
Given the fact that construction/refurbishing activities will take place, chance find procedures 
will be included in the construction guidelines. 
 
5. Tentative financing 
Source: ($m.) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0 
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 
7 
 Total 
7 
 
6. Contact point 
Contact: Jesus Maria Fernandez Diaz 
Title: Sr Public Health Spec. 
Tel: (202) 458-4806 
Fax:  (202) 522-1201 
Email: jfernandezdiaz@worldbank.org
 
