                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: ISDSC14402


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 26, 2016

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nicaragua                        Project ID: P155197
                                          Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation Project
Task Team Leader: Migara Jayawardena
Estimated Appraisal Date:                 Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                      Lending Instrument:
Sector: Energy and Extractives
Theme:
IDA Amount (US$m.): 30.00
SREP Amount (US$m.): 15.00
MDB/Private Financing Amount (US$m.): 24.00
Project Developer (CCP): 46.50

Environmental Category: Proposed environment category is A
Simplified Processing             Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project     Yes [ ]                  No [X]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

The development objective of the Geothermal Risk Mitigation Project is to help confirm
resources and speed-up geothermal development in the field by mitigating risks and leveraging
funds through a PPP arrangement.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

Project Scope: The proposed project is designed to confirm the resource base and to mitigate
risks with the view to facilitate the development of the first operational power plant in the Casita-
San Cristobal field. The resource confirmation and the demonstration of the first modular
expansion of a small-scale demonstration power plant of 15-25 MW in capacity would mitigate
the development risks and increase the prospects of additional investments to unlock the
potential in the field. The proposed project will be developed in two project phases covering the
multiple stages (1-4) of the geothermal development cycle, as detailed below:
Project Phase A: Exploration Drilling for Resource Confirmation [Estimated cost $42.5
million (includes $10 million already invested by Cerro Colorado Power, a public private
partnership between Polaris Energy Corporation and Empresa Nicaragüense de Electricidad
(ENEL)
    ▪ Stage I: Surface Studies and Reconnaissance – This includes the first set of activities
       undertaken in a geothermal development. They consists of surface reconnaissance,
       geological, geophysical and geochemical studies, and in the case of the Casita- San
       Cristobal Field, the drilling of a slim/core hole that has confirmed the availability of a
       steam resource. CCP, utilizing its own funds, has already completed this activity,
       providing a sounds basis for moving forward with stage II development.
    ▪ Stage II: Exploration Drilling Program – An exploration drilling program of 3-5 wells
       is being considered in order to ascertain the steam capacity (i.e. resource base) for
       producing electricity and to estimate the cost of extracting the resource. The exploration
       program will significantly improve the understanding of the geothermal resource and
       provide better estimates as to the cost of the project, whereby, risks would be
       considerably reduced.
    ▪ Technical Assistance for Resource Confirmation – Following the exploratory drilling,
       an industry standard (bankable) feasibility study and an Environmental and Social Impact
       Assessment (ESIA) that meets international standards and complies with World Bank
       Group requirements will be prepared. These important studies will evaluate and confirm
       the commercial viability of the project and its prospects for sustainability. It will form
       the basis for making an informed investment decision as to how to proceed with Project
       Phase B activities.

Project Phase B: Steam Field and Power Plant Development [Illustrative cost ≈$73.0
million]
   ▪ Stage III: Production Drilling and Steam Field Development – On the basis of the
       resource estimate and the initially proposed expansion, the well field would be further
       developed with additional drilling of production and injection wells; and the Steam
       Above-Ground System (SAGS) that will transport the steam from the wells to the power
       plant will be constructed.
   ▪ Stage IV: Construction of Power Plant – Also based on the feasibility and ESIA
       studies, an initial small geothermal power plant expected to be in the range of 15MW-
       25MW will be constructed in line with industry standards. It will demonstrate the
       viability of sustainably generating power from the geothermal steam resource in the
       Casita-San Cristobal reservoir; and open up prospects for further modular expansion at
       the field in the future.

Project Financing through PPP Arrangement: Activities described in the proposed scope will
be funded through additional equity from the private developer, SREP grants and credit up to
$15 million, IDA credit up to $30 million, and potential private financing from other multilateral
sources. The initially proposed funding arrangements, is depicted in the following figure:
          Illustration of Proposed Project Funding Structure across Multiple Geothermal
                                       Development Stages




D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The exploitation concession covers an area of 20 square kilometers and is located on the
southeast slope of the Casitas volcano, (part of the Cordillera de los Maribios and Reserva
Natural Complejo Volcánico San Cristobal-Casita) in the municipality of Chinandega located in
the Chinandega Department. The Project is situated approximately 130 km northwest of the city
of Managua and 20 km West of the city of Chinandega. The concession is located in private
lands overlapping the Reserva Natural Complejo Volcánico San Cristobal-Casita; Hacienda
Algeria (99%) and Cooperativa El Higueral (1%). No human settlements or communities are
located within the geothermal concession area (20 km2).

The Reserva Natural Complejo Volcánico San Cristobal-Casita, is a protected area of 179.64
km2 under the category of Natural Reserve belonging to the National System of Protected Areas
(Servicio Nacional de Areas Protegidas SINAP) of the Republic of Nicaragua . It was
established by Decree-Law 1320 of 1983. It is located in the department of Chinandega, 130 km
north of the Pacific region of Nicaragua km of the capital Managua. The protected area consists
of a chain of five volcanic cones, including the San Cristobal one, the country's highest volcano.
The reserve is divided into six management zones: Core Area, Conservation Recovery Area,
High Fragility Area, and Sustainable Production Zone in addition to the buffer zone. The
geothermal development activities of the Project are proposed to take place within the
Sustainable Production Zone and the Core Zone, while the already built access road and the
future transmission line also affect a narrow strip within the Buffer Zone of the protected area.
Most of the impacts will however be generated within the Sustainable Production Zone, where at
least two well pads and the power plant are planned to be sited. The already constructed well pad
and an additional proposed well pad are located within the Core Zone.

Nicaraguan legislation approved in 2006-2008 (through amendments to the Geothermal Law,
article 7; to the General Environmental and Natural Resources Law, article 116; and to the
Protected Areas Bylaw, article 22) allows geothermal exploration and development in protected
areas, provided appropriate environmental assessment and mitigation measures are applied and
included in the Management Plan of the Protected Area

Geothermal development is a multi-stage process, and the Casita-San Cristobal field
development began in 2009. Surface studies (geological, geophysical, and geochemical) have
already been completed, a well pad constructed including its associated access road, and a slim
hole drilled that has led to the confirmation of the availability of a steam resource. Based on this
favorable result, it is proposed to proceed with the remaining stages of development towards the
demonstration of a small operational power plant (phase B of the Project).

Compliance with Nicaragua’s permitting requirements:

Following Nicaraguan legislation, CCP prepared Environmental Impact Studies (EIS), Category
II 1 at the request of the Environmental and Natural Resources Ministry (Ministerio del Ambiente
y los Recursos Naturales or MARENA). In 2009, MARENA granted CCP with an
environmental permit for the project to conduct exploration activities from three drilling sites
(two of them within the core zone of the Natural Reserve (Resolución Administrativa No. 017-
2009 - Nov 23, 2009) in the exploration concession area of 100 km2. Based on the environmental
permit, CCP carried out in 2009-2011 an initial geothermal exploration program in the area,
which comprised surface investigations, construction of an access road and drilling of a single
slim hole within the core zone of the Natural Reserve. For the follow-on exploitation phase, CCP
prepared an EIA category II covering an area of 20 km2, for which an environmental permit was
granted by MARENA on July 13, 2015. The proposed activities covered by this permit are:
construction and installation of four (4) platforms for production and reinjection wells, civil
works and ancillary installations necessary for the drilling program and the construction of the
power plant. The permit was granted with a series of conditional requirements that need to be
fulfilled prior to starting any exploitation activities including the drilling of additional wells.
These requirements include: a presentation of the updated and specific environmental
management program including a contingency plan, control and follow-up plan; environmental
quality plan; waste management plan; noise management plan; and training and environmental
education plans. Additional permit conditions have to do with the biodiversity component of the
project, for which MARENA is requesting flora and fauna inventories, based on the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, to identify presence
of migratory, endemic or resident species in the area of the concession.




1
 CATEGORY II - All works, projects, industries and activities considered in this Environmental Category II
can cause a potential high impact on the environment and are subject to an Environmental Impact Study.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective ESMS:

Currently, CCP doesn’t have an ESMS in place consistent with the WB Performance Standards.
However, Polaris, the primary shareholder of CCP, is an experienced geothermal developer that
constructed and is currently operating the San Jacinto-Tizate geothermal project in Nicaragua,
which is being financed by IFC and other multi-lateral development partners. Therefore, it has
prior experience with the implementation of the IFC performance standards and has an ESMS in
place for the San Jacinto-Tizate operation. Polaris is proposing the approach of transferring
technical and operational capacity by adopting the applicable ESMS procedures/protocols from
the San Jacinto drilling operation (which is currently ongoing) to the CCP and applying them to
the Casita-San Cristobal exploration drilling program. Additional work will be undertaken by
CCP to develop the ESMS further to adapt it to meet the specific requirements of the Casita-San
Cristobal project. This approach will help them take advantage of the valuable experience
developed by Polaris throughout the development of the San Jacinto field and utilize staff with
expertise that will help transfer good operational practices for implementing the ESMS during
the implementation of the Casita- San Cristobal Project.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Noreen Beg/ Ximena Herbas Ramirez                         Senior Environment Specialists
Peter LaFere/Carlos Perez Brito                           Senior Social Specialist

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                        Yes          No         TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                   X
and Social Risks and Impacts
Given that the activities of the proposed Project will be implemented within a protected area, the
San Cristobal Casita Natural Reserve, including inside the core area of the Reserve, the World
Bank has classified the proposed project as Category A (for all phases), requiring full
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). Since the project will finance both phases,
the Borrower will be required to comply with World Bank Performance Standards throughout
the entire Project.
Following Nicaraguan legislation, CCP prepared Environmental Impact Studies (EIS), Category
II 2 at the request of the Environmental and Natural Resources Ministry (Ministerio del Ambiente
y los Recursos Naturales MARENA). In 2009, MARENA granted CCP with an environmental
permit for the project to conduct exploration activities from three drilling sites (two of them
within the core zone of the Natural Reserve (Resolución Administrativa No. 017-2009 - Nov 23,
2009) in the exploration concession area of 100 km2. Based on the environmental permit, CCP
carried out in 2009-2011 an initial geothermal exploration program in the area, which comprised

2
 CATEGORY II - All works, projects, industries and activities considered in this Environmental Category II
can cause a potential high impact on the environment and are subject to an Environmental Impact Study.
Performance Standards (please explain why)                          Yes          No         TBD
surface investigations, construction of an access road and drilling of a single slim hole within the
core zone of the Natural Reserve. This has resulted in favorable findings indicating the existence
of high temperature steam, which if extracted, could be suitable for power generation.
For the follow-on exploitation phase, CCP prepared an EIA category II covering an area of 20
km2, for which an environmental permit was granted by MARENA on July 13, 2015. The
proposed activities covered by this permit are: construction and installation of four (4) platforms
for production and reinjection wells, civil works and ancillary installations necessary for the
drilling program and the construction of the power plant. The permit was granted with a series of
conditional requirements that need to be fulfilled. Some of these requirements include a
presentation of the updated and specific environmental management program including a
contingency plan, control and follow-up plan, environmental quality plan, waste management
plan, noise management plan, training and environmental education plans among others. Other
conditions have to do with the biodiversity component of the project, for which MARENA is
requesting flora and fauna inventories using the International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) list and defining if there are migratory, endemic or resident species in the area of the
concession.
As the EIA for the follow-on exploitation phase was undertaken to meet local requirements and
hence does not consider the WB performance standards, it will need to be revised taking into
consideration the requirements for complying with WB Performance Standards. This review will
be carried out independently and it may need several additional studies and Environmental and
Social Action Plans to be developed to bring the ESIA and the management aspects of the
project in line with the World Bank performance standards.
Also, it would be useful for CCP to strengthen the project’s socioeconomic baseline, through the
development of a Social Assessment that will be included in the ESIA and that will contribute to
the development of more effective Environmental and Social Action Plans. This Social
Assessment is expected to include: (a) a more complete picture of land tenure, ownership, and
use within the project site and concession area, (b) current economic/livelihood activities within
the project’s influence area (c) more detailed information of sources of potable water, water
usage by the local community within the project site and concession area, water-quality data, and
periodic monitoring of water supplies (ground and surface) within the project site and concession
area, (d) issues related to land/resource access and any impacts thereof as a result of CCP’s
activities, (e) more precise demographic data for the project site and the concession area, (f)
presence of indigenous peoples as identified under PS 7, (g) archeological, paleontological,
historical, cultural, artistic, or religious value of the project area.

The Social Assessment will also provide a basis for the development of a stakeholder
engagement and consultation strategy to ensure that the World Bank consultation requirements
for a Category A project are met.

Upon completion of Phase A and once the geothermal resources have been confirmed, additional
assessments will be carried out incorporating the updated information. This is a critical mid-
project decision point regarding the manner in which Phase B will be implemented. Along with
the technical studies, an ESIA for the phase B will be prepared with the additionally available
Performance Standards (please explain why)                     Yes          No          TBD
information. This phase B ESIA and ESMS would need to comply with World Bank
Performance Standards, and will be one key consideration that will determine how to proceed
with Phase B activities. In addition, the ESMS will also be updated to include the activities of
Phase B as appropriate. The new ESIA and revised ESMS will be key criteria for deciding
whether to move forward with the implementation of Phase B and disbursement of funds. CCP
will meet the requirements of the updated ESMS and the Phase B ESIA in compliance with the
World Bank Performance Standards.


The key environmental and social impacts and risks associated with the project’s construction
phase (during drilling) are (a) potential contamination of surface and ground water, as well as
soils, from drilling fluids, geothermal fluids, muds, and cuttings associated to any wells drilled to
date or additional wells, and construction waste (b) increased water demand from drilling, well
testing, and construction activities (c) potential air emissions, noise, and solid and hazardous
waste generated from construction activities and/or accidental spills, (d) transportation of heavy
equipment and machinery and increased hazards thereof (e) potential health and occupation risks
to construction workers from working with extremely hot components and handling and
operating heavy equipment and machinery; and (during SAGS and power plant construction), (f)
incremental impacts associated with the easement and expansion of existing access roads, the
construction of a demonstration 15-25 MW small power plant along with a substation and a 35.8
kV transmission line extending 5.8 km to the substation.

Once the project is completed and the small demonstration power plant is in operation, the key
environmental and social impacts and risks are: (g) potential soil and water contamination from
re-injected process water and drilling wastes (muds, cuttings) (h) increased emissions of
potentially hazardous (and malodorous) air pollutants such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and
mercury (i) community and worker exposure to explosions, well blowouts, pipeline failures,
induced seismicity and/or ground subsidence (j) water consumption for supplementary activities
associated with power plant operations (primarily from water use in sanitary facilities and
associated construction camps and within the generation facility). and (k) hazardous working
conditions for plant personnel (e.g. increased exposure risks to toxic gases, working in confined
spaces or heights, exposure to heat, high pressure gases, and noise). These impacts and risks can
be managed with existing pollution prevention and control technologies and with standard
industry and environmental management practices, such as those described in IFC’s EHS
Guidelines: http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines and the EHS guidelines for Geothermal Power
Generation http://goo.gl/W3hvY6

During appraisal, the different elements of the environmental, health and safety and social
management system, its plans and procedures will be evaluated if additional measures and
actions are identified an Environmental and Social Action Plan will be developed.

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                  X
For the construction of civil works for the exploitation phase, CCP expects about 50 people to be
employed by contractor and no workers camp is expected. These will include civil engineers,
surveyors, machine operators and experienced drivers for earthworks; as well as bricklayers,
Performance Standards (please explain why)                     Yes          No       TBD
welders, helpers and guards. Unskilled workers and guards may be hired from the communities
near the project.

For building platforms and drilling of wells, CCP expects to hire about 60 employees. An
estimated 50% of qualified personnel will be recruited nationally, while most of the unskilled
workers, helpers and security personnel will be hired locally.

The WBG team will review the specific HR processes and practices for the Casita-San Cristobal
project in line with the requirements of the PS including some requirements in the contracts for
third party employers as well as the process for a grievance mechanism and occupational health
and safety practices.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                    X
Air Emissions/Air Quality: Air emissions will consist primarily of carbon dioxide (CO2) and
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in the waste steam and from around well heads. These two parameters
will be measured continuously during drilling operations and ambient levels will be measured on
a semi-annual basis around well platforms, power plant, rock muffler and silencers.
Greenhouse Gas (GHG): This project is expected to positively reduce the climate footprint of
power generation in the country displacing the utilization of less environmentally friendly bunker
fuel for producing electricity. The client will be asked to report gross and net emissions
Solid waste: The main solid waste, apart from construction waste, will be dried drilling mud and
cuttings containing potentially hazardous heavy metals, drilling fluids residues, or other
contaminants. Other solid waste generated during generation phase would include cooling tower
sludge, lubricants and plastic bags.

Water consumption and extraction: Well drilling typically is a water intensive process. Water
wells will be drilled in order to obtain the necessary water primarily for the drilling operations.
The company needs to undertake a hydrogeological evaluation to gather information about
aquifers, yields, permeability, users, gradients, abstraction, quality, etc. in order to understand
impacts to the resource, and so as to elaborate on mitigation measures, etc.


Regarding resource conservation and energy efficiency to be implemented in the project, the
WBG team will evaluate the process CCP will implement to ensure that resource and energy
efficiency is examined throughout the different phases of the project (exploitation, construction
and operation), and the monitoring measures and indicators to benchmark the performance of the
project on these aspects following best practices for the industry.

PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                             X
The World Bank team will assess if the company’s management system includes a Health Management
Plan to address matters regarding the health and wellbeing of construction workers, project staff and
nearby landowners, a Transport/Road Safety and Logistics Management Plans with measures to ensure
safety of road users during construction, that appropriate Emergency Response Plans have been
developed include procedures to respond to accidental leaks, spills, emissions, fires, and other unforeseen
impacts ( including natural disaster events such as landslides, unstable terrain, volcanic eruptions and
floods). Issues pertaining to management of security personnel will also be appropriately specified in line
with this Performance Standard. Also the WBG team will review if the system includes training of
Performance Standards (please explain why)                     Yes              No          TBD
security personnel on Voluntary Principles on Security and Human rights.


PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                 X
The land requirement for this project will affect five landowners in the area with whom easement
rights for development affecting 36 ha were negotiated and concluded in the period May 2009 –
May 2010. The Government of Nicaragua imposed easement rights for the benefit of CCP on
one of the five owners. The easement rights would not affect communities’ access to natural
resources such as water, and no physical displacement or economic displacement have occurred
or are expected to occur as a result of this project.

CCP will commission a Completion Audit to determine whether the five easements were
compensated in accordance with PS 5 and, if necessary, develop a Social and Environmental
Action Plan, as required by performance standard, prior to appraisal to identify additional
corrective actions that would be required to comply with the policy. If any further easements are
identified, a Livelihood Restoration Plan will be developed and included with the Environmental
and Social Action Plan.

As the project is likely to be conducted in several phases and as there are likely further
easements required of which the exact nature and location is not yet fully known, a Livelihood
Restoration Framework will also be developed in accordance with PS 5 to describe the principles
for the conclusion of any further easements, land acquisition, or restrictions to the use of natural
resources.
The
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                     X
Management of Living Natural Resources

The Reserva Natural Complejo Volcánico San Cristobal-Casita, is a protected area of 179.64
km2 under the category of Natural Reserve belonging to the National System of Protected Areas
(Servicio Nacional de Areas Protegidas SINAP) of the Republic of Nicaragua . It was
established by Decree-Law 1320 of 1983. It is located in the department of Chinandega, north of
the Pacific region of Nicaragua, 130 km. of the capital Managua. The protected area consists of a
chain of five volcanic cones, including the San Cristobal one, the country's highest volcano. The
reserve is divided into six management zones: Core Area, Conservation Recovery Area, High
Fragility Area, Sustainable Production Zone in addition to the buffer zone. The geothermal
development activities of the Project are proposed to take place within the Sustainable
Production Zone and the Core Zone, while the already built access road and the future
transmission line also affect a narrow strip within the Buffer Zone of the protected area. Most of
the impacts will however be generated within the Sustainable Production Zone, where at least
two well pads and the power plant are planned to be sited. The already constructed well pad and
an additional well pad are located within the Core Zone.

CCP must undertake a biodiversity assessment of related risks in all phases of the project in strict
conformance with Performance Standard 6 that will evaluate whether the Project is located
within Critical Habitats for phase A and B. The results of the biodiversity assessment will be
Performance Standards (please explain why)                       Yes          No          TBD
included in the ESIA. The assessment exercise should include a comprehensive evaluation and
understanding of the landscape in which the project is located, including the extent of
anthropogenic modification and or the presence of natural habitat or critical habitat; the
biodiversity values of the project area, the direct and indirect impacts of the project on the
biodiversity values, and recommendations of appropriate mitigation measures following the
mitigation hierarchy: avoidance, minimization, remedy/restoration and compensation/offset of
any residual (unavoidable) impact. Also, the alternatives analysis of the project will need to be
assessed to demonstrate that the project prioritized ‘avoidance’ of impacts on sensitive
biodiversity areas before considering mitigation and that there were no other viable alternatives
within the region for development of the project.

PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                       X
The EIA did not identify any groups that meet the definition in PS7 in the project area.
However, given the presence of IP in Chinandega or the possibility that certain groups have a
collective attachment to distinct habitats or natural resources within the project area, the Social
Assessment that will be prepared to complement the existing EIA will include specific further
information on whether any IP will be impacted by the project. If presence of IP is confirmed
and there are impacts generated by the Project, further requirements will be prepared based on
PS 7.

PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                               X
There is no cultural heritage management plan detailed in the existing EMP and EIA. The Social
Assessment that will be prepared to complement the existing EIA will include an assessment of
whether the site as a whole, or a specific part thereof, has archeological, paleontological,
historical, cultural, artistic, or religious value. Chance finds procedures will be incorporated into
the EIA and Environmental and Social Action Plans.



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: March, 2017

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing3 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



3   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
   Resettlement Policy Framework/ Resettlement Action Plan (RAP):
   EIA/EMP for drilling/power plant construction: Completed in July 2014. To be updated as
   needed and as requested by MARENA.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Migara Jayawardena                            Date
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Agi Kiss                                      Date
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:                  Antonio Barbalho                              Date
   Comments:
