Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC687 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P083952 
Project Name: Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance IV 
Task Team Leader: Emmanuel A. James 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 11, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.06 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.54
7.54 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the proje
ct would be to support the GON’s broad based economic 
growth and poverty reduction plan by relieving transportation bottlenecks that currently hinder 
economic growth and private sector investment. The specific objectives are to support economic 
growth by (i) expanding and complementing the previous focus on trunk roads by improving a 
connecting network of secondary and rural roads which will be selected in a manner that would 
lead to the creation of paved distributor networks (circuitos de distribución) that can better 
support economic activities of a given productive zone; (ii) helping ensure the sustainability of 
the road improvements, through strengthening of maintenance practices, (iii) institution building 
in the MTI, and (iv) addressing new challenges such as the proposed decentralization of the 
management of the road network. The achievement of the project's objectives will be measured 
by the: (i) reduction in vehicle operating costs and time savings; (ii) qualitative improvements to 
the network in terms of the km of roads assessed as being in good or fair condition; (iii) extent of 
the participation of the private sector in road rehabilitation and maintenance programs as 
measured in terms of the numbers and value of contracts awarded; (iv) adequate funding and 
implementation of road maintenance; and (v) number of communities provided with improved 
road access to social, educational and economic centers.  
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
a.  What are the alternative development interventions or approaches considered?
 
The GON cannot, at this time, address all the public investment needs countrywide, so it has 
chosen to target them through a productive cluster approach. The idea being that zones of high 
productivity potential would be identified as points where coordinated efforts should be made to 
direct multisectoral public investments, particularly infrastructure, in order to reduce bottlenecks 
hindering either private investment or the economic growth of these clusters. The GON 
identified tourism, agro business, food processing, and agriculture as key productive clusters. 
 
Under this approach the MTI has divided the country geographically into four zones: zone 1 
(Granada, Masaya, Carazo, Rivas), zone 2 (Chinandega, Leon), zone 3 (Esteli, Matagalpa, 
Jinotega RAAN), and zone 4 (Boaco, Chontales, RAAS). It has qualified all zones in terms of 
their productive potential and will accordingly try to support the appropriate scale and mix of 
infrastructure investments in each. This proposed project, and various IDA projects such as for 
microfinance and rural telecommunications, together will support this approach.  
 
Currently less than 5% of the secondary road network is paved, therefore the approach proposed 
for the Fourth project focuses primarily on the secondary and rural roads connecting 
communities to the main trunk network, mostly within zones 1 and 4 (other donors are focusing 
in zones 2 and 3). 
 
b. 
What lending instrument is proposed and why; or what alternative instruments are being 
considered?  
The team proposes the use of a Specific Investment Credit.  
 
c. 
What are the proposed institutional arrangements?  
The project will be carried out by the same MTI unit that has managed the previous IDA projects 
very well. Also, during the now completed phases of road candidate identification and selection, 
MTI led a Steering Committee that incorporated the other line ministries in order to better focus 
road improvements in line with other public and private investments proposed for a particular 
zone. 
d. 
What are the components being considered? 
The project would enhance IDA’s ongoing support for a) capacity building and institutional 
strengthening of MTI, b) the design and implementation of routine and periodic maintenance 
programs, and c) full operational establishment of the road maintenance fund (FOMAV). The 
project would support the improvement of some connector roads between the Panamerican 
highway and the pacific coast and the stabilization of about 300km of secondary and rural roads. 
The balanced technical approach would continue along the same lines as the previous IDA 
projects, ensuring and emphasizing sustainability of all road improvements by capacity building 
and institutional support, and implementation of routine and periodic maintenance programs via 
microenterpises and private constructors. 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The road maintenance projects will be located nationwide. The criteria for the selection of roads 
and the work program will be agreed largely between the MTI and the FOMAV annually.  
Page  3
The road improvement subprojects have all been identified and will be located in zone 1, 
Masaya, Carazo, Granda and Rivas (200km), and in zone 4, Boaco, Chontales, RAAS, (100km).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project includes basic road rehabilitation works, all completely within the existing 
rights of way. Shoulders will be provided in built-up locations to help promote the safety of 
pedestrians and of non-motorized traffic. Standard, well known technologies will be used to 
avoid any negative environmental impact and construction costs will be minimized through the 
use of national and international competitive bidding procedures. Given the nature of the road 
improvement works, the rehabilitation of trunk and rural roads in long used and well trafficked 
corridors, and based on the social and environmental screening that were carried out, no negative 
impacts are expected. Also, there will be no resettlement of people and the roads do not traverse 
any indigenous communities nor natural habitats. The MTI has developed good environmental 
and social manuals and procedures that will be applied during project design and 
implementation. These include chance finds procedures for cultural property as well as steps for 
consultation (including with street vendors) during project preparation and implementation. 
Those manuals also include standard mitigation measures that are to be applied during 
construction.  
 
The MTI has developed and demonstrated its capacity for managing all aspects of IDA projects 
including areas realated to the Safeguard Policies. The MTI Division of Environmental 
Management has completed most of the environmental and social assessment required for the 
preparation of the proposed Fourth Project. These tasks were completed in accordance with the 
principles established in the Environmental Guideline (Guía para la Categorización y Definición 
de Requerimientos para la Evaluación Ambiental y Social de Proyectos) which are based on the 
World Bank Safeguard Policies (June 2003).  
As mentioned, the MTI will have to follow the stipulations of manuals and procedures developed 
under previous IDA projects. A wealth of documentation exists including: guidelines to prepare 
environmental impacts assessments, criteria to assess environmental impact, rural roads 
construction manual, environmental protection guidelines for roads construction and 
rehabilitation, World Bank environmental policies, Norma Técnica Obligatoria Nicaraguense 
(NTON), general provisions for streets, roads and bridges construction, basic environmental 
standards for road construction, norms for the exploitation of material borrow pits, standards and 
ministerial resolutions for the basic provisions of hygiene and safety in the work place, Central 
American Environmental Manual for road design, construction and maintenance (SIECAS) and 
the Social Management Manual-MTI.  
 
During construction and within the framework of the Environmental and Social Management 
Plans an environmental follow-up, monitoring and surveillance plan will be carried out. Its 
objective will be to control the application of each one of the environmental mitigation measures, 
to define new counteractive measures against unexpected environmental impacts, to redefine 
measures when the designed measures are not effective, and to evaluate quantitatively and 
qualitatively the MTI’s level of compliance. The main actors responsible for the environmental 
follow-up and monitoring are: the contractor’s environmental specialist, the environmental 
supervisor from the supervisory firm, and the environmental specialist from the DGA-MTI. This 
control team through joint periodic visits (weekly and monthly) will monitor every project 
Page  4
activity, will prepare a report regarding level of compliance with relevant environmental aspects, 
and will recommend actions in order to correct any non-compliance aspects.  
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (LCSEN) 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
The MTI Division of Environmental Management has 
completed most of the environmental and social assessment 
required for the preparation of the proposed Fourth Project.  
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
The MTI has developed chance finds procedures for cultural 
property during project preparation and implementation.
 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
The MTI has developed procedures as well as steps for 
consultation (including with street vendors) during project 
preparation and implementation.
 
TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
1
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared: 12/21/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS: 12/21/2005 
 
C.  Based on the environmental and social analyses completed so far and the basic improvements 
to be carried out the project was rated as a category B. In addition, strategic regional 
Environmental and Social analyses have been carried out to define a suitable framework for 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
improving the road to Bluefields. In the final analyses a 2 phased approach is being pursued. 
Under this project only the long developed road section from Nueva Guinea - Naciones 
Unidas will be improved. The Government will seek support from the GEF and other donors 
for finalizing plans and starting implementation of the environmental and social management 
plan for the adjacent Cerro Silva protected Forests and the Bluefields RAMSAR Wetlands 
site.  
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emmanuel A. James 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
