Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC362 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 5, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nicaragua 
Project ID: P078990 
Project Name: NICARAGUA - 
EDUCATION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Suhas D. Parandekar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2003 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 15 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
0 ($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The  project aims to bring together donors and lenders to help GON implement its National 
Education Policy, including the Education For All (EFA) goals. Project objectives aim to a) 
increase completion rates at all levels of basic education; b) improve quality and relevance of 
learning; c) improve systems of governance and accountability, including measures to strengthen 
community participation in the education sector; and d) harmonize donor assistance in the sector.  
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The core of a successful educational policy is defined by a set of learning standards, strategic 
directions about how learning would be imparted, and a set of operational guidelines that direct 
the teaching and learning process including teacher behavior and didactic materials such as 
textbooks. A coherent and coordinated pedagogical policy is a vital element of GON educational 
policy. GON is committed to delivering the basics skills of reading, writing, and arithmetic, that
 
currently have been neglected as individual parts of the system cater to diverse requirements of 
various donor projects.
 1
 Other elements of educational policy relate to the provision of basic 
                                                
 
1
 A view of today’s Nicaraguan classroom presents the results of years of uncoordinated donor efforts – learning 
standards defined by a project financed by a donor many years ago, textbooks (if present) financed by another 
development partner, and the teacher using a lesson plan developed as a part of another external financed program 
for training teachers in that particular region – these diverse elements would typically bear no relation to one another 
Page  2
 
 
inputs and to improve the labor market relevance of education, especially important for 
secondary and adult education. Previous efforts, including IDA financed First and
 
Second Basic 
Education projects point to the need for sustained training of local school communities in support 
of the autonomy program, with care regarding protection of equity. Key sector governance 
reforms include the gradual strengthening of municipalities in support of the school autonomy 
program, and the strengthening of MECD with regard to its policy making and M&E 
capabilities. The GON’s education policy outlined above is summarized into the following five 
key strategic areas of action
2
: 
 
(i) 
Educational Reform and Improvement of Pedagogical Processes. 
(ii) 
Improvement of Inputs and Processes for Quality Improvement. 
(iii) 
Amplification and Diversification of Educational Opportunities. 
(iv) 
Basic Education of Youth and Adults integrated with the Labor Market. 
(v) 
Governance Reforms: Municipalization, Decentralization and Institutional 
Restructuring of the Ministry of Education (MECD). 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Countrywide. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
The government may lack the institutional capacity to implement the program. Decision making 
is centralized in the hands of whoever is the incumbent minister of education, who runs the 
ministry through hand-picked administrative officials who have personal accountability to the 
minister, and there are no incentives regarding accountability for results of the educational 
system. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[To be 
consulted 
with QAT ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[To be 
consulted 
with QAT] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[To be 
consulted 
with QAT] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
                                                
 
2
 All activities and indicators will be developed fully and stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 
Page  3
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [X] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Safeguard policies classification will be determined once reviewed by a Safeguards specialist at 
the time of the PCN and QER reviews, which are scheduled for December 15, 2003 and March 
11, 2004 respectively.  
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: March 11, 2004
 
