                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 100979

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/06/2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Federal Republic of Nigeria            Project ID: P155000
Project Name: Power Sector Guarantees Project II
Task Team Leader: Erik Magnus Fernstrom / Tomoko Matsukawa
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 10, 2015 Estimated Board Date: April 28, 2016
Managing Unit: GEEDR                            Lending Instrument: Guarantee
Sector: Power (90%); Oil and gas (10%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m):              0.00
CIF Amount (US$m):            100.00
Other financing amounts by source (US$m):
IBRD Guarantees (US$m)         300.00
Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing                Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project         Yes [ ]                  No [X]

B. Project Objectives

1.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the supply of electricity received
by Nigerian consumers.

C. Project Description

2.    The proposed PSGP II will support the implementation of the Roadmap for Power Sector
Reforms by providing additional US$300 million IBRD Guarantees to support the next batch of
IPP transactions. In addition, the proposed PSGP II provides to support the development of
renewable energy IPPs by mobilization of US$100 million CTF financing allocation for grid-
connected solar IPPs in Nigeria.
       Description of Project Components

3.      Component 1 - Guarantees for Private Transactions (up to US$300 million): IBRD
Guarantees will be provided in supporting private transactions at an advanced stage of
development, as described under Component 1 of the Board-approved original PSGP PAD. The
transactions may also benefit from complementary IFC investments and MIGA insurance, as
appropriate. The contractual framework for these IPPs to be considered is expected to be similar
to that of the first two IPP projects supported under the original PSGP, including a Power
Purchase Agreement (PPA) with NBET. The IBRD Guarantees to be provided under PSPG II are
expected to be structured with indicative terms and conditions which are substantially similar to
those that have been approved under the original PSGP. Following screening criteria will be
applied for transactions that will be supported under PSGP II: (i) FGN’s own IPP nomination
and prioritization procedures based on the status of readiness (e.g. registration and licensing, land
deeds, etc.) of each transaction, (ii) status of compliance (e.g. technical design, environmental
and social assessments, economic feasibility, and financial structuring, etc.) with the Nigerian
and WBG guidelines, (iii) strategic priority to support economic development of the Northern
states, as well as (iv) diversification of generation mix and renewable energy development (e.g.
solar IPPs). In addition, continued innovation in accessing different financing markets is also a
part of the screening criteria.

4.     Component 2 - Support for Solar IPPs ($100 million): Based on regional best practices,
the overall strategic approach is to support the development of FGN led solicited solar IPP
market in Nigeria. The Bank (under an ongoing IDA project) is carrying out a feasibility study to
investigate appropriate sites, sizing, and mechanisms (for example, a hybrid solar-hydro site or a
standalone site). The resulting information will be used to develop standard bid-out packages and
will be competitively auctioned off for development (tentatively, by mid-2016). During this
solicited process, the IPPs winning the auctions will be developed as a public-private partnership
with bidders offered CTF financing as government participation (subsidized loans), in addition to
IBRD Guarantees (as noted above), as needed, to reduce the high cost of frontrunner solar IPPs
and to obtain the lowest possible tariff.

5.     Under this Component, support will also be provided to private sector led solar IPPs that
are currently in advanced stages of development. Given the nascent state of the solar IPP market
in Nigeria, and the higher than usual costs (due to security situation, transportation, and
establishment of a new supply chain) of renewable energy generation plants in northern Nigeria,
the CTF financing will assist in reducing the risk premium associated with these transactions,
support price discovery, and will support development of commercial frameworks and standard
documents (e.g. PPAs and put/call option agreements, PCOAs) that will be used for solicited
IPPs.

6.      While, NERC has made provisions for higher pass-through tariffs for renewable energy
IPPs, it expects to follow an ‘open-book’ approach to negotiate realistic purchase prices of such
transactions and for prices to reduce over time with further crowding in of experience and scale.
This is aligned with the experience in other developed markets such as South Africa and Chile.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

7.     The project is national in scope. The Guarantees will cover payments for electricity that
will be supplied to the national grid by the IPPs (through existing or new associated
infrastructure).


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

8.     Because it is not certain that any particular IPP will be accepted for Guarantees support,
the PSGP II will use a framework approach (as described in the original PSGP) to provide for
safeguards compliance by each IPP being considered for support under PSGP II. A Sectoral
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (SESIA) examining broad environmental and
social impacts in the relevant energy sectors (gas, hydro) is already being prepared as part of the
original PSGP. The FGN is updating the existing Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that were developed by PHCN
for NEGIP to meet the safeguards requirements of the Project.

9.     The ESMF will include a screening procedure to identify the Bank safeguards policies
triggered and guide the Implementing Agency in determining the appropriate level of
environmental assessment for proposed Project activities, based on Bank EA policy and FGN
law and regulations: full Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for those
projects with major and irreversible environmental and social impacts, less intensive studies
leading directly to Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for projects with
minor to moderate impacts, or, for activities involving existing or partially existing facilities,
Environmental Audits. The ESMF will provide detailed guidance to IPP proponents for
preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, and Environmental Audits. The RPF will guide the FGN and
project developers in complying with Bank policy on resettlement and acquisition of land and
other assets. It will present the principles to be applied and provide criteria for determining when
a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is needed and the procedures for RAP preparation.

10.    For IPPs with existing EIAs and sites already acquired, the Project team would carry out
due diligence, by reviewing the EIAs and documentation of resettlement and land acquisition for
quality and consistency with the objectives and principles of Bank safeguards policies, and
identifying needs for supplementary information and mitigation or monitoring measures that
would have to be prepared prior to approval for PRG support. The Bulk Trader will rely on the
Environment, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) of the Project Implementation Unit for
NEGIP and NEDP for the management of safeguard policies. ERSU has demonstrated
satisfactory capacity to address impacts of power project and associated facilities; in fact, the
ERSU prepared both the ESMF and the RPF for NEGIP. NEGIP, TDP and NEDP supervision
missions have shown that the ERSU’s capacity to implement the ESMF properly for those
projects is fully adequate. ERSU has overseen audits of substations, prepared ESMPs, and
supervised preparation of RAPs and implementation of ESMPs for substation and distribution
line improvements and extensions.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

 Amos Abu – Senior Environmental Specialist, GENDR
 Paula F. Lytle—Senior Social Development Specialist, GSURR
 Thomas Walton, Consultant, GENDR

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                        Yes          No         TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental
                                                                   X
and Social Risks and Impacts
This project will follow the process established in PGSP for investments in new power plants,
which is that a full ESIA that meets the requirements of PS 1 and Nigerian law and regulations
must be prepared, disclosed, and approved by the Bank for each investment prior to Board
presentation. In cases where the investment is in an existing generating plant, the PS 1
requirement will be fulfilled by means of an environmental audit. Developers and operators will
prepare an ESMS for construction and operation, with provisions for compliance by contractors
and suppliers, as well as a Stakeholder Engagement Plan and grievance mechanism. Since it is
possible that the project may also support system improvement investments by DISCOs that have
not yet been identified, the ESMF that was prepared for comparable activities under PSGP will be
modified to incorporate the Performance Standards and disclosed prior to appraisal. The terms of
reference for the Sectoral Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or gas-fired power
development planned in conjunction with PSGP have been amended to add solar, wind, and
hydroelectric generation, and consultants are being engaged to carry out the assessment.
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                 X
IPP developers and operators will need to conform to labor and working condition requirements
of this PS, by means of provisions in their ESMS and procedures to ensure that they are applied
as fully as is practicable to contracted workers, workers engaged by third parties, and workers in
the supply chain. In parts of northern Nigeria, providing effective security for facilities and
personnel will require special attention.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                 X
Development of solar and hydroelectric generation will not affect GHG or air pollutant emissions
and may represent avoided emissions if they are considered to be substitutes for generation that
would otherwise be gas-fired. Gas-fired IPPs will add to Nigeria’s GHG emissions. All
investments will be designed and operated according to the more stringent of Nigerian standards
or the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines. Waste Management Plans will be prepared as part of
ESIAs and incorporated in the ESMS of developers, contractors, and operators.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                       X
ESIAs and Environmental Audits will address community health and safety issues, including:
social conflict and exposure to HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases as a result of influx
of workers and employment-seekers, air and noise emissions, exposure to hazardous materials,
emergency preparedness and response, and loss of ecosystem services important to the
community. Developers, operators, and contractors will be guided by this PS when arranging for
security of their facilities.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                X
Some of the investments under consideration either already exist (e.g., GENCOs and DISCOs) or
Performance Standards (please explain why)                         Yes           No          TBD
will be located on sites already owned and used by the developer and therefore will not entail land
acquisition. Some sites may be acquired in willing-buyer/willing-seller transaction. However, it
is possible that land may be acquired, particularly for transmission lines, in transactions in which
expropriation is an option, and for this reason, PS 5 is triggered. RAPs acceptable to the Bank
will need to be prepared in those cases. Since it is possible that the project may also support
system improvement investments by DISCOs that have not yet been identified, the RPF that was
prepared for comparable activities under PSGP will be modified to use PS 5 as its basis and
disclosed prior to appraisal.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable
                                                                     X
Management of Living Natural Resources
Depending on location, investments may affect forest or wetland habitat and related biodiversity.
Hydroelectric facilities will affect aquatic ecology and water uses. Impacts on ecosystem services
will have to be addressed. Some types of solar generation have adverse impacts on birds.
Transmission lines located near areas frequented by large birds or crossing flyways pose risks of
collisions and electrocutions. There are 30 important bird areas, two Ramsar wetlands, and seven
national parks that will need to be considered in selecting investments for support.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                          X
Groups meeting the definition in PS 7 are not found in Nigeria.
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                              X
Shrines, graves, and other cultural heritage important to local communities are frequently found
on power plant sites transmission line rights of way. Avoidance is preferable, but relocation is
also possible if carried out in consultation with the affected communities and in accordance with
traditional and administrative procedures. Chance finds procedures will be needed in all
construction contracts.

III. SAFEGUARDS PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: January 18, 2016

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: NA

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: February
   22, 2016.




1Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before
appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are
accessible to potentially affected persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leaders:         Erik Fernstrom / Tomoko Matsukawa   Date: 11/11/2015

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards        Hanneke van Tilburg                 Date: 11/11/2015
 Coordinator:
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:          Meike van Ginneken                  Date: 11/11/2015
   Comments:
