                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 2, 2016                        Report No.: 112331

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF                  Project ID: P160430
NIGERIA
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: BETTER EDUCATION SERVICE DELIVERY FOR ALL OPERATION
Task Team Leaders: Dina Abu-Ghaida, Roland Lomme
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 27, Estimated Board Date: June 8, 2017
2017
Managing Unit: GED13                       Lending Instrument: Hybrid PforR with TA
                                           IPF component
Sector: Primary Education; Secondary Education; Public Administration – Education; Pre-primary
Education

Theme: Education for All; Managing for Development Results

IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):           500
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing              Simple [X]                   Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [X]                      No [ ]

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

To strengthen accountability for results to increase equitable access for out-of-school children
and improve the quality of basic education in Nigeria.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

   A. PforR Program Boundary

1.      The Ministerial Strategic Plan (MSP) 2016-2019 is built around the three results
areas of access, quality, and systems strengthening; is comprised of ten pillars; and spans
all levels of education – starting with early childhood through tertiary education and even
adult literacy (see Figure 4). The access results area includes the pillars of out-of-school
children (Pillar 1); adult literacy (Pillar 4); and technical and vocational education and training

                                                                                                 1
(TVET, Pillar 7). The outcome statement for the access results area reads: enhanced capacity of
Nigeria’s formal and non-formal education systems that provide qualitative access to 100
percent of out-of-school and school-age children, boys and girls, in basic education; 70 percent
of eligible youths to TVET and tertiary education; and 75 percent of adults to non-formal
education and lifelong learning opportunities. The quality results area includes the pillars of
basic education (Pillar 2); teacher education (Pillar 3); basic and secondary curriculum (Pillar 6);
and tertiary education (Pillar 8). The outcome statement for the quality results area reads:
strengthened human capacity for child-centered interactive teaching and quality assurance at all
levels of educational development in Nigeria; enhance innovativeness, functionality, relevance,
market-driven knowledge and skills acquisition and transitioning into formal and non-formal
education. The final systems strengthening results area includes the pillars of Nigeria Education
Management Information System (NEMIS, Pillar 5); information and communication
technologies (ICT) in education (Pillar 9); and library services in education (Pillar 10). The
outcome statement for the systems strengthening results area reads: improved evidence-based
decision making that will assist transparency, governance, accountability, and innovation in
education delivery. Each of the ten MSP pillars includes a series of activities to be completed
and associated targets to be achieved over the 2016-2019 period.

Figure 1: Ministerial Strategic Plan 2016-2019 Pillars




2.      The MSP is a strategy document that defines activities to be implemented by various
federal as well as state-level actors and programs, notably the UBE program when it comes
to basic education reforms. The MSP was adopted by the National Council on Education, but
its national goals have not yet been translated to state-level goals and activities. In addition,
costing of foreseen interventions has only been completed for federal activities – and to date, no
budgetary allocations have been made towards these activities. But as a strategy, the MSP
makes an important contribution towards alleviating constraints on achieving education sector
outcomes by including a focus on system strengthening, and in particular on evidence-based
decision making and improved transparency and accountability.

3.   The UBE program, funded by the UBE Intervention Fund that is channeled through
UBEC, represents the relevant government program as well as the PforR Program


                                                                                                  2
boundary. The objectives of the UBE program, as most recently spelled out in the UBE
Programme 5-Year (2015-2020) Road Map are (page 48):
 Ensure unfettered access to free and compulsory nine years of formal basic education for
    children aged 6-14+ (primary and junior secondary school);
 Reduce drastically the incidence of drop-out from the formal school system, through
    improved relevance, quality and efficiency; and
 Ensure the acquisition of appropriate levels of literacy, numeracy, manipulative,
    communicative, and life skills as well as ethical, moral, and civic values needed for laying a
    solid foundation for life-long learning.
Based on these objectives, the UBE Intervention Fund sharing formula for funding to the states is
as follows (page 53 of the Road Map – see also Figure 5):
 50% as Matching Grants Fund for the provision of infrastructure such as classrooms,
    furniture, toilets, workshops, libraries, equipment, etc.;
 14% as Educational Imbalance Fund for maintaining equity and inclusiveness and
    eliminating all forms of disparities and disadvantages;
 15% as Instructional Materials Fund for the provision of textbooks in the core subjects and
    reading materials;
 10% as Teacher Professional Development Fund for the training of the serving teachers and
    education managers on various aspects of school activities;
 5% as Good Performance Fund to encourage states doing well in the implementation of the
    UBE program;
 2% as Special Education Fund for those with special needs;
 2% as UBE Monitoring Fund; and
 2% as UBE Implementation Fund.




Figure 2: Allocation of Universal Basic Education Intervention Fund

                                                                                                3
Source: World Bank. 2015. Governance and Finance Analysis of the Basic Education Sector in Nigeria.

4.     The proposed Basic Education Service Delivery for All (BESDA) Operation will
therefore aim to support and improve the UBE program, by strengthening its
accountability mechanisms, in order to better address out-of-school children in basic
education in a holistic manner, i.e. by tackling access and quality of basic education. The
Operation’s support to the government’s plan can, therefore, be described as building on the
ongoing interventions under the UBE program while simultaneously incentivizing increased
system accountability, as defined around the three related results areas:

5.      Results Area 1: Strengthening basic education sector accountability for results. A
key set of interventions, given the results-based nature of the Operation, revolves around
ensuring adequate M&E mechanisms at the federal and state levels. There will be need to ensure
implementation in all states of the Annual School Census under the NEMIS, supporting its
transformation into school-based record-keeping, as well as fielding household surveys that
allow determination of the out-of-school population and its characteristics. In addition,
interventions under this results area will support regular national student learning assessments
that may initially be limited in scope, i.e. focusing on literacy and numeracy (for which the 2015
NEDS provides a benchmark), as well as assessment of teacher competencies (for which the
2013 SDI provides a benchmark). Other interventions include strengthening the capacity for
strategic planning and program management, including FMOE’s capacity to exercise oversight
over its executive agency UBEC, and to align education sector reforms at the state level with
federal priorities. Additional interventions will revolve around improving budget management
by leveraging already available personnel management and other financial management tools
and strengthening expenditure effectiveness for service delivery.


                                                                                                      4
6.      Results Area 2: Increasing equitable access to basic education for out-of-school
children. The interventions supported by the Operation would vary by state depending on the
specific challenges the state is facing and on its policy initiatives, and they would include, on the
demand side: high-level advocacy and sensitization regarding the importance of education for
both boys and girls; conditional cash transfers to needy households to compensate for direct costs
of education (e.g. parent-teacher association fees, costs of uniforms or textbooks) and
opportunity cost of education (e.g. decrease in child labor, decrease in petty trading by girls);
scholarships, particularly at the junior secondary level; and school feeding, which is a stated
government policy that has begun implementation in some states. On the supply side, the
Operation would support school mapping to determine infrastructure needs, including those
catering to specific populations, such as nomads; expansion of school infrastructure, focusing on
rehabilitation, renovation, and extension of existing schools, as opposed to new construction;
provision of furniture and equipment for classrooms; and recruitment of teachers and their
deployment in under-served areas, with a focus on female teachers to encourage girls’ enrolment.

7.      Results Area 3: Improving quality of basic education. In many instances, out-of-
school children will be enrolling in existing schools and learning from already active teachers,
while in other instances new schools and/or classrooms will be required and new teachers
recruited and deployed. The interventions supported by the Operation would, therefore, address
both possible scenarios, and different states and geographic areas will require different
interventions, including: ensuring that schools have the necessary textbooks and other learning
and teaching materials; providing incentives to recruit suitable students into teacher education
programs; expanding teacher upgrading programs so that a greater share of teachers have formal
qualifications, while at the same time ensuring that these formal qualifications impart true
pedagogical and subject matter competencies; strengthening in-service teacher training; and
providing incentives to attract and retain competent teachers in disadvantaged areas.

8.      In terms of implementation arrangements, the Operation is national in scope and
managed at the federal level, with all states able to tap into the funds. PDO-level indicators
will have national targets, into which states will feed with their state-level targets. The FMOE
will be in charge of ensuring collection of the required data, relying on both the National Bureau
of Statistics and the National Population Commission as well as third-party verification of results
achieved. Funds for the Operation will remain at the federal level and be disbursed to the states
upon achievement and verification of agreed results. At the state level, given the overlapping
mandates for basic education, implementation will entail coordination across the public entities
in charge, i.e. SMOEs, SUBEBs, and other existing ministries and executive agencies in charge
of basic education. This coordination is presently sorely lacking so that setting up coordination
mechanisms will not be sufficient: instead, actual Operation design will have to incentivize all
entities concerned to ensure that the coordination takes place. In other words, Operation design
must ensure that the federal level has a stake in states achieving certain results, and that all state-
level actors have a stake in demonstrating to the federal level the achievement of these results.

9.     The FMOE requested feedback on the draft MSP from its development partners,
including on potential areas that partners might support. Prior to the MSP, development
partners provided extensive technical assistance for basic education, both at the federal and state

                                                                                                     5
levels: for strategic planning, institutional effectiveness, social accountability, M&E, and
teachers’ development. They have also engaged in policy dialogue and supported the drafting of
the MSP document itself, noting that it has four key areas that require strengthening:
implementation plan, M&E framework, costing, and governance framework. UNICEF, DFID,
and the Bank coordinated their support on the M&E framework and costing and the MSP was
revised and strengthened in these aspects prior to its discussion with all states at the September
27-29, 2016 meeting of the National Council on Education.

10.     In terms of potential partners for the proposed PforR, it is likely that both
UNESCO and UNICEF will remain partners on strengthening the MSP, building statistical
capacity in the education sector, and ensuring that regular and reliable education sector
data are available (Annual School Census, national learning assessment). In addition, DFID
is a key education sector partner both for FMOE as well as the Bank, especially as relates to
efforts to improve governance and accountability in the education sector (including through TA
to UBEC and institutionalization of school-based management committees). The Bank team
will, therefore, be exploring partnership with DFID on the proposed Operation, in particular on
the required technical assistance. USAID has also supported improved education sector data by
funding the 2010 and 2015 NEDS and the Bank will explore partnering with USAID for its
annual updating. Finally, the Bank team will be exploring the possibility of a partnership with
the African Development Bank in terms of support to the proposed Operation.

11.     This Operation is proposed as a hybrid Program for Results (PforR), consisting of
two parts: the Program and a technical assistance (TA) component, which uses the
Investment Project Financing (IPF) approach. The design of the proposed Operation builds
on the track record of recent collaboration between the Nigerian government and the Bank using
results-based financing in the education sector: the State Education Program Investment Project
(IPF using a results-based financing approach), which highlights the need for a strong technical
assistance component to support the implementation of the government’s programs.

12.     The Program (tentatively US$480 million). The PforR instrument is considered the
best fit for present purposes in order to support the implementation of the government’s UBE
program; focus on education outputs and outcomes, as opposed to inputs; and incentivize
performance at the federal, state, and local levels. A major challenge is to design and implement
a national program, led by FMOE (essentially through its executive agency, UBEC) but working
across all states, that funds, monitors, evaluates, and adjusts diverse activities across the states.
By focusing on achievement of an agreed set of results yet allowing flexibility and incentivizing
home-grown solutions, including at the state and local levels, the PforR instrument
accommodates Nigeria’s federal nature best. Given the fact that there is variation across states in
Nigeria in the specific set of education sector challenges they face, there will be wide variation in
states’ priority concerns and the reforms they choose to address these concerns. A PforR
instrument seems the most appropriate one to incentivize performance and results along the
delivery chain at a systemic level given the specifics of Nigerian federalism, i.e. with a
distribution of responsibility which vests the federal government with only a limited role in basic
education. The PforR instrument also leverages and strengthens key country and sector systems,
including public financial management, procurement management, social and environmental



                                                                                                   6
management, as well as monitoring and evaluation – all needed for the Program to achieve its
desired results.

13.      The IPF (TA) Component (tentatively US$20 million). This component would finance
a set of technical assistance activities both at the federal and state levels aimed at strengthening
the capacities of federal and state governments for program implementation, coordination, policy
development, human resource management, and monitoring and evaluation. It would also
support a set of activities to strengthen the capacities of federal and state governments for 1)
statistical capacity and the use of data in policy making; 2) institutional effectiveness and
strategic planning (with a focus on executive agencies at the federal, state, and local levels as
well as on intergovernmental policy coordination); 3) transparency and accountability (including
the operationalization of established social accountability institutions at the school level); and 4)
mainstreaming of key budget management tools. Parallel technical assistance provided by other
donors (see Table 3) will also be leveraged. Finally, the TA component would pilot innovative
approaches, e.g. to address demand-side constraints to education for girls, with the aim of
evaluating and rolling those approaches out if deemed successful.

Table 1: Technical assistance provided by other education sector development partners
Area                     Activities                                                   Donors
Institutional capacity   Ministerial Strategic Plan (costing and results framework)   DFID
                         UBEC institutional review                                    DFID
                         State sector plans                                           UNICEF

Budget management        FMOE Medium-term Sector Strategy                             DFID
                         State Education Accounts                                     USAID
M&E                      National Education Data Survey                               USAID
                         Annual School Census                                         UNICEF
                         Community mapping of out-of-school children                  USAID
Teacher effectiveness    Teacher training                                             French government
                         Teacher development                                          DFID/UNICEF
Social accountability    Operationalizing school-based management committees          DFID/UNICEF/USAID



14.    Environmental and Social Systems Assessment will be the primary analytical instrument
that will be used to evaluate environmental and social risks and benefits associated with the
proposed operation. The proposed TA component will not support program activities that are
judged to be likely to have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or
unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. This ISDS was prepared to address
the TA component of the proposed operation.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

15.     The proposed TA component under the Operation has no physical footprint and there will
be no adverse environmental and social risks and impacts. The TA component activities do not
trigger any of the Bank’s safeguards policies.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

                                                                                                          7
16.    While this TA does not trigger environmental and social safeguards policies, Nigeria has
demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in the
implementation of a range of World Bank projects, including category A projects. There are
adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World
Bank safeguards policies. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv) is
responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with
national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices in every region
of the country. At state level, the State Ministry of Education will be responsible and
accountable for all safeguard issues.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
   Alexandra Bezeredi, Aki Tsuda (Social Safeguards); Hocine Chalal and Amos Abu
   (Environmental Safeguards).

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)             Yes         No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                                                                                               8
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: January 30, 2017

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: January 30, 2017

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leaders:                             Dina Abu-Ghaida, Roland Lomme                         December 2, 2016
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Adviser:                   Maman-Sani Issa                                       December 2, 2016
      Comments:
    Sector Managers:                               Halil Dundar, Hisham Waly                             December 2, 2016
      Comments:




                                                                                            (Template Version November 2007)




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



                                                                                                                                   9
