INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC927
Date ISDS Updated: June 28, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Nigeria                      Project ID: P071391
Project Name: Lagos Urban Water Supply  Task Team Leader: Alexander McPhail
Project (LUWSP)                            ..
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 12,  Loan/Credit amount (Sm.):
2004                                  IDA: $100m
Estimated Board Date: February 24, 2005
Managing Unit: AFTU2                  Lending Instrument:
Sector: Water supply (95%); Sewerage  Theme: Infrastructure services for private
(5%)                                  sector development (P); Access to urban
services for the poor (P); Municipal
governance and institution building (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: John Boyle
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower                        $l1m
B. Project Objective
The development objectives of the proposed Lagos Urban Water Supply Project (LUWSP)
would be:
*  To initiate private sector participation in the management of water production and
distribution facilities;
* To increase the amount of potable water delivered to end users in the city of Lagos;
* To assist the government in developing a viable strategy for intermediate and long-term
development of water production and transmission facilities; and
*  To assist the City of Lagos to develop and implement a viable wastewater collection and
treatment strategy.
C. Project Description
The Project will include four components, as follows:
a) Rehabilitation and Network Expansion: This component will include civil works to be
executed within the three areas targeted for management contracts, namely Ikeja, Ikoyi, and
Lagos Island, as well as works at the Adiyan and Akute Iju intakes and treatment works. Works
will include the following: (i) rehabilitation of treatment plant(s) and transmission line(s); (ii)
service area network rehabilitation and metering; (iii) network expansion; and (iv) additional
works which may be identified at appraisal. These investments will be phased across the life of



the project taking into account the following factors: (i) the need for an early increase in water
production capacity from both surface and ground water resources; (ii) the need for early
installation of bulk water meters and regulating valves in order to control the flows to respective
service areas; (iii) the need for early restructuring in the operation of water transmission and
water storage systems; and (iv) the need for rehabilitation/strengthening of the distribution
systems over a longer time period. The component will also finance the purchase of vehicles and
equipment for the Lagos State Water Corporation (LSWC).
b) Public-Private Partnership (PSP) Development: The LSWC's vision for PSP in the sector is
based on a prudent, stepwise approach which takes into account both the size of the water sector
in Lagos and the current difficult environment surrounding international financial markets. The
Project will support this approach by assisting the LSWC in contracting private sector operators
to establish three Private Sector Units (PSUs) in the service areas of Ikeja, Ikoyi and Lagos
Island. The Project will also support the implementation of a multi-year technical assistance
contract for the principal treatment and bulk transmission systems. The component will finance
costs associated with transaction design and tendering for the PSUs, as well as the fees for the
treatment and transmission technical assistance contract.
c) Capacity-Building and Project Management: This component will assist the LSWC through:
(i) expert technical assistance in various areas, from institutional organization to financial
management and R&D; (ii) the design and implementation of a communication and stakeholder
outreach program; (iii) the purchase of office equipment; (iv) training; and (v) financing PIU
operating costs.
d)  Policy Reform and Institutional Development:  As a contribution to developing and
implementing the LSWC's long-term vision, this component will finance: (i) the design of a low-
income household access strategy for the Lagos water sector, (ii) studies to underpin reforming
the regulatory framework for water supply and distribution; and (iii) a wastewater collection and
treatment strategy. On the last point, this component will provide support for the LSWC to
complete and implement a long term strategy for wastewater collection and treatment, including
the difficult issues surrounding the financing and sustaining of these investments.
D. Project Location:
The project will be located in the city of Lagos, with a focus on Ikeja, Ikoyi, and Lagos Island, as
well as works at the Adiyan and Akute Iju intakes and treatment works.
2



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
__________If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
iXi      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
j[ 1    Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[       1   Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
11Indirgenous Peoples (Ol} 4.LO0..
]   Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
[XI      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
1       Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
11     Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP/GP 7.60
J 1    Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
f ] A [Xj B [ ] C [ ] Fl [ J TBD (to be determined)
Civil works will be entirely rehabilitation of existing infrastructure involving only temporary
inconvenience to adjacent properties and commercial activities, plus network extensions into an
area east of Ikoyi beside existing and planned roads, the latter on unused land reclaimed from the
lagoon. A minor existing environmental issue is the disposal of treatment plant sludge at Iju and
Adiyan. Currently, the clarifiers do not work, and the slightly acidic sludge is discharged into
small nearby rivers. River ecology and hydrology appears to be affected and, at Adiyan, the
sediments are contributing to periodic flooding of a community road. Thus, the proposed Project
is expected to be an EA category B Project, requiring exclusively: (i) the definition and
implementation of appropriate sludge disposal measures at the two treatment plants; and (ii) the
inclusion of environmental and social protection clauses in civil works contracts. An
Environmental Management Plan will be prepared and disclosed that addresses these two issues.
Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ j SI [X] S2 [ S3 [] SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)
Safety of Dams: Water supply to both the Iju and Adiyan plants is controlled by an upstream
dam on the Ogun River. The Dam Safety Assessment just completed for the World Bank-
financed National Urban Water Sector Reform Project (P071075,Cr. 39240) included the Ogun
River dam. This assessment will be re-disclosed for this project.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared.
October, 2004
3



B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS
Not Applicable
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
July / August 2004
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
-Task Team Leader:                     Alex McPhail                            4  .t)6  JL.L  i04
Approved by:                                            Cr
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Thomas E.                    a                        J 
Comments                                           o
Sector Manager:                       Inger Andersen       l      7
Comments                                               (31t44t U   v   t4      0 L  Jt     Q
wb191011
C:\ISDS - June 28 2004.doc
June 30, 2004 1 1:18 AM
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a forrn and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
4



