                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                              APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 114419


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 17, 2017

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: FEDERAL         REPUBLIC     OF Project ID: P160430
NIGERIA
                                          Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: BETTER EDUCATION SERVICE DELIVERY FOR ALL
Task Team Leaders: Dina Abu-Ghaida, Roland Lomme
Appraisal Start Date: March 27, 2017      Estimated Board Date: June 20, 2017
Managing Unit: GED13                      Lending Instrument: Hybrid: PforR with
                                          TA IPF component
Sector: Early childhood education, primary education, secondary education, public
administration - education
Theme: Data development and Capacity Building, Gender, Education


IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):           500
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing              Simple [X]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [X]                  No [ ]

B. Project Objectives:

1.      To increase equitable access for out-of-school children and improve literacy in focus
States, and strengthen accountability for results, in basic education in Nigeria.

C. Program Description:

2.      The Universal Basic Education (UBE) program, funded by the UBE Intervention Fund
that is channeled through the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC), represents the
relevant Government program that this Operation aims to support. The proposed Better
Education Service Delivery for All (BESDA) Operation aims to incentivize three key behaviors
that will lead to the desired change, i.e. improved performance of the UBE program:

                                                                                           1
a. The adoption of a results-oriented approach that fosters mutual accountability among Federal
   and State actors;
b. Allocation of funds to those States that demonstrate the greatest need and performance; and
c. Addressing constraints to access to basic education in a holistic manner, i.e. both demand-
   and supply-side constraints, where relevant.

3.      The proposed BESDA operation aims to bolster the UBE program’s ability to channel
more funds to States with greater needs, so that the PforR Program boundary is roughly half that
of the UBE program, corresponding to the 17 focus States (out of a total of 36 States and the
Federal Capital Territory) and all States under Results Area 3 (strengthening accountability for
results). The UBE program’s objectives are currently being pursued through the UBE
Intervention Fund allocation formula that is subject to revision, if deemed necessary1. The
proposed Operation, though it supports the UBE program, does not rely on the current allocation
formula of the UBE Intervention Fund and its range of activities. Instead of the UBE
Intervention Fund’s approach of equal allocation to all States, a subset of focus States facing the
greatest challenges in promoting access to basic education will be eligible for this Operation’s
funds dedicated to increasing access to basic education and improving literacy. At the same
time, given the importance of strengthening accountability and results-orientation for the
education sector as a whole, FME, UBEC, and all States will be able to access the funds
dedicated to this end. The Operation’s results- and needs-based focus will therefore provide a
demonstration effect, or proof of concept, both for the Federal and State levels, as to how the
UBE program could operate more effectively and achieve desired results.

4.      The proposed BESDA Operation is designed as a hybrid consisting of two parts: the
Program (US$472.5 million), using a Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument, and a technical
assistance (TA) component (US$27.5 million), which uses an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) instrument. The design of the proposed Operation builds on the track record of recent
collaboration between the Government and the World Bank in the education sector using results-
based financing.

5.      The PforR instrument is considered the best fit for present purposes in order to: support
the implementation of the Government’s UBE program; ensure a focus on education outputs and
outcomes, as opposed to inputs; and incentivize performance at the Federal and State levels. A
major challenge is to design and implement a national program, led by the Federal Ministry of
Education (FME) -- through its executive agency, UBEC -- that works across all States, that is
able to fund, monitor, evaluate, and adjust diverse activities across the States. By focusing on
achievement of an agreed set of results yet allowing flexibility and incentivizing home-grown
solutions (to respond to specific needs) at the State and Local levels, the PforR instrument
accommodates Nigeria’s Federal nature. Given the variation across States in Nigeria in terms of
the education sector challenges they face, there will be wide variation in States’ priority concerns
and, in turn, the reforms they choose to address these concerns. In addition, a PforR can
incentivize performance and results along the delivery chain in a manner suited to the specifics
of Nigerian federalism, i.e., the Federal Government has an oversight role and responsibility for

1
   The allocation formula is determined by the UBEC Board of Directors and its revision requires the approval of
the Federal Executive Council (or Cabinet).


                                                                                                                   2
service delivery is primarily vested in States. Further, the PforR instrument is capable of
leveraging and strengthening key country and sector systems, including public financial
management (PFM), procurement management, social and environmental systems management,
as well as M&E – all needed for the Program to achieve its desired results.

6.      Despite strong Government commitment to UBE, the capacity of both Federal and State
Governments for planning, coordination, and M&E is weak. The TA component, implemented
under the IPF modality, would complement the Program and finance a set of TA activities both
at the Federal and State levels aimed at strengthening the capacities of the implementing
agencies for policy development, Program implementation, coordination, and M&E, including a
research agenda and third-party validation of Program results and activities. Under this approach,
World Bank funds are used to finance specific expenditures, e.g., consulting services and
training, in accordance with the World Bank’s fiduciary policies and guidelines.

7.     Environmental and Social Systems Assessment will be the primary analytical instrument
that will be used to evaluate environmental and social risks and benefits associated with the
proposed operation. The proposed TA component will not support program activities that are
judged to be likely to have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or
unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. This ISDS was prepared to address
the TA component of the proposed operation.

8.      Several development partners are also active in the basic education sector in Nigeria and
have TA interventions underway that this Operation aims to leverage and expand upon. Table 1
provides an overview of the TA currently provided by other development partners. Specifically,
this PforR Operation will build on ongoing activities by the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) and the UK Department for International Development
(DFID) in support of improved literacy and teaching quality. Interventions under Results Area 2
will therefore build on USAID’s five-year Nigeria Northern Education Initiative, which supports
Bauchi and Sokoto States in improving children’s reading skills, and DFID’s Teacher
Development Program (TDP), which aims to improve the skills, including language teaching, of
66,000 teachers in six States (Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Niger, and Zamfara) over its
lifetime (2013-2019). Currently, the TDP is operating in Jigawa, Katsina, and Zamfara States.
USAID is also active in supporting Bauchi and Sokoto States in producing State education
budgets – an experience that is feeding into the design of State basic education plans and
progress report under Results Area 3. UNICEF, in turn, is providing TA to the FME to
implement the Annual School Census (ASC). This TA includes sharing good practice on school
record-keeping in lieu of the current approach in Nigeria that is based on enumerators who visit
schools for the purpose of collecting data under the ASC. This Operation will, therefore, build
on UNICEF’s efforts with respect to the ASC moving forward. The above TA provided by
development partners does not cover all the needs in the 17 focus States, so the proposed
Operation will expand the geographic coverage of activities.




                                                                                                3
      Table 1: Technical assistance provided by other education sector development partners
        Area                              Activities                         Development
                                                                               Partners
Institutional          Ministerial Strategic Plan (costing and results   DFID
capacity               framework)
                       UBEC institutional review                         DFID/MacArthur
                                                                         Foundation
                       State education sector plans                      UNICEF
                       Strengthening of the utilization rules of the     DFID
                       UBE Intervention Fund matching grant
Budget                 FME Medium-term Sector Strategy                   DFID
management             State Education Accounts                          USAID
Monitoring and         National Education Data Survey                    USAID
evaluation             Annual School Census                              UNICEF
Teacher                Teacher training                                  French government
effectiveness          Teacher development                               DFID/UNICEF
Social                 Operationalizing school-based management          DFID/UNICEF/USAID
accountability         committees


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

9.      The proposed TA component under the Operation has no physical footprint and is not
expected to lead to adverse environmental and social impacts. The TA component activities do
not trigger any of the Bank’s safeguards policies.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

10.     While this TA does not trigger environmental and social safeguards policies, Nigeria has
demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in the
implementation of a range of World Bank projects, including category A projects. There are
adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World
Bank safeguards policies. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv) is
responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with
national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices in every region
of the country. At State level, the State Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) – the State
arm of UBEC -- of each participating State will be responsible and accountable for all safeguard
issues.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
11.   The specialists on the team include: Alexandra Bezeredi, Aki Tsuda (Social Safeguards);
Amos Abu, and Omezikam Eze Onuoha (Environmental Safeguards).




                                                                                               4
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                     Yes             No               TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                 X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                         X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                  X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                             X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                              X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                       X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                 X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                           X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                      X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                               X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD stage ISDS: April 17, 2017

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A




2   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



                                                                                                                                   5
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leaders:            Dina Abu-Ghaida, Roland Lomme     April 14, 2017
 Approved by:
 Regional           Safeguards Maman-Sani Issa                   April 17, 2017
 Coordinator:
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:             Halil Dundar                      March 17, 2017
   Comments:

                                                  (Template Version November 2007)




                                                                                  6
