Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2005 
Report No.:  33499
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P071391 
Project Name:  Second National Urban Water Sector Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alexander A. McPhail 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 13, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Access to urban services and housing (S);Regulation and 
competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's principal development outcomes are: (i) increased reliability and financial 
viability of selected urban water utilities; and (ii) increased access to piped water 
networks in selected urban areas. Progress toward these principal development outcomes 
will be measured through: (i) the increase in water delivered through existing and 
extended networks; (ii) improvements in cost recovery; and (iii) increase in the number 
of households having access to the piped water network.     
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will be implemented in three states in Nigeria: Lagos, Cross River and a third 
state that will be identified early in implementation.  Given the development objectives 
described above, the Project emphasizes financing for water system rehabilitation, 
increasing treatment capacity and adding household and standpipe connections.  It will 
also finance management interventions and strengthening.  The Project also encompasses 
management contracts for utility operations in Lagos and Cross River States and may 
help to finance these contracts.    The Project has four components and a large 
unallocated amount to cover unidentified project costs in the state yet to be identified 
during implementation.    a)   Rehabilitation and Network Expansion (US$168.4 million):  
Page  2
This component will include civil works to be executed in Lagos and Cross River State. 
Works will include the following: (i) rehabilitation of treatment plant(s) and transmission 
line(s); (ii) service area network rehabilitation and metering; (iii) network expansion; and 
(iv) additional works which may be identified at appraisal.   These investments will be 
phased across the life of the project taking into account the following factors: (i) the need 
for an early increase in water production capacity from both surface and ground water 
resources; (ii) the need for early installation of bulk water meters and regulating valves in 
order to control the flows to respective service areas; (iii) the need for early restructuring 
in the operation of water transmission and water storage systems; and (iv) the need for 
rehabilitation/strengthening of the distribution systems over a longer time period. The 
component will also finance the purchase of vehicles and equipment.    In Lagos, this 
component will namely cover namely Ikeja, Ikoyi, and Lagos Island, as well as  works at 
the Adiyan and Akute Iju intakes and treatment works.    In Cross River State, the urban 
areas to be included under this component will be Calabar, Ikom, Ogoja, and Obudo.    b)   
Public-Private Partnership (PSP) Development (US$ 9.8 million):  Lagos: The LSWC's 
vision for PSP in the sector is based on a prudent, stepwise approach which takes into 
account both the size of the water sector in Lagos and the current difficult environment 
surrounding international financial markets.  The Project will support this approach by 
assisting the LSWC in contracting private sector operators to establish three Private 
Sector Units (PSUs) in the service areas of Ikeja, Ikoyi and Lagos Island.  The Project 
will also support the implementation of a multi-year management contract for the 
principal treatment and bulk transmission systems. This component will finance costs 
associated with transaction design and tendering for the PSUs, as well as the private 
operator fees for the treatment and transmission management contract.    Cross River 
State: Recognizing that Cross River State is already implementing a PPP arrangement, 
the Project will evaluate the current situation to ascertain the nature of support required 
by the CRSWB to further improve the implementation of the PPP.  At Appraisal, the 
current management contract which serves as the legal framework for implementing the 
PPP will be examined in more detail with a view to fashion out implementation 
arrangements that will ensure sustained and improved delivery of the services. The Bank 
notes that aspects such as strengthening supervision of the management contract, 
monitoring and auditing of performance and introducing pro-poor provisions are 
important.    c)   Service Sustainability and Project Management (US$ 12.7 million):  
This component will assist the LSWC and CRSWB through: (i) expert technical 
assistance in various areas, from institutional organization to financial management and 
R&D; (ii) financing critical operating costs; (iii) the design and implementation of a 
communication and stakeholder outreach programs; (iv) the purchase of office equipment 
and light vehicles; and (v) financing PIU running costs.    d)   Institutional Development 
and Policy Reform(US$ 12.3 million):  As a contribution to   developing and 
implementing the sector's long-term reform and sustainability, this component will 
finance: (i) expert technical assistance; (ii) expert commercial and management 
assistance; (iii) studies to underpin reforming the regulatory framework for water supply 
and distribution; (iv) regulator training (v) training and workshops and (vi) River Basin 
Initiatives and MDG tracking.       
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented in established urban areas in three states in Nigeria: 
Lagos, Cross River and a third state that will be identified early in implementation.  In 
Lagos, the project will focus on the distribution networks in Ikeja, Ikoyi, and Lagos 
Island. It will also support works at the Adiyan and Akute Iju intakes and treatment 
works.  In Cross River, the four urban areas to be included are Calabar, Obudu, Ogoja, 
and Ikom.  In all cases, water is sourced from nearby rivers, some of which are regulated 
by upstream dams.     
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated.    Environmental 
Assessment:  In Lagos State, civil works will be entirely rehabilitation of existing 
infrastructure involving only temporary inconvenience to adjacent properties and 
commercial activities, plus network extensions into an area east of Ikoyi beside existing 
and planned roads, the latter on unused land reclaimed from the lagoon.  A minor existing 
environmental issue is the disposal of treatment plant sludge at Iju and Adiyan.  
Currently, the clarifiers do not work, and the slightly acidic sludge is discharged into 
small nearby rivers.  River ecology and hydrology appears to be affected and, at Adiyan, 
the sediments are contributing to periodic flooding of a community road.  An action plan 
is being prepared to address these issues.  In Cross River State, the environmental and 
resettlement consequences of anticipated civil works are likely to be very minor to none, 
given normally responsible construction planning and management.  Nonetheless, 
uncertainties about the nature and scope of civil works in Obudu, Ogoja and Ikom lead to 
the determination that an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 
would be prepared for the project.    Resettlement:  Land acquisition is expected to be 
minimal to none since civil works will largely be rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, 
Page  4
and some extensions of treatment facilities within current plant boundaries, and of 
distribution networks alongside existing roads.    Nonetheless, uncertainties about the 
nature and scope of civil works in Obudu, Ogoja and Ikom lead to the determination that 
a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the project.    Dam Safety:  The 
dam safety report (DSR) prepared for the ongoing Nigeria National Urban Water Sector 
Reform Project (Cr. 3924) (NUWSRP1) covered the dam regulating water supply to 
Lagos, but not dams in Cross River State.  The Owelobudu Dam regulating water supply 
for Obudu in Cross River State does need remedial work on the spillway.  Thus, it was 
determined that the NUWSRP1 DSR would be extended to include Cross River State.    
International Waterways:  The City of Ikom draws its water from the Cross River which 
has its source in Cameroon, thus triggering the Bank's International Waterways policy 
(OP 7.50).  Nigeria does have a general agreement with Cameroon on the use of the river, 
but notification under OP 7.50 is still required under World Bank guidelines and will be 
done in mid-February 2005.       
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse long-term impacts are anticipated.    With water supply projects, there is the 
concern that improving accessibility will lead to increased sewage and wastewater, and 
consequent surface/groundwater quality and health impacts.   In this context, the Project 
will provide technical assistance at least in Lagos to characterize the nature and extent of 
any current surface or groundwater quality problems in urban areas with a view to 
supporting of future sewage, wastewater and groundwater management programs       
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower prepared an ESMF, RPF and DSR for the first NUWSRP, in collaboration 
with the relevant state water and environmental agencies, and has the capacity to do so 
for this project.   The state environmental agencies have adequate capacity for specifying, 
reviewing and supervising any EA or EMP requirements as the project is implemented.  
As in the first NUWSRP project, the Bank will include provisions for technical assistance 
to the Lagos and Cross River water authorities so they can adequately manage the 
safeguards aspects of project implementation.       
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
stakeholder specialist and a strategic communication team were part of the preparation 
team to ensure the involvement of key local stakeholders in all Project phases through a 
comprehensive Communication and Stakeholder Outreach Program.    All decisions 
related to the Project's components and implementation arrangements have been taken in 
consultation with community representatives, State Governments, Local Governments 
and Federal agencies. Consumer and stakeholder consultations included a comprehensive 
Page  5
communication audit which assessed perceptions, attitudes, and beliefs of stakeholders 
vis-
à-vis PSP in Lagos water provision. The communication audit also served as a 
baseline for the design and implementation of a comprehensive strategic communication 
program to support the LSWC's PSP policy and consumers' concerns regarding the PSP.    
A
Social Assessment to be conducted in the three states will examine the range of 
stakeholders' interests, and address potential social risks to the Project and Project social 
impacts on local consumers, the water boards, and informal providers. The Project's 
social impact will be monitored through a stakeholder survey at the Mid-Term Review 
and Project's completion.    All Project's public documents will be made available at the 
federal, state and local levels at suitable locations.       
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/17/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  6
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexander A. McPhail 
02/16/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John A. Boyle 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
02/16/2005 
Comments:   
