Page  1
 
 
                                                       
28978 
 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet 
Section I – Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
A. 
Basic Project Data
 (from PDS)
 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
COUNTRY
: Nigeria 
PROJECT ID
: P085424 
PROJECT
: Nigeria: Development of the National Statistical 
System (STATCAP) 
TTL
: Gregory Taiwo Nzekwu (AFTP3) 
Co-TTK: John Ngwafon (AFTKL) 
APPRAISAL DATE
: February 16, 2004 
IBRD AMOUNT
:  
RVP APPROVAL DATE
: May 26, 2004 
IDA AMOUNT
: US$ 30 million 
MANAGING UNIT
: AFTP3 
SECTOR
: Multi-sector 
LENDING INSTRUMENT
: APL 
STATUS
: Appraisal 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
 
1.A.2. 
Project Objectives
 
The principal outcome of this project is for national statistical agencies to provide reliable, timely, 
and accurate economic, financial, socio-demographic and other data, in line with international 
good practice and frameworks to policy decision makers and other users. 
 
The main objectives of the project are to:  
 
• 
Carry out legal and institutional reforms that encourage statistical development; 
• 
Develop human resources through training to achieve efficient statistical 
operations, and develop a statistical production system that continuously adapts 
to evolving needs of the society and economy through user-producer dialogs; 
• 
Develop statistical infrastructure through the adoption of internationally accepted 
methodologies and data quality standards; 
• 
Institutionalize core statistical activities, including poverty monitoring; 
• 
Improve statistical output by consolidating and strengthening existing surveys 
and administrative sources, and close the information gap by designing and 
conducting new data-generating activities; 
• 
Promote statistical information sharing and the use of data for policy making. 
 
The project will consolidate and complement the efforts previously undertaken by the Nigerian 
Government, bilateral and international organizations and address improvements to be made in 
the statistical system that are specified in the Statistical Master Plan. 
 
The impact of the project will be measured by the presence of effective regulatory and 
institutional frameworks, qualified human resources, statistical infrastructure in line with 
internationally accepted methodologies and standards, upgraded statistical programs including 
censuses and surveys, statistical outputs that are timely, accurate, and meet users’ needs, as well 
as adequate IT infrastructure that enable efficient statistical production and dissemination. 
I.A.3. 
Project Description
 
The project will support organizational change and improvements in specific statistical areas as 
follows: 
• 
Organizational development, including development and implementation of 
the legal and institutional framework, and the capacity of statistical producers 
and users; 
• 
Improvements in statistical infrastructure, such as statistical production and 
dissemination methods and the management of statistical information; 
• 
Production of better statistics in various sectors, including social and 
demographic statistics, poverty and living conditions, agriculture, livestock, 
forestry, fishery, the environment, business statistics, national accounts, and 
fiscal and financial statistics. 
• 
Improvements in infrastructure including transport equipment, and 
computing facilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
 
I.A.4. 
Project Location
: 
The project will be located in the Federal Office of Statistics (later Nigerian National Bureau of Statistics) and 
the six zonal offices to be strengthened to serve the states in each of the six geo-political zones.  It will also be 
implemented by statistical departments in some sector/line ministries such as Agriculture, Health, Education, 
Transport, Labor and Productivity, Water Resources, as well as some central statistical agencies, including 
Central Bank of Nigeria, National Population Commission and National Manpower Board. 
B.1. 
Check Environmental Classification
 A [  ] B [  ] C [X ] D [  ] FI [  ] 
The project does not involve any construction but could accommodate renovation/rehabilitation of some office 
blocks allocated to statistical agencies involved in the project.  There is no associated environmental impact. 
C. 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 (from PDS) 
I.C1. Table on applicability                                                           Yes         No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01) 
 
  X 
 
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36) 
 
  X 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
  X 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
  X 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30) 
 
  X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
  X 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
  X 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60) 
 
  X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50) 
 
  X 
 
 
 
