                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 22, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nigeria                                 Project ID: P088150
Project Name: Civil Service Renewal Project      Task Team Leaders: Victoria Kwakwa

Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2004            Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2004
Managing Unit: AFTP3                             Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan
                                                 (TAL)
Sector: Public Sector (100%)                     Theme: Civil Service Reform and Capacity
                                                 Building
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Kristine Ivarsdotter (Sr. Social
Development Specialist, AFTS1), Serigne Omar Fye (Sr. Environmental Specialist,
AFTS1)
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 45
Other financing amounts by source: Co-financing                                     ($25.0m)
                                  Government                                          ($5.0)

B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]

The ultimate objective of civil service reform is to build a better performing federal public
service.     This means one which is affordable, properly resourced, well structured and
appropriately sized. It is one in which pay structures enable the Government to recruit, retain
and motivate the key technical, professional and managerial staff it needs to fulfill the changed
demands on the state in areas such as service delivery, regulation and the provision of classic
public goods.

It is recognized that this will take a decade, possibly longer, of continued reform underpinned by
sustained good governance and committed leadership, to fully achieve. The aims of this first
support project are more modest. First to ensure that the process of civil service renewal is
firmly launched. Second, to capitalize on the strong climate for overall change and build a
reform momentum, as work conditions improve in the pilot ministries and agencies and staff see
the benefits of better training and equipment. Third, to strengthen government payroll controls
and lay the foundations for a second phase of reforms, which are civil service-wide. Fourth, to
build capacity in the three central management agencies, to equip them to take the National
Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS) program forward, and to manage
more effectively the machinery of government. Thus ministries and agencies targeted under the
project will by the end of the project have more appropriate organizational and staffing
structures, modern equipment and more efficient work processes. Staff will have stronger
incentives to perform and be accountable and benefit from a well planned and focused staff
training program.

C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]

The project has three main components: (i) support for a minimum set of service wide system
reforms, including the reform and strengthening of core civil service management agencies; (ii)
support to the implementation of reforms in the pilot ministries and agencies; and (iii) support
for the full take off of the activities of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC),
one of the Government's leading anti-corruption agency.                  An unallocated amount is also
provided.

    (i) Service Wide Systems Reform

This component will support implementation of a first minimum set of service wide reforms to launch the civil
service reforms and which are also a sine qua non for the success of the more extensive reforms in the targeted
agencies. Key elements are:

    G Staff audit and verification for the entire civil service;
    G Implementation of modern technology based systems for effective personnel and payroll controls;
    G Reform and strengthening of central civil service management agencies the Federal Civil Service
         Commission (FCSC), the Federal Character Commission (FCC); the Office of the Head of Civil Service of
         the Federation (OHCSF); and the Bureau For Public Service Reform (PSB);
    G Definition and implementation of a Reform Change Management Strategy;
    G Preparation of detailed work-plan for implementation of reforms service wide.

    (ii) Reform of Pilot Ministries/Agencies

This component will help implement civil service reforms in five pilot ministries/agencies:
Federal Ministry of Finance, National Planning Commission (NPC), State House/Office of the
President, the Ministry of the Federal Capital Territory, and Federal Ministry of Information
(FMI). The five pilots are a self-selected group, headed by reform minded ministers, part of the
economic team, which predisposes them towards vigorous implementation. In addition, the
following factors are important in their inclusion as pilots: The Federal Ministry of Finance
(FMF) will play a lead role in instituting reforms in public financial management. It cannot
champion reforms in other ministries effectively without reforming itself; The National Panning
Commission (NPC) has a key role in economic development. It has not been effective since its
creation and needs to re-evaluate its mandate in the light of reforms and redefine its contribution;
The Ministry of the Federal Capital Territory (MFCT) is the largest Federal Ministry with about
25,000 employees (including in its parastatals). It is also the third largest providing several basic
services to a population of about 6 million. Due to its size and the fact that it is the seat of
government, it is highly visible; The Federal Ministry of Information (FMI) is the government
spokesperson, and provides the vehicle with which the Federal Government communicates with
the citizens, and the citizens with government. It should be a good vehicle for communicating
reforms; it can only do that most effectively if it is actively engaged in the reform process; The
reforms are being championed by the President, so it is only right and proper for The Presidency
to lead by example.

Key reforms to be supported include:

      G    Reorganization and restructuring including right sizing;
      G    Strengthening of budget and financial management in line with Federal Government of
           Nigeria's budget and financial management reforms;
      G    Improvement in work processes including through basic IT systems and infrastructure;
      G    Capacity building including through new and more sustainable approach to training.

This component includes provision for payment of severance to affected staff. The approach to severance to be used
is fully consistent with the Bank's operational guidelines. Retrenchment will be embarked on only after other
sources of staff reduction including elimination of ghost workers, early retirement, etc., have been fully explored. In
addition, each pilot agency will need to have put in place an effective personnel and payroll management systems
before it embarks on retrenchment.

    (iii) Support to The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC)

The EFCC which began operations in April 2003 has responsibility of enforcing all laws relating
to financial and economic crimes in Nigeria. Key areas of support under the project are:

    G    staff training including the setting up of a training center;
    G    upgrading of IT capability; and effective communication and publicity campaign against
         economic and financial crimes.

The project's components were selected on the basis of a series of diagnostic studies, including
on (i) the critical issues needing to be addressed service wide to ensure success of this pilot
initiative; (ii) the current state of the pilot ministries including reviews of their mandates,
organizations structures, work processes and human resources; and on (iii) managing the process
of change being embarked upon under these reforms. It has also been informed by government's
strong desire to mitigate adverse political and social impacts of the project through adequate
measures to cushion effects on workers to be retrenched.

Critical service wide reforms should deliver the following outcomes: (i) more effective control
and management of personnel and payroll; (ii) provision of improved incentives for good
performance in human resources management; (iii) broadened constituency for reform of the
federal civil service beyond the economic team by bringing in core service wide agencies such as
the federal civil service commission and building their capacity to take the service wide reforms
forward.

The support to pilot agencies should result in: (i) better functioning ministries, delivering better
on clear mandates; (ii) firm launching of the process of civil service renewal; building of a
reform momentum, as work conditions improve in the pilot ministries and agencies and staff see
the benefits of better training and equipment; (iii) strengthened capacity in the two central
economic management agencies, to take the NEEDS program forward, and to manage more
effectively the machinery of government. Staff will have stronger incentives to perform and be
accountable and benefit from a well planned and focused staff training program.

The reform change management component is a key element of the risk mitigation plan and is
designed to deliver as a key outcome, reduced political and social risks associated with some of
the activities under the operation.

The key outcome of the component supporting the EFCC will be a broadening of the initial progress that the EFCC
has made in tackling corruption.

Outputs from the project are expected to include: (i) modern and effective personnel and payroll control systems
service wide and in the pilot agencies; (ii) organizational structures consistent with achievement of ministry
mandates; (iii) appropriate staffing numbers and composition; (iv) computerization of key work processes; (iii) skills
upgrading of staff; (iv) action plan for implementation of reforms service wide; (v) preparation and passage of an
Act detailing the functions and the role of a reformed and modern Federal Civil Service Commission and clarifying

the new roles of the other two key agencies, the Federal Character Commission and the Office of the Head of the
Civil Service of the Federation.

D. Project location (if known)

The project will be located within the Federal Government of Nigeria in Abuja, the Federal
Capital Territory.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]

Not Applicable

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


 Applicable?        Safeguard Policy
                    If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
     [No ]          Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
     [No ]          Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
     [ No]          Pest Management (OP 4.09)
     [No ]          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
     [No ]          Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
     [No ]          Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
     [No ]          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
     [No ]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
     [No ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*
     [ No]          Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [X ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

As a technical assistance operation, this project will not fund any activities that would cause an
adverse effect on the environment. Therefore, it is being classified as a Category C. Should any
environmental issues evolve, this section would be revised.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.
    May 10, 2004

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: Not
    Applicable

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific
    studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: Not Applicable


*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas
1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

   Noteworthy: The ready availability of funding for retrenchment under the project will help address the social
   issues. The project includes activities to help retrenched staff acquire some basic skills that will help those who
   can join the private sector and provide training for setting up micro enterprises in a few key areas. The social
   impacts of the project will be monitored through tracer studies of staff who have been retrenched.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                          Victoria Kwakwa                                     April 22, 2004
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:           Thomas E. Walton                                    April 22, 2004
   Comments
 Sector Manager:                            Cadman Mills                                        April 22, 2004
   Comments

