Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1577 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P074447 
Project Name: State Governance and Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader: Manga Kuoh-Moukouri 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.10 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project aims to increase the ability of selected States to deliver quality public services.  Its 
principal development objectives are to: (i) rebuild state governments? public financial 
management capacity and enhance accountability; and (ii) strengthen civil service capacity to 
implement state government policies and programs.  This will enable them to discharge their 
constitutional role and mandate with higher standards of efficiency, effectiveness, and 
transparency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project is designed around three broad components as follows:  
 
Project Component #1: Individual States Public Management Reforms (US$ 22.5 million; IDA 
US$ 20.5 million; Participating States US$ 2.0 million).  
 
This first and largest component of the Project aims to (i) ensure that three states rebuild basic 
systems of public financial management, and human resource management information that meet 
a
minimum standard in terms of efficiency, accountability and transparency; (ii) promote the 
standardization of PFM procedures and of financial data production among the states of the 
Federation to allow appropriate data aggregation and analysis; and (iii) increase the ability of the 
Page  2
states to improve and monitor the development and implementation of public policies and 
programs.  
 
The participating states (Bauchi, Cross River, and Kaduna) have been chosen among six states 
which where identified during Project preparation through a transparent competitive process 
based on initial diagnostic/proposal documents presented by thirteen states out of twenty four 
invited.  The four criteria utilized in evaluating the initial proposals were (i) the quality of 
diagnosis of existing constraints, (ii) the overall reform program for the state?s public sector,  
(iii) the relevance of the activities proposed for IDA consideration, and (iv) track record between 
1999 and 2002.  The selection was further refined in light of the states performance in 2003 and 
2004 and the NEEDS and Bank assistance strategy which both require to pilot the reforms in a 
small number of states before there implementation in multiple states.  
 
Project Component #2  - US$ 2.0 million.  Improving Inter-Governmental Collaboration (IDA 
Credit: US$ 2.0 million).  
 
The objective of this component is to (i) deliver a robust and forward looking analytical work 
on intergovernmental collaboration in Nigeria in order to facilitate future policy choices on 
federalism; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of MoIGA to play its role and deliver on its mandate.  
To that end, the Project will support two sets of activities  
 
:
(a) 
Study on intergovernmental collaboration.  This will include (i) the review of current 
legislation, regulations and practices, (ii) a comparative analysis of Nigerian experience and the 
experience of selected countries around the world with regards to the delivery of public services; 
and (iii) recommendations on the way forward for Nigeria.  The study to be conducted an 
interdisciplinary task force on intergovernmental collaboration (TFIGC) coordinated by MoIGA 
and with the assistance of consultants will be completed by the end of June 2006; and  
 
(b) 
MoIGA institutional strengthening will included (i) the implementation of the 
reorganization plan indicated above (with appropriate coordination with other FGN MDAs 
undergoing similar exercises under the Economic Reform and Governance Project (ERGP), and 
(ii) staff training in the areas of decentralization and intergovernmental relations, and 
communication skills.  
 
Project Component #3 US$ 5 million: Niger Delta Development Commission Activities 
Enhancement (IDA Credit: US$ 5 million)  
 
Although primary responsibility for social and economic development in the nine states (Abia, 
Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo and Rivers states) which comprise the 
Niger Delta Region of Nigeria rests with state governments, there are a number of regional issues 
that transcend state boundaries, and require the coordination of state and federal action in support 
of state development objectives.  The Niger Delta Development Commission (NDDC) was 
established by law in 2000 to ?formulate policies and guidelines for the development of the 
Niger-Delta area and conceive, plan and implement, in accordance with set rules and regulations, 
projects and programs for the sustainable development of the Niger-Delta area? .  The NDDC is 
funded directly from the Federation Account  
Page  3
The grounding premise of the component is that improved accountability and enhanced trust in 
public institutions is the corner stone for peace and development in the Delta.  The Project will 
assist the NDDC in two ways:  
 
(a) 
make NDDC a more effective development institution by building its capacities for (i) 
strategic management; (ii)financial management; (iii) conflict analysis and management; (iv) 
environmental management; and (v) community development orientation;  
 
(b) 
support a new partnership that would promote innovative collaboration among NDDC, 
NGOs, bilateral donors, communities and the private sector companies working in the Delta. The 
new partnership component will support three pilot Niger Delta Community Foundations 
(NDCFs) directed at the replication of the Community Foundation model deployed successful in 
South Africa. The NDCFs will also draw guidance from the program of highly successful 
community development which has evolved in Akasa, Bayelsa State, along the coast.  Project 
funds will provide seed capital and support a board of governors and secretariats for the NDCFs 
for a period of four years.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bauchi, Cross River, Kaduna, Abia, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, Imo, Ondo 
and Rivers states   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The environmental Category of this project is C.  The activities planned under the Project do not 
include major construction or utilization of materials that present substantial environmental risks.  
Moreover, the proposed support to NDDC to enhanced its capacity to monitor compliance with 
federal and state environmental regulations should result in improved environmental 
management practices in the Niger Delta region.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/23/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manga Kuoh-Moukouri 
02/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
02/16/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
02/16/2005 
Comments:  I agree with the depiction in this safeguards sheet and hence (from my vantage point) 
approve as per requirements vis a vis my role. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
