                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                             Report No.: AC1218



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/08/2005

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Nigeria                                Project ID: P090135
Project Name: Federal Roads Development Project
Task Team Leader: Anil S. Bhandari
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2006        Estimated Board Date: August 1, 2006
Managing Unit: AFTTR                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and
civil service reform (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               100.00
        Financing Gap                                                    200.00
                                                                         300.00



B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The initial development objectives are: (a) To reduce road transport costs along the road links
 supported by the project; (b) To introduce total asset management methods for delivery and
 management of Federal roads; and (c) To plan and facilitate sustainable financing arrangements
 for the road sector.
 These will be aligned with the NEEDS objectives and be limited to one or two of the most
 important outcomes, in line with the decisions of the PCN Review Meeting, during further
 project preparation.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Project Components
 The project components will be designed in line with the strategy to support both the
 implementation of the proposed reform and the financing of critically needed investments. The
 three main components are:
 (i) Policy and Institutional Reforms. Assistance with the implementation of agreed actions
 including (a) studies to identify needed critical reforms to be supported and plan of action

 to establish an autonomous Federal Highway Authority (FHA); and (b) implementation
 of agreed reforms linked to the phasing of the possible IDA assistance through the
 Project.
 (ii) Institutional Capacity Building. Technical Assistance to support the RSDT and to
 implement improved road prioritization, planning and service delivery on the Federal
 roads network. The required activities will be finalized during the Project preparation and
 appraisal but with the initial list including a National Transport Master Plan, a 10-year
 road sector investment plan and support to the RSDT in specific fields of expertise where
 in-house expertise is not available.
 (iii) Upgrading, Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Federal Roads: Assistance with (a) the
 preparation of the complete Road Sector Development and Maintenance Program
 (RSDMP); and (b) design, preparation of bid documents and implementation of selected
 priority investments with long term performance based contracts using design, build,
 operate, maintain, and transfer principles.
 Implementation Arrangements
 The Federal Ministry of Works (FMW) will establish a Road Sector Development Management
 Team (RSDT) to implement the RSDMP undertaking project preparation and implementation
 until the formation of the Federal Highway Authority (FHA). The RSDT will comprise
 professional staff recruited on a competitive basis and either seconded from the FMW or
 recruited from outside the Ministry. The Team will be fully empowered to discharge its day to
 day functions in line with the overall mandate to implement the RSDMP. This means that the
 team will implement activities supported by the Bank, other donors and the GON, in an
effective,
 timely and orderly manner.
 Triggers: The project will have two key triggers. The first one is the passing of the Bill to
 Provide for the Establishment of the Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission by the
 National Assembly, which includes Private Sector Participation in Federal Infrastructure
 Development; and the second will be the establishment of the RSDT as an effective Unit to
 implement project activities. As road reform initiatives are currently under discussion and
 specific actions are difficult to define, it is foreseen that road reform milestones will only be
 included as triggers in the later phases of the proposed project.
 Proposed Phasing of the Project and IDA credit amounts:
 The project is designed to support the RSDMP, a 10 year-program including both road sector
 reform and road infrastructure improvement activities. Since the road sector reform program
will
 be staged in accordance with a long term timetable, it is foreseen that the ideal lending
 instrument would be an APL. Until clarification is received from the Board on the use of an
 APL, the team will prepare a series of three projects, each a SIL, supporting one phase of the
 program as set out below.
 # FY07: Phase 1 $ 300 - 500 million
 # FY09: Phase 2 $ 400 - 600 million
 # FY11: Phase 3 $ 500 - 600 million
 # Total IDA FY06-11 $ 1200 - 1600 million

D. Project location (if known)
Certain sections of a prioritized set of the major north-south and east-west transversal links

 collectively called the "Unity Roads". The final section is under discussion.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The borrower?s capacity to manage safeguards policies within the sector is weak. The project
will explore the possibilities of building environmental and social capacity within the sector, in
particular within the FMW or in the Road Sector Development Team (RSDT) to be later
transferred to the new FHA. The project will ensure that the relevant EIA?s, RPF and where
necessary, EMP?s and RAP?s for each road segment will be prepared, approved and disclosed
according to Bank?s safeguards policies as well the national policies. Environmental and social
management capacity within the FMW and the RSDT will be in place to manage this process to
ensure compliance.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 X
    Applied to the upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance activities planned under this
project.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                     X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 X
    Specific activities and project sites will not be known until during program implementation
by the contracted consortiums. Involuntary resettlement may occur in areas where the upgrading
activities require land acquisition and/or will include the displacement of people using the Right
of Way for residential or economic purposes.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                 X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                          X



Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 08/01/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    1. The resettlement policy framework and the environmental and social management
    frameworks will be prepared, cleared and disclosed before project appraisal, which is
    currently scheduled for February 2006.

     2. The requirements and provisions set forth in these safeguard documents will be included
    in the bidding documents for the long term performance based contracts. The bidding
    documents will be subject to Bank clearance before being issued to pre-qualified bidders.

     3. The EIAs/EMPs, and the RAPs --as appropriate -- for each individual contract will be
    prepared by the contracted consortium after contract award but before implementation of the
    scheduled works. These will be subject to Bank clearance before start of construction.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke                                      04/05/2005
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Mr Thomas E. Walton                                             04/05/2005
    Comments: Approved by Regional Safeguards Coordinator
  Sector Manager:                                 Mr Alain L. Labeau                                              04/05/2005
    Comments: Approved by SM




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


