                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                  Report No.: 132587

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2018

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

  Country:          Nigeria                  Project ID: P153732
  Project Name:     NIGERIA FCPF REDD READINESS (P153732)
  Task Team         Amos Abu; Mirko Serkovic
  Leader(s):
  Estimated         N/A
  Board Date:
  Managing Unit:    GEN07

  Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
  Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
  Financing (In USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:         4.94               Total Bank Financing:         0.00
  Financing Gap:              0.00
      Financing Source                                                     Amount
      Borrower                                                               0.00
   Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                  4.94
      Total                                                                  4.94
  Environmental B - Partial Assessment
  Category:
  Is this a        No
  Repeater
  project?


  B. Project Objectives
  Project Development Objective for the Readiness Preparedness Support is to support Nigeria to
  design a socially and environmentally sound strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and
  forest degradation.
    C. Project Description
    The proposed additional grant would enable Nigeria to complete the REDD+ Readiness process at
    national-level as defined in its Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP), while deepening its
    engagement in three additional States1 (to be selected).

    Specifically, the AF will: (i) reinforce the capacities and ensure the operation of the national-level
    and state-level2 REDD+ management bodies to provide political and technical guidance to the
    development of the REDD+ Strategy; (ii) reinforce the capacities and organization of the main
    stakeholders for a more effective participation in the development and implementation of the
    REDD+ Strategy; (iii) finalize the REDD+ Strategy with a detailed action plan and implementation
    budget; (iv) strengthen national policies to support REDD+ implementation; (v) establish a
    Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) system for REDD+; (vi) support enabling activities
    for the REDD+ investment program in Cross-River State under development; (vii) prepare Nigeria to
    access available national and international funding for REDD+ investments.

    The additional grant support will continue to be organized along four components that correspond
    with the components and sub-components of Nigeria’s R-PP:

    Component 1. Strengthen National and State Level Readiness Management
    Arrangements (US$1,925,000):
    The objective of this component is to support national and state-level coordination and monitoring of
    the REDD+ process, including the project management costs. The AF will support the operational
    costs of the National REDD+ Secretariats, as well as the operational costs of six State-level REDD+
    Secretariats (Cross-River, Nasarawa, Ondo and three additional States to be selected), to enable them
    to mainstream REDD+ into their policies and programs and engage with stakeholders locally. It will
    also support associated capacity strengthening and training needs. It will also support the convening
    of the Federal Level REDD+ Management Arrangements and intersectoral coordination.

    Component 2. Develop REDD+ Strategies and Conduct SESA (US$557,000):
    The objective of this component is to carry out analytical work feeding into the formulation of a
    National REDD+ Strategy (including on benefit sharing), develop the strategy itself, undertake the
    SESA and produce the relevant safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, and PF). The AF will
    complement the REDD+ Strategy and SESA being funded by the original grant by defining
    approaches to mobilize resources for the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy (identifying the
    most suited funding sources – public and private, multilateral, bilateral, and national – to implement
    the different actions proposed, including mainstreaming REDD+ into national policies and
    programs). The AF will fund the development of a Safeguards Information System (SIS) that
    includes real time tracking of environmental and social safeguards issues, including the preparation
    and implementation of the site specific safeguards instruments during the implementation of the
    REDD+ Strategy. Building on the experience from Cross-River State, the AF will also fund the
    analysis and mapping of multiple (non-carbon) benefits with the aim of providing information on key

1
  Additional to Cross-River, Nasarawa, Ondo which have benefitted from UN-REDD funding and the initial FCPF
grant of US$ 3.8 million.
2
  Cross-River, Nasarawa, Ondo and three additional states to be determined.
quantitative and qualitative variables about the impact of REDD+ activities on rural livelihoods,
conservation of biodiversity, ecosystem services provision, among others.

Component 3. Forests Reference Emissions Level – FREL (US$1,080,000):
The objective of this component is to develop Nigeria’s national FREL taking into account the
national circumstances and UNFCCC guidance. The AF will update and strengthen the FREL by
enhancing the sampling of the forest inventory and continue to reinforce capacities at national level.
Building on this, the AF will support the development and operationalization of a National Forest
Monitoring System (NFMS), including the associated software, as well as capacity strengthening and
training needs.

Component 4. Enhance Stakeholder Engagement, Communication, Consultation and
Feedback for REDD+ Readiness Process (US$1,378,000):
The objective of this component is to ensure broad stakeholder engagement in the REDD+ process,
support communication on REDD+, conduct consultations on specific issues related to REDD+
Readiness process, and design and establish a feedback and grievance redress mechanism. The AF
will deepen engagements with all levels of stakeholders to ensure the future implementation of the
National REDD+ Strategy. This would entail reinforcing existing structures (National and State-level
Stakeholder Forums) and focusing on engaging forest-dependent communities with a view to
supporting them to establish networks of communities for fostering the sharing of experience and
lessons. At the community level, there will be a focus on addressing gender gaps. In addition, the AF
will support engagement with government at the policy and technical levels with a view to
establishing institutional linkages for the implementation of REDD+, as well as engagement with
other stakeholder groups such as civil society, media, and the private sector. The AF will support the
organization of these meetings and related capacity strengthening to enhance the participation of
these stakeholders in the REDD+ process, engaging them in the different deliverables of the AF. In
the three new States to be selected, REDD+ Stakeholder Forums will also be established. This is an
innovation that has demonstrated to increase ownership based on the experience of Cross-River
State. Building on the analytical work done with regards to the Feedback and Grievance Redress
Mechanism (FGRM), the AF will support its establishment.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in Nigeria do not
include the implementation of REDD+ physical investments on the ground. The FCPF support is
limited to technical assistance (analytical studies, capacity building, training and consultations and
awareness raising activities at the national and sub-national levels). In future, once the REDD+
strategy is implemented, REDD+ might potentially include physical investments on the ground but
this would be beyond the scope of this Project.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The institutional arrangements for the implementation of the additional grant will continue relative to
the ongoing project. The project is being implemented by the Federal Ministry of Environment
(FME), with the National REDD+ Secretariat in the Forestry Department being responsible for the
day-to-day operation.
The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects.
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the project. In Nigeria, the FME is responsible for
setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with national
environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices in every region of the
country. An experienced team exists inside this ministry that deals with the national environmental
issues in their daily work. Further, safeguards specialists in the World Bank team will provide
additional guidance to the Borrower's team and the Bank task team.

The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national REDD+ Readiness
process is being led by the National REDD+ Secretariat and carried out through inclusive
consultations and in close coordination with other analytical studies / processes. The exercise is
being directly supervised by the SESA Working Group and the National Technical Committee on
REDD+. The SESA will enable the integration of key environmental and social considerations into
the REDD+ Strategy and the development of the relevant safeguards instruments (Environmental and
Social Management Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework and Process Framework). These
would provide the framework for guiding the implementation of the REDD+ Strategy. The SESA is
building upon existing knowledge and institutions that currently carry out similar studies to inform
strategic, sectoral planning or other relevant impact assessments, where relevant. It is expected that
the SESA will help to identify the most relevant stakeholders and the priority areas for institutional
strengthening to ensure that the REDD+ strategy would be implemented in a socially and
environmentally sound manner. The SESA and the development of the safeguards instruments are
being conducted in a participatory manner and would be subjected to a national validation workshop.
The safeguards policies triggered by this AF is the same as those applicable to the original project. In
addition, the scope and envisaged potential environmental and social impacts are materially
consistent with those of the original project.

The future implementation of REDD+ may involve changes to the legal and policy framework on
forests and on the sectors driving deforestation (agriculture, energy), the implementation of activities
in the forest sector (enhance afforestation/reforestation/agroforestry and enhancing Protected Area
systems), the implementation of activities in the agriculture sector (agricultural intensification,
promoting extension services for sustainable agriculture and developing sustainable livestock
ranching systems) and the implementation of activities in the energy sector (establishing sustainable
fuelwood lots, promoting fuel-efficient technology such as efficient cookstoves and promoting the
use alternative sources of energy such as biogas/biofuel). The main anticipated environmental and
social risks identified for the future implementation of REDD+ are summarized by Safeguard Policy
in Section II.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Michael Ilesanmi (Social Development Specialist, GSU20)
Elijah Abiodun Siakpere (Social Development Specialist, GSU20)
Lucky Erhaze (Environmental Specialist, GEN07)

Joseph Ese Akpokodje (Senior Environmental Specialist, GEN07)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY1
    Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment      Yes              The expected impact from the future
    OP/BP 4.01                                     implementation of REDD+ activities is not
                                                   expected to have adverse environmental impact
                                                   and is assigned as EA Category “B” according to
                                                   WB safeguards policy requirements. Impacts
                                                   would mostly be site specific, reversible and can
                                                   easily be avoided or managed as the project aims to
                                                   reduce emissions and deforestation from
                                                   subsistence and commercial agriculture through
                                                   adoption of good agricultural practices that
                                                   mitigate carbon emissions.

                                                   REDD+ activities trigger the Environmental
                                                   Assessment OP Policy given that the
                                                   intensification of agricultural practices could lead
                                                   to intensive use of agricultural inputs (such as
                                                   inorganic fertilizers) that could lead to pollution.
                                                   Further, they could lead to erosion and other
                                                   ecological problems due to land intensification.

                                                   The borrower will prepare an Environmental and
                                                   Social Management Framework (ESMF) which
                                                   will be disclosed locally and on the World Bank’s
                                                   external website in accordance with Bank
                                                   requirements, alongside the REDD+ Strategy.

                                                   The ESMF will include Environmental and Social
                                                   Management Plans (EMSPs), methods and
                                                   procedures, along with appropriate institutional
                                                   arrangements     for   screening,    reviewing,
                                                   implementing, and monitoring specific ESAs to
                                                   prevent adverse impacts, as well as cumulative
                                                   impacts.




1
 General WBG’s EHS Guidelines:
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/554e8d80488658e4b76af76a6515bb18/Final+-
+General+EHS+Guidelines.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   REDD+ activities trigger the Natural Habitats OP
                                    Policy given that the creation of a new Protected
                                    Area (PA) in different ecosystems could lead to
                                    mono specific exotic tree plantings which may alter
                                    the natural vegetation and result in loss of
                                    biodiversity. In addition, tree seedlings may
                                    potentially invade the adjacent vegetation. Finally,
                                    monoculture in fuelwood lots particularly on fast-
                                    growing trees can lead to loss of ecosystem services.

                                    The ESMFs will address issues related to natural
                                    habitats and potential impacts of the National
                                    REDD+ Strategy, which will later be included in the
                                    national ESMF; issues specific to the CRS will also
                                    be covered in the CRS ESMF.

Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   REDD+ activities trigger the Forest OP/BP 4.36
                                    given that activities to restore degraded forest areas
                                    through Assisted Natural Regeneration (ANR) and
                                    reforestation/ afforestation programs may lead to
                                    plantation tree seedling invading the adjacent forest.
                                    Further, the high cost of alternatives to fuelwood
                                    may encourage continuous degradation of forests.
                                    Restricted access to forest resources may also result
                                    in illegal activities which may trigger deforestation
                                    further. Finally, corruption, outdated laws and
                                    policy, cultural attachment and changes to the
                                    traditional system of land tenure could also increase
                                    deforestation.

                                    ESMFs are currently been prepared and will reflect
                                    the requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy
                                    regarding forest management, in particular as these
                                    relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   REDD+ activities trigger the Pest Management OP
                                    policy given that the future implementation of
                                    REDD+ activities could result in the restoration of
                                    degraded forest areas through Assisted Natural
                                    Regeneration (ANR) and afforestation/reforestation
                                    programs. Further, forest management            and
                                    conservation practices may involve the use of
                                    pesticides. The ESMF will contain a section on
                                    Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) that
                                    would elaborate on what actions need to be
                                    undertaken to minimize environmental, health and
                                    safety impacts.
Physical Cultural Resources    Yes    REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented in
OP/BP 4.11                            areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
                                      resources by rural communities living there (e.g.
                                      holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
                                      forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                      project will have negative impacts on any such sites,
                                      the SESA will address issues related to physical
                                      cultural resources and potential impacts of the
                                      National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
                                      included in the national ESMF. Similarly, the CRS
                                      ESMF will address issues related to the CRS
                                      REDD+ Strategy.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No     There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10                                  The SESA will, however, take into account the
                                      interests of all relevant stakeholders, in particular,
                                      vulnerable populations, to mitigate the risk of social
                                      exclusion of landless and vulnerable groups in the
                                      future implementation of REDD+, and consult with
                                      them adequately, ensuring that they participate in,
                                      and benefit from REDD+ activities.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes    REDD+ activities trigger the Involuntary
BP 4.12                               Resettlement OP policy given that, with the future
                                      implementation of the National REDD+ Strategy,
                                      restrictions of access to legally designated parks,
                                      protected areas, or forest management / reforestation
                                      areas may be introduced. Furthermore, conflicts may
                                      ensue from enforcement and sanctions pertaining to
                                      the future implementation of REDD+. The policy
                                      aims to avoid resettlement to the extent feasible, or
                                      to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and
                                      economic impacts in cases where resettlement or
                                      other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. A
                                      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is currently
                                      under      preparation. The RPF will describe the
                                      process and methods for carrying out resettlement
                                      under the future implementation of the National
                                      REDD+        Strategy,    including   compensation,
                                      relocation and rehabilitation of potential Affected
                                      Persons. With regard to restrictions on access to
                                      protected areas, parks, forest concessions, etc., a
                                      Process Framework (PF) is also being prepared as
                                      well.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    N/A

Projects on International      No    N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         N/A
    BP 7.60
General WBG’s EHS Guidelines-
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/554e8d80488658e4b76af76a6515bb18/Final+-
+General+EHS+Guidelines.pdf?MOD=AJPERES



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
   A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: N/A
   B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
      The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
      The SESA is currently ongoing, upon which the safeguards instruments (an ESMF, RPF, PF) will
      be developed. Building on this, the additional grant will fund the development of a Safeguards
      Information System (SIS) to report on how safeguards are being addressed and respected during the
      implementation of the REDD+ Strategy including stakeholders’ engagement.

IV. APPROVALS
         Task Team Leader(s):                            Name: Amos Abu; Mirko Serkovic

         Approved By:

         Regional Safeguards                             Name: Maman-Sani Issa (RSA)                                                                       Date: April 4, 2018
         Coordinator:
         Practice Manager:                               Name: Maria Sarraf (Acting PM)                                                                    Date: September 15,
                                                                                                                                                           2018
         OPSOR ESSAT                                                                                                                                       Date: October 22,
                                                                                                                                                           2018




111
       Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and
in a    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
