Page  1
-
1
-
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
Report No.:  43486 
 
Date ISDS Updated: 05/03/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P090104 
Project Name: Nigeria National Energy Development Project 
Task Team Leader: S. Vijay Iyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P); Privatization (S);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
172.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
180.00 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
1. 
On a broader level, the project
 will contribute to the country뭩 goals of improving service 
delivery for socio-economic services and creating opportunities for growth.  The outcomes more 
specifically will be transmission efficiency improvements; better quality of electricity supply and 
improved customer service in certain clusters where impact can be monitored; and increased 
access to electricity in pilot areas.  On reforms, the expectation is to see the emergence of 
stronger unbundled companies; emerging policy and regulatory institutions; and the design of 
workable models for increased private sector and community participation in all aspects of the 
electricity business.  
 
2. 
The strategy being adopted to improve the sector presents opportunities to reduce 
emissions of carbon dioxide and other related greenhouse gases through the reduction of 
distribution losses from encouraging efficient gas-fired generation in an oil-dominated thermal 
grid; from improved transmission efficiency and O & M; and from certain renewable energy 
investments such as hydro and solar.  This would open up possibilities for carbon financing 
Page  2
-
2
-
mechanisms.  A Renewable Energy component is proposed 
to be added under the President뭩 
Renewable Energy Program mandate with possible GEF funding.   
 
C.  Project Description 
 
3. 
The Project envisages three main investment components: (i) strengthening transmission 
systems and developing greater reliability of bulk power supply; (ii) expanding CREST-based 
distribution initiatives; and (iii) demonstrating electricity access models for intensification and 
extension, including renewable energy, where economically feasible.  The value of the 
investment component will be approximately US$169 million, of which 96% is to be financed by 
IDA and GEF resources. The technical assistance component (approximately US$11 million) 
will extend support to reforms in the electricity sector, regulatory strengthening, facilitate private 
participation in cluster distribution projects, and assist with the design of risk mitigation 
instruments that may be offered to the private sector to ensure financial viability of their 
participation in the electricity distribution business.  In terms of technical assistance support to 
the gas sector, the project is also likely to finance a feasibility study for the Trans Nigeria gas 
pipeline.  The terms of reference for the gas pipeline feasibility study will include the preparation 
of a scoping report for a preliminary Environmental Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan. 
 
4. 
Project implementation of investment components is proposed to be carried out through 
the Project Management Unit (PMU), using the capacity created under the ongoing Transmission 
Development Project.  The environmental management capacity within the Project Management 
Unit (ERSU) is proposed to be strengthened through additional staffing and training.  This will 
provide increased capacity to implement the action plans for the safeguards policies which may 
be triggered during the course of implementation of investments in the electricity sector.  An 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) have been prepared.   These have been reviewed and are consistent with the 
Bank뭩 safeguard policies.  In addition, the Bank뭩 Health and Safety Guidelines applicable to 
this project are Electric Power Transmission and Distribution, Occupational Health and Safety; 
and Management and Monitoring of Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).  These will be provided 
to the Project Management Unit that will be responsible for implementation. 
 
5. 
Possible adverse impacts and proposed mitigation measures that have been identified in 
the ESMF include, among others, exposure to PCBs during construction, damage to cultural 
property, and loss of assets due to re-establishing the safety margin between power lines and 
structures (involuntary resettlement).  The relevant plans and proposed mitigation measures have 
been provided to the Bank by the Government and have been publicly disclosed in Nigeria. 
 
6.  
Options can be explored in due course to locate this Project Management Unit that will 
be strengthened and will evolve into the Corporate Planning and Strategy Unit, either (i) within 
the Ministry of Power and Steel to function as a planning, implementation and monitoring unit 
for the entire sector, or (ii) to set it up as a stand alone company that provides a broad range of 
process support to the NEPA-successor entities and other key players in the sector, on a fee-
based system.   
 
Page  3
-
3
-
D.  Project location 
 
7. 
The Project will be implemented in different clusters spread over the entire country, but 
will be by definition limited to the areas that are currently served by the electricity network 
(except pilot access expansion and intensification sub-projects including renewable energy). The 
Project strategy is to make investments to achieve measurable impacts in targeted areas. The 
CREST program and related investments would be implemented in such areas or clusters 
benefiting a group of customers that are served by an electrically demarcated distribution and sub 
transmission network. Investments in the distribution sub sector would be coordinated with those 
in transmission sector so as to ease transmission congestion to these clusters. Hence measurable 
and tangible improvements would be achieved over a pre-determined baseline in these clusters in 
terms of improved distribution efficiency and revenues, reduced losses and enhanced customer 
satisfaction in terms of quality of supply, reduced fault-redress times, and reduced billing 
complaints.  The specific locations of these clusters are not known, but these will be within the 
territory of each of the eleven distribution companies.   
 
E.  Borrower뭩 Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
8. 
Nigeria and NEPA have established environmental regulations to handle the expected 
impacts from the proposed Project.  An Environmental Assessment and Environmental Policy 
Framework was prepared for the ongoing Nigeria Power Transmission Development Project, and 
publicly disclosed on February 7th, 2001.  This framework is being applied for implementation 
of all the Project components, which are quite similar to the ones proposed under this Project.  
Based on this assessment, an updated Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) 
template has been prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal, both at the Info-Shop and in-
country.  During the assessment carried out for ESMF and RPF it was established that the 
existing Pr
oject Management Unit뭩 capacity will need to be strengthened by the addition of staff 
and training, in order to bring its capacity in line with the current safeguard guidelines as well as 
the Bank뭩 latest health and occupational safety guidelines for the electric power sector.  An 
assessment of the institutional capacity was also made, and the Project has been revised to 
include funding for the assistance required to upgrade/strengthen the capacity of the 
Environment, Social and Resettlement Unit (ERSU) within the Project Management Unit.   
 
In addition, following the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework, 
the Project will now also include a dedicated budget of (USD 1 million) to address the issue of 
management of PCBs, in case a Phase 2 Environmental Audit identifies the need for waste-
disposal facilities for PCB-contaminated waste resulting from activities undertaken for this 
project.  The Resettlement Policy Framework indicates that the project would provide support to 
the relevant distribution company or transmission company if needed, to provide compensation 
for involuntary resettlement in line with the eligibility criteria that have been specified in the 
policy guidelines.  The Bank Team was assisted during appraisal by an Environmental Specialist 
located in the Abuja Office of the World Bank.  These will be part of project costs and financing 
(up to US$1 million) will be provided on a case by case basis.  
 
Page  4
-
4
-
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy would be triggered in respect of impacts arising from construction of new and/or 
rehabilitation of existing electrical installations, noise impacts, health and safety issues arising 
from rehabilitation and replacement of old electrical equipment, and site contamination issues.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No land acquisition or major new lines/installations are expected to be financed under the 
project.  However,  minor relocation or use of land for new low and medium voltage lines may 
take place.  For this reason, OP/BP 4.12 related to Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered 
and a Resettlement Policy Framework prepared..   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/27/2005.  This has been concluded. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Both safeguard related studies have been completed and publicly disclosed through the Info 
Shop (April 25, 2005) and in Nigeria (April 26, 2005).  The revised Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), 
after incorporating changes during appraisal, are being reposted at the Bank뭩 Info Shop, and 
in-country, both through a website and in newspapers locally.  
 
The scope of the work already completed is summarized below.  
 

Review the implementation experience of the current framework for the ongoing 
TDP: to what extent has it been used to assess impacts of sub-projects, prepare and 
implement mitigation management plans and reporting of compliance.  The 
assessment includes visits to 1-2 sites of sub-projects to make an on the spot 
assessment of the effectiveness of the procedures defined in the ESMF. Since the 
RPF has not been applied, one cannot assess its effectiveness on the ground, but if 
Page  5
-
5
-
there are any situations in which it appears that it should have been applied and was 
not, this has been noted;  
 

In view of the proposed project componen
ts, determine which of the Bank뭩 ten 
Safeguard Policies are likely to be triggered. Based on this information and the 
review results of the existing framework, the work would; (i) identify likely impacts; 
(ii) determine how these impacts may differ from the impacts of the sub-projects 
under the TDP; (iii) determine the gaps in the existing framework that could constrain 
compliance with Safeguard Policies; and (iv) make recommendations on revisions 
required in the framework to address these gaps, if any.  
 

Based on the results of the two points above, prepare a revised Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF). The RPF was reviewed and cleared by ASPEN team. 
 

A
capacity assessment of the PMU (and its ERSU) to determine its capability to 
apply and monitor the results of the ESMF and RPF (and sub-project EMPs and 
RAPs, as appropriate) will be made.  Recommendations are to be made in respect of 
capacity building needs, including related training needs and costs.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
05/04/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton/ Mr. Mohamed Arbi-
Ben-Achour 
05/04/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Yusupha B. Crookes 
05/04/2005 
Comments:   
wb10286 
C:\Temp\NEDP\ISDS-PAD-Final-5-4-05.doc 
05/04/2005 1:33:00 PM
 
