Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1453 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/04/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P090104 
Project Name: Nigeria National Electricity Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Subramaniam V. Iyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);State enterprise/bank 
restructuring and privatization (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
110.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
93.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.00
103.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
On a broader level, the project will contribute to the country?s goals of improving service 
delivery for socio-economic services and creating opportunities for growth.  The outcomes more 
specifically will be efficiency improvements, increased access to electricity and better quality of 
electricity supply in certain clusters.  On reforms, the expectation is to see the emergence of 
stronger unbundled companies and policy and regulatory institutions and increased private sector 
and community participation in all aspects of the electricity business.  
 
2. 
The strategy being adopted to improve the sector presents opportunities to reduce 
emissions of carbon dioxide and other related greenhouse gases through the reduction of 
distribution losses, from encouraging efficient gas-fired generation in an oil-dominated thermal 
grid, from improved transmission efficiency and O & M and from certain renewable energy 
investments such as hydro and solar.  This would open up possibilities for carbon financing 
mechanisms.  A Renewable Energy component is proposed to be added under the President?s 
Renewable Energy Program mandate with possible GEF funding.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3. 
The Project envisages three main investment components: (i) strengthening transmission 
systems and developing greater reliability of bulk power supply; (ii) expanding CREST-based 
distribution initiatives to clusters in all 11 distribution company areas; and (iii) demonstrating 
electricity access models for intensification and extension, including renewable energy, where 
economically feasible.The value of the investment component will be approximately US$200 
million, of which nearly 50 percent is proposed to be financed by IDA and GEF resources. The 
technical assistance component (approximately US$10 million) will extend support to reforms in 
the electricity and gas sectors, regulatory strengthening, facilitate private participation in cluster 
generation and distribution projects and design of risk mitigation instruments.  
 
4. 
Project implementation is proposed to be carried out through a coordinated Corporate 
Planning and Strategy Unit (CPSU) arrangement, using the capacity created under the ongoing 
Transmission Development Project.  It is proposed to integrate the ongoing Project?s 
Management Unit into the Corporate Planning and Strategy Unit to be housed in the 
NEPA/Initial Holding Company for the time being.  Options can be explored in due course to 
locate this within the Ministry of Power and Steel to function as a planning, implementation and 
monitoring unit for the entire sector or setting it up as a stand alone company that provides a 
broad range of support in the same areas to the NEPA-successor entities on a fee-based system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
5. 
The Project will be implemented in different clusters spread over the entire country, but 
would be by definition limited to the areas that are currently served by the electricity network 
(except pilot access extension and expansion sub-projects). The Project strategy is to make 
investments to achieve measurable impacts in targeted areas. Such areas or clusters would be a 
group of customers that are served by an electrically demarcated distribution and sub 
transmission network. The CREST program and related investments would be implemented in 
these clusters to create ?islands of excellence?. Investments in distribution sub sector would be 
coordinated with those in transmission sector so as to ease transmission congestion to these 
clusters. Hence measurable and tangible improvements would be achieved over a pre-determined 
baseline in these clusters in terms of improved distribution efficiency and revenues, reduced 
losses and enhanced customer satisfaction in terms of quality of supply, reduced fault-redress 
times, and reduced billing complaints.  The specific location of these clusters are not known, but 
these will be within the territory of each of the eleven distribution companies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
6. 
Nigeria and NEPA have well established environmental regulations to handle the 
expected impacts from the proposed Project.  An Environmental Assessment and Environmental 
Policy Framework was prepared for the ongoing Nigeria Power Transmission Development 
Project, and publicly disclosed on February 7th, 2001.  This framework is being applied for 
implementation of all the Project components, which are quite similar to the ones proposed under 
this Project.  The existing Project Management Unit has the necessary capacity to apply the 
framework. However, during preparation of this project, an evaluation of the experience of the 
above framework will be carried out prior to appraisal and the results, as well as, any proposed 
changes needed to bring it in line with the current safeguard guidelines.  An assessment of the 
Page  3
institutional capacity will also be made, and the Project will include any assistance required to 
upgrade/strengthen the capacity shortcomings, if any.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy would be triggered in respect of impacts arising from construction of new and/or 
rehabilitation of existing electrical installations, noise impacts, health and safety issues arising 
from rehabilitation and replacement of old electrical equipment, and site contamination issues.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The second policy is unlikely to be triggered in any significant way as no land acquisition or 
major new lines/installations are expected to be financed under the project.  Some minor 
relocation or use of land for new low and medium voltage lines may be involved.  Nigeria and 
NEPA have well established environmental regulations to handle these impacts.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/23/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
specific mission is in the field to undertake safeguard related assessments and prepare a 
revised Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF and the RPF will be disclosed as separate 
documents.  The scope of the work is summarized below.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
(a) 
Review the implementation experience of the current framework for the TDP ? to 
what extent has it been used to assess impacts of sub-projects, prepare and implement 
mitigation management plans and reporting of compliance.  The assessment would include 
visits to 1-2 sites of sub-projects to make an on the spot assessment of the effectiveness of 
the procedures defined in the ESMF. Since the RPF has not been applied, one cannot assess 
its effectiveness on the ground, but situations in which it appears that it should have been 
applied and was not should be noted;  
 
(b) 
In view of the proposed project components, determine which of the Bank?s ten 
Safeguard Policies are likely to be triggered. Based on this information and the review results 
of the existing framework, the work would; (i) identify likely impacts; (ii) determine how 
these impacts may differ from the impacts of the sub-projects under the TDP; (iii) determine 
the gaps in the existing framework that could constrain compliance with Safeguard Policies; 
and (iv) make recommendations on revisions required in the framework to address these 
gaps, if any.  
 
(c) 
Based on the results of (a) and (b) above, prepare a revised Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). 
The revised RPF would take into account any changes in the operational policy for 
involuntary resettlement.  Operational Directive 4.30 was the governing policy when the RPF 
for TDP was written, but it was replaced by OP 4.12 which became effective in January 2002 
and is the policy that applies to the Nigeria Energy Development Project.  
 
(d) 
A capacity assessment of the PMU (and its ERSU) to determine its capability to 
apply and monitor the results of the ESMF and RPF (and sub-project EMPs and RAPs, as 
appropriate) will be made.  Recommendations are to be made in respect of capacity building 
needs, including related training needs and costs.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
03/31/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/31/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Yusupha B. Crookes 
03/31/2005 
Comments:   
