                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC578
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/06/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: OECS COUNTRIES                                        Project ID: P073267
Project: OECS Protected Areas and Associated                   Task Team Leader: Garry Charlier
Alternative Livelihood
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 17, 2004                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: May 20, 2004                                    IDA Amount ($m):
                                                               Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 3.70
Managing Unit: LCSEN                                           Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Lending Instrument: UNIDENTIFIED (??)                          Theme: Biodiversity (P); Rural non-farm income
Status: Lending                                                generation (S); Participation and civic engagement
                                                               (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the project is to strengthen national and regional capacities in the sound
management of protected areas (PAs) in support of the sustainable economic development of Small Island
Developing States SIDS in the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) sub-region through: (i)
the strengthening of existing and creation of new protected areas (PAs); and (ii) providing environmentally
sustainable economic opportunities for communities living in the surrounding areas. This will be
accomplished by supporting the following activities: (i) improving the relevant legal, policy and
institutional arrangements (collectively termed institutional framework) in the participating OECS
countries; (ii) establishing or strengthening a number of pilot PAs including providing support for the
development of new and alternative livelihoods for communities living in proximity to these sites; and (iii)
improving institutional capacity to manage PAs in the region. The principal project outcomes will be: (i)
common, updated and comprehensive institutional frameworks supporting national systems of protected
areas; (ii) establishment of new or strengthening of existing pilot PAs; (iii) development and enhancement
of environmentally compatible economic opportunities in communities associated with the proposed PAs;
and (iv) increased public awareness of the importance of biodiversity conservation and protected area
management in the sustainable economic development of SIDS.

The global objective of the project is to contribute to the conservation of biodiversity of global importance
in the OECS region by removing barriers to the effective management of PAs, and to increase the
involvement of civil society and the private sector in the planning, management and sustainable use of these
areas.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project will have four components (summarized below). Total project cost is estimated at US$7.6
million equivalent (including contingencies). In addition to the OECS', the Participating Member States'
and the beneficiary communities' contribution of about US$1.88 million, GEF would finance about US$3.7
million; the other cofinanciers of the project will be the French FFEM ("Fonds Français de l'Environnement
Mondiale") for about US$1.64 million equivalent, and the OAS (Organization of American States) for
about US$0.35 million.

                                                         2
                                                                                                           ISDS


Component 1: PAs Policy, Legal and Institutional Arrangements Reform ($1.0M)

Component 2: Protected Areas Management and Associated Sustainable Alternative Livelihoods ($3.6M)

Component 3: Building Capacity for Biodiversity Conservation and PA Management and Increasing
Awareness ($0.8M)

Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation and Information Dissemination ($2.2M)




I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The project area of coverage will be located within the territories of the six Participating Member States of
the OECS (namely: Antigua and Barbuda, the Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and
Nevis, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines). The Eastern Caribbean region is characterized
by a rich biodiversity endowment, which, in combination with its isolation within the Caribbean Sea, has
resulted in relatively high rates of national and regional endemism. In addition to exhibiting differing
degrees of endemism, the islands of the region also provide habitat and nesting sites for non-endemic
migratory marine mammals, turtles and avian species. One recent survey of the world's biodiversity
hotspots identified the Caribbean as the fifth ranking "hotspot" and one of the highest priorities in any
global strategy for biodiversity conservation and sustainable management.In a second study based on
faunal distributions, the Eastern Caribbean region was classified as a unique marine eco-region of the
tropical northwestern Atlantic province and ranked as the highest priority within the province, in terms of
its conservation status (most threatened). The principal ecosystems are dry and humid tropical forests,
wetlands and tidal flats, sandy and rocky beaches, coral reefs, seagrass beds, mangroves, offshore islets, as
well extensive karst and volcanic areas with their distinct biodiversity associations. The reef, seagrass and
mangrove systems of this area are recognized as among the most productive in the world.

For the three preselected pilots, site specific participatory social assessments were carried out, including for
(i) Point Sable, St. Lucia; (ii) Tobago Cays, St. Vincent and the Grenadines; and (iii) North Sound Islands,
Antigua and Barbuda. Current information indicates they include one archeological find, and possibly
historical sites.

With respect to Point Sable site (St. Lucia) the populations nearby that are or would be potentially affected
by the proposed protected area comprise a total of six communities with about 14,000 people in the vicinity
of the town of Vieux Fort.        The communities have access to schools, hospitals and health centers.
Permanent human population within the PA is negligible. While the aforementioned communities are
located outside the limits of the proposed protected area, natural resource uses are many and competing
including timber harvesting for charcoal production, fishing, crab hunting, sea moss cultivation, community
based tourism, agricultural production, and recreational activities. The major natural resource users in the
region are: charcoal producers; fishermen (some of whom are involved in crab hunting and sea egg
cultivation); sea moss farmers in the Savanne Bay area; watersports users (scuba divers/snorklers);
livestock farmers; and restaurateurs. Local stakeholders consulted included community representatives and
pertinent government agencies (e.g. Forestry Department, Fisheries Department and others). The main local
concerns highlighted by the social assessment in relation to the proposed protected area included interests in

                                                         3
                                                                                                           ISDS


ensuring local involvement in co-management of the proposed protected area; protecting the mangroves;
ensuring livelihoods from charcoal production, sea moss cultivation and fishing; and promoting recreational
uses in the area and eco-tourism. There appears to be a high level of local support for the proposed PA.

With respect to the Tobago Cays site (St. Vincent and the Grenadines) the proposed PA includes five
uninhabited islands and the island of Mayreau. Most of the population of about 3,000 persons that reside in
the Grenadines live on Union island which is the administrative center and the conduit for daily excursions
to the Tobago Cays, Mayreau, and Palm Island. The tourism industry is the main source of income, as well
as small-scale subsistence agriculture, some fishing which is declining and construction. Direct natural
resource users of the PA include fishermen who dive for lobsters and conch and indirect users are primarily
ship peddlers or boat boys (who sell provisions to boats). Other indirect users are local craftspeople and
souvenir peddlers. There are also expatriate resource users and these include: yacht operators of which
3,000 anchor in the lagoon; day-charters which are organized and operated mainly by foreign nationals to
Palm Island, Mayreau and the Tobago Cays; and cruise ships. Local stakeholders consulted included a
broad cross-section of inhabitants and users from representatives of the Mayreau Environmental
Development Board and Tobago Cays Marin Park Board to yacht owners and dive operators to fishermen
and boat taxi operators, among others. The main local concerns highlighted by the social assessment in
relation to the proposed protected area included interests in protecting and regulating the Cays and its reefs
as well interest in demarcation, zoning, user fees, and education and training on the ecological and
economic values of the natural resources; earning livelihoods from the use of the Cays; vendoring;
enhancing the water taxi (boat boy) business and reducing conflicts between yachts and taxis and between
taxis; conducting day-tours to the Cays; reducing illegal fishing by locals and visitors (such as spear fishing
or off-season); managing liquid wastes and garbage; and recreational uses.

With respect to the North Sound Islands site (Antigua and Barbuda), the proposed PA is comprised of six
uninhabited islands though these are widely used to support tourism, and tourist-related activities, fisheries
and local recreational activities. The communities on mainland Antigua, with a total of about 2,000
persons, within a few kilometers of the PA are the most intensive users. Key features of natural resource
use include diving, anchorage, fishing (mainly recreational), bathing, swimming, snorkeling, picnics, and
day tours. It is estimated the area is used annually by some 20,000 visitors (tourists and locals). Among
human pressures on the environment, current fishing practices are placing too much pressure on
near-shores stocks, and anchoring by tour operators and ghost traps are taking a toll on the coral reefs.
Recreational activities on island beaches are another major source of environmental stress. Local
stakeholders consulted included a broad cross-section of stakeholders from representatives of the National
Parks Authority, Fisheries Division and Forestry Division to fishermen, tour operators, recreational users
and the private sector, among others. The social assessment clearly identified a high level of interest and
commitment to the proposed PA. The main concerns highlighted included need to: protect the reefs from
damage (such as from anchors, divers, snorkelers and fish pots); implement a protected area (including,
among others, demarcation buoys, new signage, employment of a park warden, better law enforcement and
establishing user fees); control illegal types of fishing (though fishing grounds are mostly outside the
proposed park); and improve management of solid and liquid wastes. There were also interests expressed
in alternative livelihood options, specialized training, and recreational uses.



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:

                                                        4
                                                                                                            ISDS


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment. In accordance with OP 4.01, an Environmental Assessment (EA) was
consulted during the participatory site specific EA with diverse stakeholders (described in more detail in
I.A.4); during a broad stakeholder workshop held in November 2003; and publicly disseminated for further
comments on ESDU's web site. This EA identifies potential direct and indirect environmental impacts
associated with the project and incorporate relevant mitigation measures in the project's design and
implementation. The project will be largely positive or neutral from an environmental standpoint and few of
the proposed activities are likely to have adverse impacts. Examples include site-specific impacts
associated with small-scale PA infrastructure (e.g., visitor centers, control posts, trails etc.) and impacts
associated with changing livelihood practices (e.g., certain extractive practices or changes in land use). In
both cases, environmental impacts are expected to be localized and preventable through responsive
mitigation measures. Given the "demand-driven" nature of the project, some specific areas and
respective project interventions will not be confirmed until project implementation (primarily as
related to Component 2: Protected Areas Management and Associated Sustainable Alternative Livelihoods
). In response, an environmental management plan (EMP) has been developed which will ensure
that potential future adverse impacts will be identified and addressed through one or more
environmental safeguards which also have been incorporated into the project design.

Cultural Property. The three pre-selected protected areas to be supported under the project include several
historical sites and one includes small archeological findings. Future sites to be supported may also be
found to include culturally important or historical or archeological sites. The management plans to be
developed for all protected areas under the project would include regulations and procedures for the
appropriate protection and preservation of these cultural properties consistent with Operational Policy Note
11.03.

Involuntary Resettlement. In accordance with OP/BP 4.12, the Process Framework for the project was
consulted during the participatory site specific social assessments with diverse stakeholders (described in
more detail in I.A.4); during a broad stakeholder workshop held in November 2003; and publicly

                                                       5
                                                                                                           ISDS


disseminated for further comments on ESDU's web site (see as well summary description of stakeholders in
II.D. 4). The project will not involve or affect indigenous people, and will not cause involuntary physical
resettlement in the selected protected areas to be supported. However, some livelihood activities could
potentially be impacted due, for example, to new limitations on fishing in some areas through zoning,
imposing limits on fish catches or restricting certain types of fishing and agricultural practices in
ecologically sensitive areas. It should be noted that some use restrictions currently exist "on paper" in the
proposed areas but are not regularly enforced because of capacity issues. In accordance with OP 4.12, a
Process Framework has been developed that outlines the criteria and procedures that the project will follow
to ensure that eligible, affected persons are assisted in their efforts to restore or improve their livelihoods
(under Component 2) in a manner that maintains the environmental integrity of the proposed PAs. These
criteria and procedures would be detailed in the management plans to be developed for each PA supported
by the project and in the operational manual. In all such cases, the project would address the livelihood
issues of affected populations in a manner which is fair, just, and in accordance with local laws, as well as
consistent with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

The potential long-term environmental impacts are strongly positive, in that current unsustainable use of
sensitive ecosystems will be replaced by activities and management that are designed to promote
biodiversity conservation and compatible economic activities for local residents.


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As described above in Section II D.1a, the EA, EMP, SA and Process Framework prepared by the
Recipient describe the mechanisms to ensure project compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders for the project includes (i) National and Regional public institutions and governmental
agencies; (ii) members of civil society and business community, including NGOs (national and regional)
working on environmental issues; and (iii) in the areas surrounding the proposed protected areas, site-specific
constituencies such as fishermen, farmers, dive operators, tour operators, local associations and others. All of
these groups are already involved in the project. While the project has changed over the course of preparation
from a concept for St. Lucia only to a revised regional proposal for the OECS sub-region, both project concepts
were developed through an extensive series of consultations, meetings, workshops and sites visits over more
that four years involving local, national and regional stakeholders. These stakeholders have also been consulted
for the development of the environmental and social assessment and the process framework through a series of
workshops, meetings, site visits during project preparation. In addition, the Process Framework and
Environmental Assessment have been disclosed for public comment on the ESDU web site. These
stakeholders will continue to be consulted during project implementation, through their involvement in key

                                                       6
                                                                                                           ISDS


project activities and components, as to be reflected in the Project Implementation Plan and annual work plans.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 10/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                             12/22/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                              1/30/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 10/28/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                             12/22/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                              1/30/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Garry Charlier                                        01/05/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Judith Lisansky (Sr. Anthropologist)                  01/20/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Random Dubois (Sr. Env. Specialist)                   01/20/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

                                                7
                                                               ISDS




Approved by:                    Name                 Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan D. Quintero    01/05/2004
Sector Manager/Director          John Redwood        01/05/2004

