                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 96613
Date prepared/updated: 06 May 2015

   I.      Basic Information

                                                 Project ID: P146252
Country: PAKISTAN
                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Indus Eco region Community Livelihood Project (IECLP)
Task Team Leader: Naila Ahmed
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1st 2013 Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: SASDL                           Lending Instrument:         Investment Project
                                               Financing
Sector: South Asia Region: Rural Development & Livelihoods (SASDL)
Theme: Community livelihoods development
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: JSDF Grant of US$2,850,000
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                  Yes [ ]                   No [X]
Simplified Processing                          Simple [X]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises Yes [ ]           No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objective for the proposed project would be to pilot alternative livelihood
opportunities and improve capacity of 5,500 households of fisher communities in four priority
sites of the Indus Eco region namely – Keenjhar Lake; Manchar Lake; Chotiari; and Nara
Canal.

This will be accomplished by: (a) organizing targeted freshwater fisher folk into fisher groups;
(b) introduction of better and sustainable fishing practices; (c) enhancing alternative income
generation opportunities, for youth, women, and disadvantaged groups, through establishing
community based cottage industries; and (d) developing effective and sustainable linkages to
markets and local Government.
3. Project Description:

Component 1: Improvement in fishing practices and establishment of fisher groups (US$
1,543,125)
The objective of this component is to improve the capacity of fisher communities to better
manage their fish resources using appropriate management practices. Fishing is one of the main
sources of livelihoods in the Indus Eco region, which, despite having significant commercial
potential, has not been addressed by the public sector and lacks the necessary infrastructure and
support for fisher communities. This component will address this through the following 3 sub-
components:

          (i)        Sub-component 1 (a): Promoting Better Management Practices through Fisher
                     Sustainability Schools for targeted fishing communities in the four districts
                     (Thatta, Sanghar, Khairpur and Jamshoro) in Better Management Practices (BMP)
                     for freshwater fisheries. This will be achieved by training master trainers based in
                     their respective villages and will facilitate the implementation of different BMPs
                     related activities in collaboration with local activists, by conducting Fisher
                     Sustainability Schools (FSSs) in these villages. Trainings will follow a curriculum
                     covering BMPs for managing different fish species, types of fishing, stock
                     management, how to record fish catch data and how to calculate basic fish stock
                     assessments, water requirements for aquaculture, and integrated resource
                     management. (Although the training shall target fish species, freshwater shrimp
                     may also be covered, adding an advantage for fishers who also sell shrimps as
                     part of their catch). The FSSs will include demonstration areas, a landing site (per
                     area) where they can display BMPs such as pen culture, cage culture, stock
                     management, habitat management, improved landing, fish handling, and
                     processing; Refresher courses will be held for master-trainers, to update them in
                     new innovations and brush up on existing techniques/practices as well as
                     exposure visits to see successful sites in the region.

                     Sub-component 1 (b): Establishment of four fisher groups1 for freshwater water
                     bodies in the Indus Eco region. These will be established at one water body in
                     each district to promote rights based and co-management in the industry. Co-
                     management will be introduced from the start of the project, using past initiatives
                     such as an MoU with the fisheries department for access rights (both legal and
                     physical)2. A bottom-up approach will be employed as fisher folk will be
                     organized at the village level and authorized to select their village representatives
                     who will federate into registered cluster groups with the government so as to
                     become a legal entity. Fishery groups will be formed entirely for marketing
                     purposes to minimize extra expenses, gather market information and adjust
                     exploitation. The fishery groups will be linked to the Area coordination
                     committees (ACCs) to ensure that their needs in terms of facilities (access roads,

1
  Such groups have previously been established under WWF – Pakistan’s Indus for All Program for the agriculture sector.
Neighboring countries such as Bangladesh and India have introduced the concept of fisher groups or cooperatives which have
been successful and we hope to replicate that in Pakistan.
2
   It should be noted that this is based on existing best practices and guaranteeing the laws is outside the scope of this pilot project.
                      ice factories, or alternative practices such as drying, salting etc.) are met and that
                      the water-bodies are protected from pollution and over- or improper exploitation.

            (ii)      Sub-component 1 (c): Establishment of chilling units, ice boxes and packaging
                      units, which will be used to process selected species for direct export, with the
                      support of the Community Based Organizations. There are a number of fish
                      species found in Pakistan, such as the River Sole, that fetch higher prices
                      compared to those being exported from India and Bangladesh. This innovation
                      will rely on the entrepreneurship of local fisheries, with support from the project,
                      fisher groups, and district and provincial governments, to export these species.
                      The emphasis will be on quality rather than quantity, so that fishers may receive
                      more income from a lesser amount of good quality, well preserved fish rather than
                      over-fishing a water body for a larger amount of low grade fish. All in all, 4 large
                      chilling units or freezers and 4 packaging3 units will be installed at landing sites
                      and 200 ice boxes will be distributed to fishermen – which do not require any
                      electricity. A Cost benefit Analysis will be done prior to distributing these four
                      chilling and packaging units – whereby costs, maintenance, ownership and other
                      fees will be taken into consideration to assess its long term feasibility.

Component 2: Promotion of alternative livelihood for women and youth (US$992,950)
This component focuses on facilitating and building capacities for development of alternative
sources of income to address issues related to high dependence on fishing for livelihoods. The
objective of this component is to support women, youth and disadvantaged community members
in particular at the project sites to establish sustainable community based livelihood initiatives
and to strengthen their business operations through the provision of assets and technical
assistance. While this component will target mainly women and youth and the previous one will
target fisher-folks, both components will contribute to living natural resource management,
community organization for livelihoods, and skills development. Mechanisms to identify and
support innovative approaches to help the rural poor organize themselves around livelihood
based businesses will also be supported in this component, and there will be community
contributions in-kind and in cash that will leverage on the projects investments. This component
has three sub-components:

                   (i) Sub-component 2 (a): Organization of targeted communities and
                       Establishment of community based livelihood activities that are based on
                       existing community demands and identified as having a high potential for
                       generating revenues in the local environment. These will include initiatives such
                       as a demand and skill assessment to identify the needs and potential of the target
                       communities, prior to setting up organization and acquiring assets and support
                       for the organization and federation of the targeted poor as well as establishment
                       of: a) Community managed village bakeries; (b) Community based milk groups
                       by organizing milk producers and establishing demonstration shops; (c) Indigo
                       production units for the selling of locally produced 100% natural dye to
                       handicrafts, which will also support local farmers growing indigo plants; and (d)
                       Local ‘recycling groups’ of youth and marginalized community members, who
3
    This would entail setting up an area used to process, prepare and store fish for storage purposes.
                     collect waste, residing in and around large towns such as Sanghar and Thatta.
                     Savings and Internal lending activities will be piloted with a few groups with a
                     view to improve the sustainability of livelihood activities. Prior to this activity
                     commencing a savings and internal lending manual will be developed to ensure
                     that the activity is suited to the context.

                (ii) Sub-component 2 (b): Provision of assets such as Bakery cooking equipment,
                     milk chillers and marketing outlets, indigo seeds and processing units, recycling
                     kits, etc. Indigo production plots and raw materials would be acquired through
                     “sub-grants,? details of which will be outlined in the operations manual and
                     finalized during the appraisal stage. It should be noted that a 15% community
                     contribution4 (e.g. space for shops, cash, labor, as well as provisions for
                     maintenance of assets) towards livelihood activities will be required from
                     community members.

                (iii)Sub-component 2 (c): Capacity building of project beneficiaries to start and
                     sustain alternative livelihood initiatives listed above and to strengthen their
                     business operations through activities such as training in packaging, marketing,
                     book-keeping, savings, value-addition, training master trainers on paper
                     recycling and indigo production which will include growing, processing and
                     marketing of the indigo dye. Providing trainings in producing and marketing to
                     improve the sale of local handmade products, to be marketed as 100% recycled
                     and environmentally friendly paper and products, will also indirectly aid in
                     conserving the environment. Project field staff will also receive capacity building
                     trainings to increase project implementation efficiency.

Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation and Knowledge Dissemination (US$313,925)
As a pilot project, this component will finance a number of learning activities that will allow for
up-scaling of successful approaches as well as facilitate governance, project management,
implementation, conducting a baseline survey, reporting and coordination efforts. It will consist
of the following two sub-components:

          (i)       Sub-component 3 (a): Governance and Project Management: by supporting an
                    effective project management system, through the provision of operating costs,
                    training and technical assistance to strengthen the implementing agencies capacity
                    through technical trainings with regards to new and changing technology, as well
                    as Community Based Organizations (CBOs) regarding Participatory Monitoring.
                    Monitoring visits; Quarterly planning and review meetings; Program Support Unit
                    meetings; and Annual review and networking meetings will also be conducted
                    regularly for ensuring timely and effective implementation, reporting and
                    communications of the project.


4
  WWF-Pakistan has maintained a cost/time-sharing principle in all its projects that target the local community for inculcating a
sense of ownership and ensuring project sustainability. In our experience, communities in these areas have readily agreed to
contribute in kind or through cash and the targeted communities in this project have already been contacted and informed of the
contribution aspect of the project.
         (ii)      Sub-component 3 (b): Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning: which will
                   ensure efficient and thorough monitoring of project activities (both ongoing and
                   post-implementation monitoring), conducting a baseline survey of project
                   households, sharing of lessons learnt through exposure visits and workshops for
                   project beneficiaries; regular reporting on progress and results (against the
                   baseline); conducting research studies on various approaches adopted, monitoring
                   changes in trends in poverty using Poverty Environment indicators; conducting a
                   comprehensive project completion report; and yearly financial audits.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project will focus on four priority sites5 of the Indus Ecoregion, where WWF -Pakistan is
already present and has an understanding of the local communities’ needs and socio-economic
potential. The project will cover an area of 2,168 km2 with at least 187 villages, in the Sindh
Province of Pakistan. The priority areas are: (i) Keenjhar Lake in Thatta District; (ii) Chotiari
Reservoir in Sanghar District; (iii) Nara Canal and surrounding communities in Khairpur
District; and (iv) Manchar Lake and surrounding communities in Jamshoro District.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Javaid Afzal, Environmental Safeguards Specialist, GENDR
Salma Omar. Senior Social Development Specialist, SASSD




5
  All four priority areas are well defined in terms of boundary delineation. At least half of the selected areas are vulnerable to
severe flooding, as has been witnessed during the 2010 and subsequent floods.
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered Triggered          Explanation
(please explain why)
Environmental        Assessment Yes                The project will provide some basic
(OP/BP 4.01)                                       assets like stoves, chillers, indigo
                                                   seeds and processing units, and
                                                   packaging units spread over the
                                                   project area. The potential negative
                                                   impacts can include; introduction of
                                                   non-indigenous species in water
                                                   bodies, ammonia impact from pens,
                                                   conflict among communities, losses
                                                   due to floods and spillage of fuel
                                                   from generators for machinery. The
                                                   project has prepared an ESMF.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)       No             Project sites support important
                                                   natural habitats. However the
                                                   activities under the proposed project
                                                   are not likely to negatively impact
                                                   these habitats. Rather, the proposed
                                                   activities seek to improve the
                                                   fisheries management as well as
                                                   income generation as an incentive for
                                                   protection of the natural resource and
                                                   habitat.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                No             No forests in project area
Pest Management (OP 4.09)           No             No pesticide usage
Physical Cultural Resources         No             No physical resources of cultural
(OP/BP 4.11)                                       value in project area
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)     No             No indigenous communities in the
                                                   area
Involuntary        Resettlement     No             No resettlement or loss of livelihood
(OP/BP 4.12)                                       is expected
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)         No             No dams to be built
Projects    on    International     No             No activity on international
Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             waterways
Projects in Disputed Areas          No             No activity in disputed areas
(OP/BP 7.60)

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project activities are not expected to have any negative environmental impacts. The impacts
associated with the installation of chilling units, indigo dye production and bakery equipment
will be localized, marginal and temporary. Furthermore, the use and promotion of natural Indigo
dye is expected to have a positive impact on the environment since it will replace the chemical
dyes currently being used in the area for traditional fabric printing. The potential negative
impacts can include; introduction of non-indigenous species in water bodies, ammonia impact
from pens, conflict among communities, losses due to floods and spillage of fuel from generators
for machinery.

Social: The Project will establish chillers and packaging facilities to enhance the livelihoods of
fisherfolk. Existing premises will be donated by the community to such initiatives. No land
acquisition and resettlement will take place for such initiatives. Where required, the project will
acquire land through voluntary land donation procedures. Such procedures will ensure that the
donated land (i) is made available freely by the legal/designated owner(s) and not as a result of
coercion (ii) does not lead to resettlement of any kind (iii) does not lead to adverse impacts on
the livelihoods of any group. Additionally, the project will ensure that livelihood related
initiatives do not lead to any loss of income compared to pre-project levels. Both these aspects
will be monitored as part of project implementation and through the World Bank’s own
monitoring mechanisms.

The project has prepared an ESMF, which includes institutional arrangements for the
environmental and social management of the project. Besides, it provides mitigation and
monitoring plan to offset the negative environmental impacts. ESMF includes checklists for each
of the interventions as well as a generic environmental checklist. Mitigation measures are
proposed for every potential adverse impact. ESMF also specifies the training requirements,
documentation and reporting procedures and monitoring and evaluation. In addition to the
internal monitoring, ESMF also specifies the third party monitoring to be carried out by an
outside agency (such as an independent consultant/firm) twice: once before the mid-term review
of the project and second and last time three months prior to the closing of the project
implementation.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
 N/A

The project area has been witness to rapid urbanization over the last few decades with sharp rise
in population and associated environmental and social issues. These trends are projected to
continue and project activities are not expected to have significant, incremental long term effect
on the urbanization and environmental trends.
Social: While project activities do not foresee any adverse impacts, some conflicts could rise as a
result of changes proposed in existing livelihoods and the benefit stream to the poor. Primarily
this is likely to come from powerful groups in society who may benefit from maintaining control
over livelihoods of the poor. The project will need to have a robust stakeholder analysis and
community outreach mechanism to ensure that such conflicts are managed well.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

This is a project which will help improve livelihood conditions of the poor and marginalized
group of people and the only other alternative is ‘no-project’ option, which will have negative
impact in terms of improving the livelihood of the communities. The interventions selected have
the minimum adverse potential impacts in comparison to alternatives including ‘no-project’
option.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESFM) has been prepared by the
project. The ESMF includes institutional arrangements for the environmental and social
management of the project. This has a three tier approach to implementing livelihood projects.
At the micro level, the project execution and implementation will be done by Program
Implementation Unit (PIU) in collaboration with CBOs and Fisher Cooperatives (FCs). At meso
level, District Coordination Committees (DCCs) headed by Deputy Commissioner (DC) of
respective district, Area Coordination Committees (ACCs) and other NGOs working in the area
will be coordinated by PIU for consultation on project implementation. At macro level, WWF-
Pakistan’s Program Management Unit (PMU) led by technical experts and managers will execute
the project while the Program Support Unit (PSU) led by senior managers and directors will
oversee and monitor the its progress. PIU and PMU, among other team members will include
Environmental and Social Focal Points (ESFPs) with defined roles and responsibilities related to
the implementation of ESMF. Moreover, Indus Eco-region Steering Committee (IESC) will be
the highest forum to review the project implementation.
The project has proposed a multi-tier GRM with designated staff at each level i.e. PIU, PMU and
IESC, as the apex forum for redressal of a complaint. The mechanism for redressal of any
grievances received by the project has been defined clearly with designated timelines and roles
and responsibilities.

ESMF also specifies the training requirements, documentation and reporting procedures and
monitoring and evaluation. In addition to the internal monitoring, ESMF also specifies the third
party monitoring to be carried out by an outside agency (such as an independent consultant/firm)
twice: once before the mid-term review of the project and second and last time three months
prior to the closing of the project implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders consist of fisherfolk, small/local fishing businesses, contractors, local
landowners, government officials etc.        Stakeholders will be consulted through social
mobilization and social outreach activities.

WWF-Pakistan is part of the environmental conservation WWF-International and it works with
the other stakeholders present in the area. WWF-P will engage itself with the project benefitting
communities, other civil society organizations present in the area like fisher-folk forum and
relevant Governmental organizations in the project area. A project baseline will be developed
that will incorporate data on existing livelihoods to measure the progress of implementation.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04/07/2015
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    05/06/2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     05/20/2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including Yes [X ]          No [ ]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ X]    N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or     NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          NA
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate      NA
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           NA
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      NA
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy          Yes [ ]    No []      N/A [ X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been        However, voluntary land donation
prepared?                                                procedures will need to be
                                                         monitored.
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for NA
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to NA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if NA
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the                 NA
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been                NA
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the      NA
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:      NA
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                      NA
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer             NA
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:            Name                            Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Naila Ahmed                     05/12/2015
 Environmental Specialist:           Javaid Afzal                    05/06/2015
 Social Development Specialist       Salma Omar                      05/12/2015
 Additional Environmental and/or     N/A
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
   Comments: None
 Sector Manager:                     Shobha Shetty                   05/12/2015
   Comments: None




                                                     (Template Version November 2007)
