Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/29/2005 
Report No.:  AC1992
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P099046 
Project Name:  AJK-Community Infrastructure and Services Project (AJK-CISP) - 
Earthquake Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Raja Rehan Arshad 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Other social services (15%);Roads and highways 
(10%);Health (5%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Access to urban services and housing (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed AJK CISP project is to improve the well-being of unserved 
and underserved low income communities through the delivery of cost effective and 
sustainable community development schemes, and basic infrastructure and services, 
using participatory community-based approaches.  This would be achieved by:  
 
(i) strengthening the role and capabilities of local governments at the district and lower 
levels to extend technical, financial, and management support to community-based 
organizations (CBOs);  
 
(ii) mobilizing and building the capacity of CBOs to increase their participation in 
development activities; and  
 
(iii) effective governance, transparency, and accountability through improvements in 
operational, monitoring and evaluation, and financial and budgetary procedures for 
project implementation.  
 
In the context of the Government's plan to decentralize administration to local 
governments, the Project will support the development of a participative development 
Page  2
framework to be implemented by the district and other lower levels of government 
working closely with communities and their community-based organizations (CBOs).  
 
The main objective of the Category Z project, AJK Emergency Recovery Project (ERP) 
is to assist the GoAJK in implementing a program to restore vital economic and social 
infrastructure damaged and/or destroyed by the October 2005 earthquake.  Performance 
of the project would be measured by how well GoAJK is able to restore the damaged 
infrastructure to stimulate a return of economic activity to normalcy.   
 
3. Project Description 
The AJK CISP will have three complementary components, briefly described as follows:  
 
(a) 
Decentralized planning and implementation assistance (US$ 3.08 million).  This 
component will develop the capacity of the state, district, communities/CBOs through: (i) 
specialized services and training assistance in institutional strengthening through 
improved procedures for project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and training 
and capacity building activities;  (ii) project implementation support,  through 
incremental staff cost for state, district and field staff; (iii) operating costs and recurrent 
cost; (iv) Pakistan and overseas learning visits; and (v) Studies on:  
 
(i) water quality testing; and  
 
(ii) baseline/time savings including time bound knowledge attitude practice (KAP) 
surveys. This component will finance capacity building activities and services by 
consultants and other service providers (such as local consulting groups, private sector 
firms, NGOs, training and academic institutions).  
 
(b) 
Community development (US$ 2.133 million).  This component will include: (i) 
mobilization, organization, and capacity building through training and technical 
assistance in the development of Community Action Plans (CAP) as the basis for the 
active participation of communities in the planning, implementation, and management of 
their development programs including systematic training on various parts of the scheme 
cycle including survey design, construction technologies and community initiatives, and 
field support activities; (ii) health and environmental sanitation awareness (HESA) 
program to reduce morbidity by generating demand for safe water, sanitation, and other 
basic infrastructure, and for the improvement of the overall environment; and (iii) support 
to women and children (SWC) in areas of health, skills and management training, 
economic/functional literacy, and livelihood improvement through linkages with 
economic and micro-credit facilities.  A complementary economic literacy (or functional 
literacy) assistance as appropriate will be provided for 10 to 15 percent of participating 
community households; emphasis will be on adult literacy and in activities to help deal 
with other emerging urban challenges especially for the youth living in  many urban low 
income areas. This component will finance mostly capacity building and training 
activities for the CBOs and their members, and related equipment as needed.  
 
c) 
Community infrastructure (US$ 21.94 million).  This component will involve 
investments in basic infrastructure and services, with priorities to be established in 
partnership with the communities through their CBOs.  This operation is designed in such 
Page  3
a
way that the actual locations of the proposed interventions are not identified at this 
stage since a demand-driven planning approach will be used during implementation.  A 
menu of infrastructure to be provided includes: (i) water supply; (ii) community latrines; 
(iii) drainage; (iv) street pavements; (v) street lighting; (vi) primary solid waste 
collection; (vii) internal pathways; (viii) foot bridges; and (ix) tagging/numbering streets.  
Trunk and other specialized infrastructure facilities will also be included to ensure that 
basic infrastructure functions efficiently.  Particular attention will be given to ensuring 
the integration of community programs, e.g., water supply and/or sanitation schemes with 
health and sanitation activities.  The Project will finance civil works and related 
equipment, technical services for pre-feasibility studies and infrastructure design, and 
capacity building in supervision of works, operation and maintenance, project 
monitoring, etc.  
 
The Category Z, AJK ERP project would comprise the following three components:  
 
(a) 
Restoration of Economic and Social Infrastructure: The component will include, 
but not be limited to, restoration and reconstruction of social and physical infrastructure 
such as roads, education and health facilities, water supply and sanitation systems, street 
pavement, foot bridges, etc.  
 
(b) 
Strengthening of the Safety Nets and Capacity Building: This component would 
include two subcomponents: (i) Strengthening of safety nets, including among other 
things providing cash grants and in-kind assistance to the affected communities and 
households and (ii)capacity building/training in order to enable communities to 
reconstruct with improved standards and to better handle disasters in the future.  
 
(c) 
Project Management and Implementation Support:  This component will finance 
project management and monitoring. It will provide support to provincial and district 
level governments by financing staff and consultant recruitment and incremental 
operating costs. This component will also finance third party inspection and validation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) has a population of 2.92 million, the majority of which live 
in rural areas. AJK has seven districts, namely Muzaffarabad, Bagh, Poonch, Sudhnuti, 
Kotli, Mirpur and Bhimber. Muzaffarabad is almost half of AJK in terms of land area and 
houses one quarter of the population. The northern parts of AJK has high mountains and 
narrow valleys. As one moves south the valley widens and productive use increases. The 
scattered settlement pattern over hilly terrain in AJK makes development difficult and 
costly.  The terrain, resources and socio-economic conditions vary across different 
regions.  Muzaffarabad, the largest district is less accessible and the poorest, especially 
the northern part of Neelum valley.  As one moves south from Muzaffarabad towards 
Bagh, then Poonch, Sudhonti and Kotli, the VAlley widens up and agricultural 
production increases.  The area is more accessible, especially from Pakistan. The border 
area with India remains a restricted zone, otherwise life carries on as usual, Kotli is 
partially hilly, and Bhimber and Mirpur further south are plains and are similar to 
agricultural regions of northern Punjab. Settlement size is larger here and agricultural 
production is more.  
Page  4
While the AJK CISP will work in all areas of the state, under the AJK ERP works will 
be carried out in the districts affected by the earthquake namely Muzaffarabad, Poonch 
(Rawalakot), Bagh, and Sadhnoti.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) has a population of 2.92 million, the majority of which live 
in rural areas. AJK has seven districts, namely Muzaffarabad, Bagh, Poonch, Sudhnuti, 
Kotli, Mirpur and Bhimber. Muzaffarabad is almost half of AJK in terms of land area and 
houses one quarter of the population. The northern parts of AJK has high mountains and 
narrow valleys. As one moves south the valley widens and productive use increases. The 
scattered settlement pattern over hilly terrain in AJK makes development difficult and 
costly.  The terrain, resources and socio-economic conditions vary across different 
regions.  Muzaffarabad, the largest district is less accessible and the poorest, especially 
the northern part of Neelum valley.  As one moves south from Muzaffarabad towards 
Bagh, then Poonch, Sudhonti and Kotli, the VAlley widens up and agricultural 
production increases.  The area is more accessible, especially from Pakistan. The border 
area with India remains a restricted zone, otherwise life carries on as usual, Kotli is 
partially hilly, and Bhimber and Mirpur further south are plains and are similar to 
agricultural regions of northern Punjab. Settlement size is larger here and agricultural 
production is more.  
 
Social organizations in AJK are molded around biradaris (clans), and one village may 
have up to four to five Biradaris. Across AJK, one to two biradaris dominated almost half 
the villages surveyed, while the rest were homogenous with almost equal number of 
population. Political interests are not related to biradari, and political competition is equal 
Page  5
within and between biradaris. The organization at the village level comprises of 
representatives (elders and influential persons) from different neighborhoods within the 
village, who meet on occasions or when needs arise.  The organization resolves family 
and property disputes and discusses and directs welfare activities. In the past, many of the 
self help activities related to construction of Mosques, schools, link roads and bridges 
have been carried out using this platform. In the more recent past, community based 
Government projects and NGO activities have strengthened these organizations by 
making them development oriented, motivating participation by youth and women and by 
introducing to them contemporary system of management and leadership development.  
 
The project supports low income communities with special assistance to women 
activities.  A key social issue that the Project seeks to address is how to secure the active 
participation of all ethnic, gender, and economic groups in sub-schemes preparation, 
design, and implementation and ensuring that CI and CD schemes respond to their 
genuine needs and demands.  An overview of the main social issues confronting the 
Project is summarized in the social assessment report carried out during project 
preparation (see Annex 12 of PAD).  
 
Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) can be defined as the areas of environmental 
significance that are comparatively more sensitive to development undertakings. The 
development initiatives in such areas should be planned in such a way that the 
environment of the area is not disturbed or changed.  The ESAs as defined in OP4.04 of 
the areas that are significant value in their natural state.  For all projects in ESAs an EIA 
is required. Any CI-schemes identified in ESAs having negative environmental impact 
will not be financed under the CISP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant cumulative impacts are expected. However, localized impacts may occur 
and they will be mitigated through the adoption of appropriate screening and design 
criteria, supervision and monitoring during implementation and operation of schemes.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No significant long term impacts are expected. However, localized impacts may occur 
(for instance, the improper siting of a water supply scheme) and they will be mitigated 
through the adoption of appropriate screening and design criteria, supervision and 
monitoring (see details in the EMF).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The applicability of the safeguard policies to the project have been determined in the 
social and environmental assessments. Guidelines for arrangements for the borrower to 
address safeguard issues have been developed and are included in the Environmental 
Management Framework (EMF) and detailed out in the AJK CISPs  Operational Manual. 
The same EMF is applicable to the AJK Emergency Recovrey Project (ERP). In 
Page  6
additional the AJK ERP Project Paper provides detailed Environmental and Social 
Guidelines in Annex 4.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the participating low income communities in AJK, to be 
assisted by their community based organizations, nongovernmental organizations (to be 
contracted as consultants and/or service providers), and clearly designated government 
staff and officials and the AJK-EPA.  
 
The processes involved in the preparation of the EMF included:  
 
Discussions with the government staff and municipal corporations to assess current 
organizational arrangements, organizational requirements, and training needs;  
 
Consultations among the relevant sectoral agencies of AJK, LGRDD, NGOs, CBOs, 
and the communities;  
 
Site visits to communities/scheme sites to identify and assess the environmental impact 
of different interventions made under previous similar projects; and  
 
Discussions with communities and project staff to identify and assess the environmental 
impact of different interventions made under other similar projects.  
 
Upon completion of the draft report, a consultative workshop attended by different 
stakeholders, including NGOs, CBOs and representatives of the government and 
communities, was organized in Muzaffarabad on July 24, 2001.  A second draft report 
was then disclosed in-country and at the Bank Infoshop (August 30 , 2001 and October 1, 
2001).  A second workshop was conducted during appraisal (November 2001).  There 
will be more consultations on the EMF with the stakeholders at the district level before 
and during launch of the project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/31/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
No 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raja Rehan Arshad 
11/09/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Javaid Afzal 
11/10/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly 
11/10/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Kseniya Lvovsky 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
Page  8
