                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 110865
Date prepared/updated: December 1, 2016

I. Basic Information

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan                               Project ID: P158643
                                                Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Pakistan National Social Protection Program
Task Team Leader: Iftikhar Malik, Amjad Zafar Khan, Lucian Bucur Pop
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 2016      Estimated Board Date: March 14, 2017
Managing Unit: GSP06                            Lending Instrument: IPF for TA component
Sector: Social Protection 70%; General Education Sector 20%; Health 10%
Theme: Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems 70%; Gender 10%, Education for all
10%; Other Human Development 10%

IDA Amount (US$m.): 10
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X ]                    No [ ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]                  Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises            Yes [ ]      No [X ]
and Emergencies)

B. Project Objectives:

1.      The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the national social safety net systems for
the poor to enhance their human capital and access to complementary services.

C. Project Description:

1.      The proposed Program builds on previous Bank engagement in the sector during the last 7 years.
The World Bank’s initial support to BISP came through a sectoral Development Policy Credit (US$150
million, approved in 2009), complemented by a Social Safety Net Technical Assistance (TA) Project
(US$60 million also approved in 2009). In 2012, the TA project was restructured with additional
financing of US$150 million to support the expansion of the program and strengthening of the
administration and performance of BISP as the national safety net platform, also introducing a result
based financing (through Disbursement Linked Indicators) modality. The current project is expected to
close on June 30, 2017.

2.      Supported by the existing Bank project, the BISP basic cash transfer (US$ 45 per family per
quarter) intervention has already demonstrated impacts on reducing short-term malnutrition, improving
beneficiaries’ consumption, and women empowerment. The BISP impact evaluation carried out in 2013
(against the 2011 baseline) finds positive effects on reducing wasting – a measure of short-term
malnutrition – amongst girls (aged 0-59 months). It also showed an increase in consumption among

                                                  1
beneficiaries after two years of implementation, resulting in a 6 percentage points decrease in the poverty
gap for households close to the program eligibility threshold. In addition, the BISP is found to have
positive effects on a variety of variables associated with women’s empowerment. The data indicates that
women are more likely to have obtained a national ID card, more likely to have permission to visit friends
alone, and that they are more likely to report being able to vote. Finally, the impact evaluation finds no
impacts on overall household labor supply, which is in line with findings from other impact evaluations of
cash transfer programs.

3.      The proposed Program would be a US$100 million credit from the International Development
Association using a Program for Results (PforR) lending instrument, and would be implemented over a
period of four years (2017-2021). The disbursement of funds under the PforR modality will be linked to
DLIs (US$90 million) tied to two result areas: Institutional and Systems Development, and Income
Support for Human Development and Access to Complementary Services. At the request of the
government, a Technical Assistance component (US$10 million) using Investment Project Financing
(IPF) will also be built in the Program to support program management, monitoring, and evaluation. An
Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) has been prepared for the PforR operation. This
ISDS has been prepared off-line only for the TA component using the IPF.

4.      The PforR will support three elements of the Government program: (i) The Basic Cash
Transfer program, delivered by BISP; (ii) The WeT program to incentivize primary school enrolment of
BISP beneficiary families’ children; and (iii) facilitation of beneficiaries’ access to complementary social
and productive services.

5.     Specific interventions to be supported by the Program fall into the following two result
areas:

    (i)     Institutional and Systems Development including update of the NSER, and strengthening
            administration and service delivery of BISP interventions included under the Program.
    (ii)    Income Support for Human Development and Access to Complementary Services including
            consolidation and expansion of the WeT program, and facilitating beneficiaries’ access to
            complementary social and productive services.

Result Area One: Institutional and Systems Development

7.       Update of National Socio-Economic Registry. The Program will support nationwide update of
the NSER to maintain a relevant and credible registry. This will build upon the lessons learned from the
ongoing first phase of the NSER update, which is being implemented in 16 districts by using a revised
PMT formula. The first phase is using a combination of door-to-door survey and on-demand registration
in selected districts. A Value for Money (VfM) analysis is being carried out to assess the comparative
outcomes of each approach. The results of the VfM study will inform the final approach for the national
rollout of the NSER update.

8.      Improved Safety Net Administration and Strengthened Service Delivery. The Program will
support the government to improve BISP systems and operations towards a more beneficiary centric
service delivery model. This includes support to enhancement of BISP MIS with adequate procedures for
data cross checks, and regular internal and external reporting standards for improved transparency and
accountability. The enhanced MIS will also support systematic tracking of beneficiaries’ access to
selected complementary services. As BISP continues to modernize payment services by implementing a
new beneficiary centric payment model approved by the Government in January 2016, the Program will
support promotion of financial literacy of BISP beneficiaries by updating and using the training modules
developed with the previous support of the World Bank. Such literacy trainings are critical given the new

                                                     2
payment model uses formal banking system for beneficiary payments, biometric verification for
withdrawal of payments from multiple collection points, and real time reporting and reconciliation to
track its efficiency.

9.       BISP Tehsil offices are the frontline for program operations, however, they face capacity
constraints and have inadequate service delivery procedures and standards. 1 BISP’s future operational
trajectory will entail expanded responsibility of Tehsil office staff vis-à-vis: implementation of the WeT
program; increased interaction with and support to BBCs; and integrated case management of
beneficiaries. The Program will support a result-oriented revision of the current operating model for the
field offices along with implementation of the new model. This includes optimizing resource allocation in
accordance with beneficiary caseload; procedures for better coordination with implementing partners;
development and delivery of regular job relevant training on programmatic and operational areas; and
development of key performance indicators. The Program will also support enhanced communication as a
critical component of improved service delivery. This includes building knowledge of BISP’s staff to
manage two-way communication with key stakeholders including local governments, communities, and
BBCs. This will contribute to a gradual delegation of responsibility to the field offices with enhanced
knowledge about the program and its operating procedures being critical to develop a wider constituency
and employ context specific approaches for communications, as necessary.

Result Area Two: Income Support for Human Development and Access to Complementary
Services

10.     Consolidation and Expansion of Waseela-e-Taleem. The Program will support consolidation
and scale-up of the WeT program to boost enrolment and attendance of primary education of BISP
beneficiaries’ children (5-12 year old) in the districts where the supply side capacity is favorable. The
Program will support expansion of the WeT from 32 to 50 districts nationwide.

11.     This will include adjustment of WeT implementation arrangements vis-à-vis the roles of key
actors i.e. BISP, provinces, and implementation partners. BISP will devise suitable models of
collaboration and coordination between federal and provincial authorities, district education officials, and
other local actors. The Program will support capacity building of all key actors, including the local
governments in accordance with their roles in the WeT implementation process.

12.     Capacity building of BBCs will be a key element in WeT expansion. These committees serve as a
vital platform to reinforce compliance with WeT co-responsibilities, and will have to be further
strengthened to carry on this role. The Program will support BBCs’ role to enhance communications
between BISP and its beneficiaries. In addition, BBCs will be leveraged to share information about the
importance of education for children, provide information about service delivery in education, and at the
same time offer an opportunity for the beneficiaries to share their concerns with the service providers.

13.     Access to Complementary Social and Productive Services. The Program will facilitate BISP
beneficiaries’ access to complementary social and productive services with an expectation that, over time,
participation in these programs will contribute to their improved welfare and economic self-sufficiency.
Social programs include, among others, education, nutrition, and health services such as the Prime
Minister’s National Health Insurance scheme. Productive services would include labor market
interventions such as access to finance, formal and non-formal skills training, and asset transfer schemes
such as the one administered by the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF).


1
 Currently, there are 383 functional Tehsil offices out of a total sanctioned number of 452. The gap in numbers is due to poor
security, poor accessibility and few number of current beneficiaries in areas with non-functional Tehsil offices.

                                                                3
14.     The Program will support assessment of beneficiary characteristics at union council level by
using the updated NSER data to identify needs vis-à-vis the relevant complementary services. A mapping
will be conducted of relevant existing national and regional complementary services that can provide
beneficiaries access to a range of options for social and productive inclusion. Some BISP beneficiaries are
already accessing a number of social and productive services. This participation, however, is ad hoc and
without any formal facilitation or systematic arrangement on the part of BISP as well as the partner
programs.

15.     The Program will support the management tools to operationalize linkages. An information
module for complementary services with interoperability with other modules of BISP MIS will be
necessary for program functioning. This would include information on complementary service providers,
BISP beneficiary participation, and other metrics for program monitoring. BISP will also develop
guidelines on how to formalize engagement with service providers. These might include monitoring and
evaluation arrangements for a results focus relationship, data sharing for beneficiary identification, and
the development of mutually agreed targets. Relevant staff will need to develop expertise on social and
productive programs in Pakistan including their content, location, eligibility requirements, and delivery
arrangements.

16.    A Technical Assistance (TA) component will be an Investment Project Financing (IPF) loan
for an amount of US$10 million. Implementation under the TA Component will be managed in
accordance with OP/BP 10.00.

17.      The TA component aims to strengthen the capacity of the implementation agency to design,
deliver, and monitor and evaluate the activities needed to achieve the Program objectives. The
Operation will provide strategic TA to guide the achievement of DLIs and Program Actions; support
capacity building of the implementing agency, BISP, where necessary; and finance specialized inputs as
identified by BISP. This will be achieved through assistance in four programmatic areas: development of
a dynamic National Socio-Economic Registry (NSER) model; Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E);
capacity building; and strengthening of fiduciary, social and environmental controls.

18.     Dynamic National Socio-Economic Registry (NSER). TA will be leveraged to pilot and
evaluate models for dynamic updates of the NSER. This will entail finalizing the design and developing
monitoring arrangements for testing options; and roll out and evaluation of options in a selected sample
number of districts. The pilot will intend to test modalities for regular updates of full (updates of the full
Poverty Score Card) or partial (new born, change of address, deaths, new members, education level of
members, etc.) household information.

19.     The Program implementing agency will also be assisted in the analysis of updated NSER data
with the objective of developing and finalizing a recertification strategy. This includes an analysis of
modalities to manage the potential exit of beneficiaries who no longer meet the eligibility criteria of the
basic income support program, and the entry of new families who meet the eligibility criteria alongside an
analysis of the fiscal implications of new entries and exits.

20.     Monitoring and Evaluation. TA will be mobilized to reinforce the M&E capacity of the
implementing agency of the Program. With the rapid expansion of the basic income support and the
Waseela-e-Taleem (WeT) program, BISPs’ M&E systems have to be strengthened to keep pace w ith and
be responsive to program growth. Accordingly, TA will be used for the development of field office
performance measurement arrangements to support streamlined internalization of revised roles and
responsibilities across all field offices. With strategic outsourcing of program functions, BISP will be
provided support to select the right tools to monitor activities of all implementing partners and

                                                      4
stakeholders. These include process evaluations and spot checks to track program implementation and
make relevant information publicly available for increased accountability and transparency.


21.      BISPs M&E systems will have to adapt to monitor beneficiary uptake of complementary social
and productive services. This will entail the development of an information module for complementary
services to host key monitoring metrics. Tracer studies will be used to track beneficiary participation in
complementary services. The studies will be based on a representative sample of complementary services
in order to ensure that all services can be assessed in relation to the enrolment and participation of
beneficiaries. BISP will need to identify a firm or institution with strong experience on social protection
issues to provide adequate third party oversight using the tools above.

22.     One or more Independent Verification Entities will also be contracted for verification of the
evidence for Program’s Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). DLI verification protocols will draw
from a range of sources including BISP MIS reports, relevant operational manuals, and training curricula.
The Government will need to identify independent verification agencies to provide confirmations of
evidence furnished by BISP.
23.

24.       Capacity Building. TA will be leveraged to support capacity building in some of the following
critical areas:

    a) Financial inclusion. As the Government transitions beneficiaries to a new payment model,
       financial literacy training will be imperative to ensure beneficiaries understand rights and
       procedures vis-à-vis accessing payments. Under a previous World Bank funded TA, BISP
       developed a financial literacy training module which was used to train 5,000 beneficiaries.
       Through the Program TA, the Government will be supported in making changes to the module, as
       needed, and delivering training on the new biometric-verification based payment model.

    b) MIS audit. TA will be used to procure a relevant firm, with established expertise, to conduct a
       complete audit of BISP information systems and their modules. Capacity building will be
       necessary to develop a comprehensive Terms of Reference to guide the firm in undertaking the
       audit and developing an action plan suited to the Government’s functional needs and
       requirements.

    c) Development of training curricula for WeT capacity building. . TA will be used to develop the
       training curricula of Provincial and Tehsil office staff in accordance with their re-defined
       functions as they relate to the WeT program. In addition, TA will be used to tailor curricula and
       deliver training to relevant education and local government officials on their roles in the WeT
       program cycle, with a particular emphasis on compliance monitoring functions. Successful
       training of stakeholders underscores the sustainable consolidation and expansion of the WeT
       program. TA will ensure that training can be outsourced to an independent firm with the relevant
       expertise and resources, and the ability to develop and customize curricula suited to the
       Program’s needs.

    d) Beneficiary centric communication through BISP Beneficiary Committees (BBCs). The Program
       primarily communicates through the platforms of BISP Beneficiary Committees (BBCs) in order
       to institutionalize participatory mechanisms for enhanced transparency and accountability. As
       part of the consolidation and expansion of the WeT program, BISP will procure the services of an
       implementing partner firm to carry out social mobilization functions. However, program staff will
       perform a critical supervision role to ensure BBC sustainability, and manage the creation and

                                                    5
        dissemination of relevant communication material. TA will be provided to strengthen Program
        functions including awareness and capacity building of BBCs on some of the following thematic
        areas: WeT co-responsibilities and importance of education, rights of beneficiaries, redress
        mechanisms, and access to complementary services. These will be delivered through targeted
        communication material, and training manuals for BBC mother leaders. TA will also be used to
        develop and fine-tune communication tools, such as street theatres, to generate greater beneficiary
        awareness and capacity building.

25.     Strengthening Fiduciary, and Environment and Social Controls. TA will be used to
strengthen key Program functions as outlined in the PforR assessments. The component will support an
updated Error, Fraud and Corruption review with a focus on Grievance Redress Mechanisms. In addition,
TA will support annual fiduciary performance reviews to validate if the program is following the relevant
operational manuals, policies and Standard Operating Procedures, and fiduciary systems are functional
and propose mitigation measures to address gaps, if needed. This would include a first year baseline
review followed by annual reviews to ensure continued Bank support. In line with the findings of ESSA,
the TA will support (i) an assessment of how to implement the NSER in line with the cultural context of
poverty among Indigenous People of Chitral, (ii) training, development of strategy, SOPS and other
material to roll out and monitor the social mobilization process and capacity building of institutional
structure within BISP to manage this aspect (iii) Vulnerability assessment of eligible but excluded and
hard-to-reach communities and (iv) user-based assessment of GRM.

D. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

26.     The proposed Program will be implemented at the national level and Program activities will be
carried out across the country. It will assist in transparent identification of the poor by following an
objective criteria without any discrimination. The Program will not involve any civil works, therefore, no
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement is envisaged under the Program. The support to institutional
strengthening will not include land acquisition. The TA component consists of studies and other technical
support for project implementation and will not trigger any safeguard policies.


E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
27.      The Program will be managed and implemented by BISP which is a statutory body formed
under the BISP Act, 2010. BISP has been the implementing agency of the World Bank’s Social Safety
Nets TA Project (P103160) and its Additional Financing since 2009 and is governed by an independent
Management Board with half of the members representing the non-governmental sectors that works in
accordance with the BISP Act. BISP will be responsible for the environment and social issues of the
overall Program including the TA component. They will actively communicate with the Bank and
coordinate with stakeholders as well as other development partners. BISP will ensure that the
implementation of the TA component will be in compliance with the relevant World Bank’ safeguards
policies. BISP appoints dedicated staff to ensure incorporation of social concerns in all operational and
M&E processes and regularly tracks them through annual status reports.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

   Rahat Jabeen (GEN06)
   Salma Omar (GSU06 )


                                                    6
II. SAFEGUARDS POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

  Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP        No           The project funds are only used for social
  4.01                                               uplift of poor and destitute community at
                                                     national level. The project activities are
                                                     designed for provision of safety net cash
                                                     transfers to the poor. The project activities
                                                     will not finance any civil work or construction
                                                     activities. Therefore other safeguard polices
                                                     are also not triggered.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No           The project interventions will not involve any
                                                     adverse impacts on natural habitats.
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No           The project interventions will not involve any
                                                     adverse impacts on Forest
  Pest Management OP 4.09               No           The project will not finance the purchase of
                                                     pesticides nor promote the use of pesticides.
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     No           The project interventions will not involve any
  4.11                                               adverse impacts on Physical Cultural
                                                     Resources.
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No           There is no impact on indigenous Peoples.
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No             The project will not involve any civil works,
                                                     therefore, no land acquisition and involuntary
                                                     resettlement is envisaged under the project.
                                                     The project activities designed comply with
                                                     this principle.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No           The project interventions will not trigger
                                                     Safety of Dams policy.
  Projects on International Waterways   No           The project location is not situated in
  OP/BP 7.50                                         International Waterways.
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No           The project interventions will not fall in any
  7.60                                               Disputed Areas.



II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The TA component does not finance any physical activities. There are no safeguards issues and
impact anticipated and no further actions are required as part of safeguards.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
   N/A

                                               7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
N/A


B. Disclosure Requirements Date                                                N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 No safeguards document is required for disclosure.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                 8
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                     Name                       Date
 Task Team Leader:          Iftikhar Malik, Amjad Zafar Khan, Lucian   12/6/2016
                            Bucur Pop

 Approved by:
 Practice Manager:          Pablo Gottret                              12/7/2016
   Comments:




                                       9
