                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: AC821



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 26, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Pakistan                                Project ID: P084302
Project Name: Sindh Water Sector                 Task Team Leader: Manuel Contijoch
Improvement Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 16, 2004 Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2004
Managing Unit: SASAR                             Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                                 Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%)           Theme: Rural services and infrastructure
                                                 (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IDA: 140
Other financing amounts by source:                                               ($m)



B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]

The overall development objective is to improve water productivity trough the pursuit of a
reform agenda and required investments leading to a better management system that links the
canal command areas, the distributary and the watercourse level. The project interventions
would: (a) define and implement an enforceable water rights system among users in the selected
canal command areas; (b) devolve responsibility for water management including O&M to
WUAs and FOs (c) improve the reliability, efficiency and equity of water distribution, among the
agricultural users, (c) modernize the existing irrigation and drainage networks, and the on-farm
technology to improve water service delivery and use and (d) strengthen the institutional
capacity of the irrigation institutions in Sindh according to the existing Water Ordinance.



C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]

The Project aims at consolidating the institutional reform process initiated under NDP and
expand its scope to an additional number of canal command areas. This will include a mix of
institutional and infrastructure interventions. Progress on the institutional reform agenda and on
the irrigation devolution strategy will be subject to political commitment and is likely to be a
long term process. It is recommended that the project be designed as an APL. The triggers in the
process will allow, once the conditions are met, to introduce the reform process and Bank

support to other canal commands and expand horizontally the scope of the program to the whole
Province. The basic elements that will trigger expansion are: a) transfer of the water allocation
responsibilities at the barrage and canal level to SIDA; b) notify and commission the canal
commands to AWBs; c) devolution to WUA/FO operations and maintenance of the distributary
and minor canal level, d) identification of infrastructure improvement needs. Through an APL
the pace at which the program would unfold would be subject and adjusted to the prevailing
political and economical conditions in the Province. The APL allows for more flexibility than the
present NDP strategy given that additional Bank support would only be triggered after evidence
that the preconditions for success are in place.

Over the medium term, the program will support the development of SIDA into a Provincial
Water Management Organization capable of managing the water resources in a sustainable way
with equity and with technical and financial capabilities. This will be achieved at the end of the
process through the operation of 3 main barrages, establishment and operation of 14 AWB to
deliver water by volume to around 1,500 FOs, and organization of a better system of water
charges collection. At the same time the dialogue will be pursued with the Irrigation Department
so as to support its transformation into a Provincial Water Authority institution with
responsibility for administration and oversight of inter-provincial water rights, regulatory and
enforcement issues.

In order to reach this stage of maturity the APL will be organized in three phases, the first one
has interventions in one barrages and 5 Canal Commands; the second could include a second
barrage and five additional canal commands areas, and finally the third phase could include the
last barrage and the remaining perimeter of four canal commands. During project preparation the
phases will be defined with more precision and in consultation with the stakeholders. The social,
environmental and institutional triggers will also be clarified.

The first phase of this long term process under the present APL I project will cover the five
canal commands already transferred to SIDA under NDP. It will require the transfer to SIDA of
the Gudu barrage that regulates the water flow of the targeted command areas and further
support the modernization1 and rehabilitation of the distribution infrastructure together with the
institutional strengthening of AWBs, FOs and WUAs.
The following components are envisaged in the proposed project.

     Capacity building. Supporting SIDA to develop the local capacity for integrated planning
         and water management in the Province. Establishment of Water Rights and allocation of
         water in Sindh. Transforming the present system of water distribution to a volumetric
         delivery according with the water entitlements and water allocation rules. The process
         will include the conjunctive use of surface and underground water in line with the needs
         of the different users and the quality of water available. This component will also support
         the existing capacity for social mobilization, formation of AWBs, FOs and women


1Modernization is a process of improvement of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure according to the new
demands of stakeholders for a more reliable, timely and efficient water service delivery, it includes interventions in
the physical and also in the managerial components of the service. Includes the use of benchmarking indicators and
techniques to evaluate the performance of the systems and compare it with other similar ones at the national and
international level.

       groups. The project will address the need to regulate the "direct outlets" that in some
       cases (like in the Nara Canal) represent 30% of the volume of water diverted to the farms.
    Civil Works. This component will support the modernization               and improvement of the
       irrigation and drainage network, construction of metering devices, communication, water
       distribution structures and fund for the maintenance works required for the sustainability
       of the system specially drainage. When needed and justified the project will introduce the
       modernization and improvement of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure in relation
       with agriculture diversification projects
    Agriculture and irrigation technology. The project will promote delivery of water to the
       WUAs according to water delivery contracts and support the necessary infrastructure
       improvements to achieve a more timely and reliable water distribution. In this way the
       project will foster the introduction of modern irrigation practices and the installation of
       pressurized irrigation systems which will represent a major technological innovation for
       Pakistan agriculture. The project will also pursue coordination with the Sindh OFWMP
       project in the execution of the investments at the off-farm and on-farm level to establish
       the required articulation with agriculture productivity objectives.
    Management and administration. The project will support the transition towards a more
       efficient system of water and irrigation management including the professionalization of
       service delivery through SIDA, the devolution of operations and maintenance to AWBs,
       FOs and WUAs, and the revision of the role of the Irrigation Department.



D. Project location (if known)

[Guideline: If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation]



E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


               Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
               If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
     [ ]       Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

     [ ]       Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

     [ ]       Pest Management (OP 4.09)

     [ ]       Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

     [ ]       Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

      [ ]           Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

      [ ]           Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

      [ ]           Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

      [ ]           Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

      [ ]           Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Manuel Contijoch                                                   Date
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Name                                                               Date
    Comments
  Sector Manager:                                 Name                                                               Date
    Comments




*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas
2Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


