                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                Report No.: 33621


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/21/2005

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Pakistan                               Project ID: P095982
Project Name: Electricity Distribution and Transmission Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Vladislav Vucetic
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 27, 2006        Estimated Board Date: July 27, 2006
Managing Unit: SASEI                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Power (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            200.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):                0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):                0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER                                                           100.00
                                                                           100.00



B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The objective of the Project is to help increase the efficiency, reliability, and quality of electricity
supply by supporting reductions in overall technical and commercial losses, increased
availability of electricity, and improved voltage profile. The Project also aims to support power
sector reform and investment planning and financing through technical assistance.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project will consist of the following main components:
 (a)    Strengthening electricity distribution networks to reduce losses and improve supply;
 (b)    Strengthening electricity transmission network to reduce bottlenecks and improve
systemâ TMs reliability and quality; and
 (c)    Technical assistance (TA) for project implementation, capacity building, investment
planning and financing, and sector reform.
 Distribution (Bank loan: $130 million): The distribution subsector, which is the key segment of
the industry for restoring its financial performance, is responsible for the largest technical and
commercial losses in the electricity supply chain in Pakistan. The DISCOs need to take urgent
measures to strengthen their networks, reduce losses, and build their corporate capacities. Each
DISCO has prepared an investment program which includes the following types of projects: (i)

distribution rehabilitation and energy loss reduction (ELR); (ii) secondary transmission grid
(STG; 66-kV and 132-kV network), (iii) distribution of power to new consumers (DOP); and (iv)
rural electrification (RE). The total cost of the ELR and STG programs is about US$ 1.5 billion
over the next 5 years. The Project will include selected components of these programs, which are
oriented mainly toward improving the performance of the existing system and which would have
the largest impact. The selection will be made on the basis of economic, financial and technical
criteria, the credibility of the policy measures proposed by the companies to support the loss
reduction programs and mitigate the Project risks, and the ability of the companies to timely
prepare and implement the Project, including meeting the Bankâ TMs project readiness criteria.
 Transmission (Bank loan: $55 million): The fast growing demand requires continuing
strengthening and expansion of the already stressed transmission network. NTDC will continue
to rely on international financing institutions to complement its own funds and commercial
borrowing in financing its investment program, whose total costs exceeds $850 million over the
next five years. NTDC asked the Bank to consider financing a 220-kV double circuit
transmission line Dadu-Khuzdar in Baluchistan, and two 220-kV substations (Kasowal and
Ghazi Road) with the associated shorter transmission lines.
 Technical Assistance (Bank loan: $15 million). This component will provide support in the
following areas: (a) project implementation; (b) capacity building for the various corporate
functions in the project companies; (c) investment planning and financing strategies, including
attracting private investment, with particular emphasis â " but not exclusive â " on hydropower;
and (d) the sector structural, policy, institutional and regulatory reform.
 The Project will be financed by the World Bank loan and by the companies themselves. The
indicated project components, the size and the allocation of the Bank loan, and the amount of
borrower's financing are preliminary and may change.

D. Project location (if known)
Country wide.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The DISCOs and NTDC will contract out the preparation of safeguards reports and plans to
qualified consultants. The implementation of these plans will be undertaken by the entities by
hiring staff with expertise in environmental, social and social development issues. The process
followed will be participatory and facilitative with emphasis on consultation, and
communication/information sharing. In the long term, the entities will ensure training of staff to
undertake environmental and social development and safeguards activities. The TORs for
undertaking the environmental and social assessment will be developed by the project entities
and will ensure compliance with Bank Safeguard Policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES)
    Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes       No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
    The geographical extent and coverage of the project scope varies for the DISCOs and the

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No         TBD
NTDC. Major physical interventions proposed by the participating DISCOs are Secondary
Transmission Grid (STGs) and Electricity Loss Reduction (ELR) which typically extend to only
dozens of kms. NTDC transmission lines could extend to hundreds of kms and may therefore be
more environmentally sensitive. Overall the anticipated impacts are expected to be limited and
manageable. The ELR activities are generally rehabilitation works and an effective EMP will
offset the environmental risks likely to occur only during the construction stage.

     Each participating DISCO and NTDC will prepare an ESA for the activities proposed for
the first year investments. For the activities to be taken up during the subsequent years, an ES
guidelines/framework (ESF) will be prepared. Major thrust of the ESA will be on the analysis of
alternative routes, public/stakeholdersâ TMconsultations and preparation of an EMP to mitigate
environmental risks associated with the project. The ESF will serve as the guiding
document/operational manual for the similar project activities during the subsequent years and
specific EMP will be required and developed for the individual investments.

     Draft ESA report will cover environmental and social issues related to the siting of
transmission lines/grid stations and will propose routes with least environmental and social
impacts. EMP will outline mitigation measures and the institutional arrangements for their
effective implementation and monitoring.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
    The ESA report will identify if this Safeguard Policy is triggered.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                          X
    Some of the NTDC transmission lines may pass through environmentally sensitive areas like
forests/national parks/game reserves. If so, ESA report will identify appropriate mitigation
measures in the EMP to ensure compliance with the national laws as well as with Bankâ TMs
Safeguard Policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                                 X
    The SA will identify whether any cultural Property would be damaged. During construction,
should any chance find be discovered, in compliance with the Safeguard Policies, the items will
be carefully excavated and handed over to the Department of Archeology, Government of
Pakistan.
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                                  X
    Once the specific design and locations are known, the Project will ensure compliance with
this Safeguard Policy and prepare the IPDP, if any impact in the indigenous peoples is identified
by the SA.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                         X
    A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared that will apply to all the relevant
sub-projects. Since the Project has a number of non-homogenous components, the RPF will be
prepared for the different project categories. The RPF will also provide the entitlement
framework and all compensations will be paid prior to start of construction activities. The RPF
and SA will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                            Yes               No              TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X



Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: 01/30/2006

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
    Target date for launching safeguards studies: September 2005

     Target Date for completion: January 2006

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Mr Vladislav Vucetic                                            09/13/2005
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg                                    09/21/2005
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Ms Penelope J. Brook                                            09/13/2005
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


