Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/26/2005 
Report No.:  43490
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P076872 
Project Name:  Second Improvement to Financial Reporting and Auditing Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anthony Graeme Lee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  SARFM 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Standards and financial reporting (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
84.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
9.00
9.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will build capacity to improve the accuracy, comprehensiveness, reliability, 
and timeliness of intra-year and year-end government financial reports, at Federal and 
Provincial levels, and initiate the process at District and sub-District levels, thereby 
strengthening the financial accountability cycle.  It would therefore directly support the 
Government of Pakistan's commitment to improved public financial management, 
accountability, and transparency, and enhance the capacity of public sector managers to 
use credible financial information for better and informed decision making.  It will 
facilitate public oversight of the use of public monies, and increase the national and 
international credibility of Governments' financial statements and assurance processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
PIFRA II has four core components: i) financial accounting and budgeting system 
(FABS); ii) capacity building and upgrading of the Office of the Auditor General of 
Pakistan (OAGP); iii) capacity building and upgrading of the Office of the Controller 
General of Accounts (OCGA); and, iv) Project Management.  Operational and 
Maintenance costs arising from PIFRA I and II investments, such as hardware and 
software maintenance and computer stationery, constitute an expenditure category in 
Page  2
each of the components that would be financed wholly by the GOP as part of its 
counterpart contributions to the project  
 
The Government has proposed that it would finance about 10% of the total cost.The 
IDA contribution (including contingencies) would therefore be US$84 million equivalent.  
The financing plan proposed is that IDA finances all expenditure categories of the four 
components except the operational and maintenance costs, at a rate of 100%, while 
Government finances all operational and maintenance costs.  The components, which 
group activities according to function, are described below. More details can be found in 
Annex 6 of PAD.  
 
i) 
Financial Accounting and Budgeting Systems (FABS) - US$ 48.739 million 
(including contingencies): This component's objective is to follow up and extend the 
work done under PIFRA I in implementing policies, systems and procedures that support 
overall project objectives of improving the accuracy, completeness, reliability and 
timeliness of intra-year and year-end government financial reports in Pakistan at the 
Federal and Provincial, and some District and Tehsil Governments.  Successful 
completion of this component would be instrumental to achieving full government 
financial accountability and transparency in the new automated environment.  The 
component consists of three phases:  
 
(a) 
The first phase includes extending the FABS designed under PIFRA I: to the 
balance of District Accounts Offices (DAOs); to the headquarters of some departments 
currently responsible for their own accounting; and to key sites in Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir.  
 
(b) 
The second phase includes further extension of PIFRA systems to: 140 central 
line ministries and provincial line departments to support budget preparation and 
execution, and 30 district government finance offices, to enable them to connect 
electronically with Finance during budget preparation and to directly access information 
on the status of their accounts during the year; plus the design and pilot implementation 
in 15 Tehsils of a simpler financial management system for Tehsil local governments, in 
the immediate term, with the option to extend the application to a total of all 105 TMAs 
at the District headquarters around the country.  The form of architecture and application 
platform will be defined and fine-tuned during the implementation process of FABS at 
the DAO sites.  (PIFRA's work in local government will be closely coordinated with 
Governments' other initiatives in this area, including those supported by ADB.)  
 
(c) 
A phase implemented in parallel would provide for:  
 
i. 
a comprehensive end user training program, the training of finance managers and 
building accounting capacity through training on financial management, the New 
Accounting Model, and the new chart of accounts;  
 
Page  3
ii. 
design of an interface between PIFRA systems and the National Bank of Pakistan 
(NBP) and State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the Central Board of Revenue (CBR) and the 
Planning Commission (PC), to allow for timely reconciliation of accounts;  
 
iii. 
accommodating MTBF provisions in system configuration;  
 
iv. 
the development of an overall systems and data architecture and capacity to 
ensure compatible information flows and summarization among national, provincial, 
district, and tehsil governments, and between PIFRA and non-PIFRA systems for whole 
of government reporting;  
 
v. 
upgrading of DAOs and other infrastructure as may be necessary;  
 
vi. 
determining the feasibility, benefits and costs of extending FABS systems to the 
Ministry of Defense and the Railways; and,  
 
vii. 
the establishment of a data warehousing capability and system.  
 
ii) 
Capacity Building and Upgrading of the Office of the Auditor General of Pakistan 
-
US$ 19.345 million (including contingencies):  The objective of the OAGP component 
is to adopt modernized government audit procedures and internationally accepted 
auditing standards that will contribute to eradicating deficiencies in program and 
evaluation capabilities in a timely and effective manner.  There is also an urgent need to 
upgrade the organization and administrative support for OAGP to support plans to meet 
its extended audit mandate.  This is to be achieved through four sub-components:  
 
(a) 
reorganization and support technical assistance for audit management and 
development activities to implement new methodologies, and significant expansions of 
office space and equipment to meet the needs of expanded professional audit functions 
directed at improving the central capacity to report publicly on the full regularity and 
performance audit mandate including adequate audit of revenue, and the certification of 
annual accounts of corporate entities, and national, provincial and district levels of 
government;  
 
(b) 
physical upgrading and IT support for field audit - poor conditions and equipment 
will be upgraded to enable more efficient implementation of audit methods designed 
during PIFRA I;  
 
(c) 
implementation of an integrated audit management information system (AMIS)- 
to improve audit control, reporting and follow up through better communications and 
planning between Islamabad and the decentralized audit directorates; and,  
 
(d) 
upgraded training facilities and programs to develop staff to internationally 
accepted professional standards - deficiencies identified by a training needs analysis 
conducted during PIFRA I will be corrected through the implementation of a 
comprehensive training program conducted in upgraded training facilities.  
Page  4
iii) 
Capacity Building and Up-gradation of the Offices of the Controller General of 
Accounts - US$ 18.470 million (including contingencies):  The CGA ordinance 
conceives a broad role for the CGA.  Accountant General (AG) offices at Federal and 
provincial levels have been made his responsibility as well as the departmentalized 
accounting entities.  This has considerably enhanced the policy formulation, 
coordination, and administration responsibilities of the CGA.  The CGA is also expected 
to play the lead role in developing an integrated accounting and financial reporting 
environment.  The systems that the CGA inherited in a real sense are undergoing 
comprehensive change and will be very different from the legacy systems.  The objective 
of the CGA component is to assist the CGA's Office and the AGs to professionally and 
adequately manage, and also to maximize the benefits from, the computerized accounting 
environment.  This objective is to be achieved through two categories of assistance:  
 
(a) 
Strengthening Government Financial Management Policy and Capacity by:  
 
i. 
strengthening the CGA's administrative and management powers through capacity 
building of CGA staff; and recruitment of senior staff with qualifications and experience 
required to take over, manage and maintain the new system;  
 
ii. 
building a skilled internal audit complement via training and recruitment, and 
developing a comprehensive set of internal controls, internal audit work programs, and 
reporting regime, of international standards of the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA);  
 
iii. 
revising/developing government accounting, budgeting, financial, and internal 
control manuals, taking into consideration the long-term vision of eventual transition to 
full international accounting and internal auditing standards;  
 
iv. 
creating a SAP Competency Center, including help desks, to provide reliable 
technical and maintenance support for SAP applications; building IT capacity through 
recruitment of technical professionals and providing technical training opportunities 
(local and foreign) for the staff responsible for the systems. The MOF has recognized the 
necessity for supporting the recruitment of well qualified counterpart staff by the CGA 
for the IT function;  
 
(b) 
Strengthening of the CGA's facilities and systems to take maximum benefit from 
the IT-based environment by:  
 
i. 
renovation of CGA headquarters - the HQ building would be upgraded to 
adequate standards to support a computerized environment;  
 
ii. 
construction and renovation of Accountant Generals offices in Balochistan & 
Sindh (and others and required) to adequate standards and to support a computerized 
environment;  
 
Page  5
iii. 
the conversion of Balochistan Treasury Offices to DAOs, including logistical 
support for the more remote sites, and new budgeted posts;  
 
iv. 
improved internal controls, specified by the CGA in consultation with the Auditor 
General and MOF/Finance Departments, for use by the Chief Financial Officers, and 
pilot implementation in 10 sites; and  
 
v. 
improved records management needed to improve financial reports to assist 
accountability and management.  A contractor will help set up archival policies and 
arrangements, supervise equipment procurement, train internal resources and transfer the 
systems to the department.  
 
The project also includes provision for training of officers: (a)to develop staff to 
internationally accepted professional standards through degree courses in accounting, 
financial management and IT; (b) to familiarize them with the concepts, techniques and 
methods of internal audit; and, (c) for training of officers for the implementation of the 
Internal Audit Manual.  
 
iv) 
Project Management - US$ 6.446 million (including contingencies):  The 
framework for Project Management comprises:  
 
(a) 
A Steering Committee, chaired by the Auditor General, with general powers to 
oversee project policies, implementation, and responsible for reviewing proposals for 
capacity development and for post completion activities shall be established.  Its 
functions will include receiving quarterly reports on the project's progress, assisting 
coordination, approving activities and helping mitigate risks, within the project's general 
framework.  The Steering Committee's core membership will include Audit, CGA, 
Finance (Federal and Provincial), Planning, Local Government, SBP, NBP and CBR; 
others may be co-opted from time-to-time as necessary.  
 
(b) 
A Project Director with adequate devolved powers to ensure that project 
implementation runs smoothly and is coordinated (between components, between 
provinces, etc.), and not held up by administrative bottlenecks.  The Project Director's 
Terms of Reference, powers and responsibilities, as contained in Annex 6, shall be 
reviewed and agreed at negotiations.  
 
(c) 
The Project Director would head a Project Directorate.  The Directorate would 
comprise a team based in Islamabad and a Sub Directorate in each Province. The 
Islamabad team would deal with overall coordination of implementation, change 
management and communication, and back-office functions such as project accounting, 
reporting and procurement including, through its MIS Wing, running a project 
implementation tracking model.  Incremental staff (including consultants as required) 
would strengthen the existing core team. Provincial sub Directorates would play the 
pivotal role for local implementation, with each client nominating an officer to be solely 
responsible for managing project work within his/her business unit. The Chart showing 
the Service Delivery relationships with these arrangements is provided in Annex 11.  
Page  6
(d) 
Project-oriented personnel in the project management team have a major positive 
impact of the pace of implementation.  An attempt to attract such staff and to limit staff 
turnover shall be made by adopting incentives such as special and project allowances, 
honoraria, and provision of good office facilities and transport.  The Project makes 
provision for contract hiring, among others, of the Director for the FABS Component, 
Director of the Auditing Component, the Director of the Training Component and other 
consultants for appropriate support at market rates during the 5-year project 
implementation period to minimize critical staff turnover during the crucial 
implementation phase.  
 
(e) 
The Project Director would have PAO responsibilities for project finances. This 
will help to ensure that project implementation and coordination are integrated with 
project finances.  
 
(f) 
Communication and change management will be the responsibility of a 
designated senior officer, who will determine strategy, oversee implementation and report 
results achieved.  Change management related to project implementation shall be 
managed through the Sub Directorates, and tailored to the needs of particular activities.  
Consultancy services and technical assistance will be secured to support the Government 
in implementing the change management activities (See Annex 7 for further details).  
 
(g) 
Adequate space for the Project Directorate at Islamabad and Sub Directorates at 
Provincial HQs shall be needed.  In Islamabad, space sufficient to house the complete 
Project Management Directorate at one site would be acquired.  Provincial Governments 
would be requested to accommodate their respective Sub Directorates.  
 
(h) 
As part of the project's unallocated category provided under the Project 
Management component, a sum of US$2 Million has been provisioned for utilization for 
activities under the aegeis of the Federal and 4 Provincial Finance Departments in order 
to reinforce the effective delivery of the fiscal management capacity part of the project 
through those offices.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project Directorate will be headquartered in Islamabad with sub-Directorates in all 
the four provinces.  The project would also extend to DAOs in AJK.  Since AJK is a 
disputed territory, the standard disclaimer has been included in the project 
documentation. The project involves some construction, but new building will be on 
Government-owned land held free of encroachments, and the balance shall be 
refurbishment of existing office space by items such as installing electrical and 
communication wiring, general repair, and maintenance.  There is no land acquisition 
anticipated; however, small piece(s) of land, if required, for construction of new offices, 
will be purchased by the Government through commercial means.  There is no 
involuntary resettlement envisaged.  
 
Page  7
B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [ ], C [X], FI [ ]  
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered  
 
Yes No 
 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01) 
[ ] 
[ X ]  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) [ ] 
[ X]  
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60) 
[X ] 
[ ]  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50) 
[ ] 
[ X]  
 
Disclaimer: "A part of the proposed project will be carried out in Azad Jammu Kashmir, 
an area over which Pakistan and India have been in dispute since 1947. By financing the 
credit, IDA does not intend to make any judgement as to the legal or other status of the 
disputed territory or to prejudice the final determination of the parties claim."   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
Page  8
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas 
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared 
Yes 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
No 
Page  9
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Anthony Graeme Lee 
04/27/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
04/27/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/27/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Robert J. Saum 
04/27/2005 
Comments:   
