                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                    Report No.: 96168
Date prepared/updated: April 27, 2015

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Islamic Republic of Pakistan               Project ID: P154036
                                                    Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Disaster and Climate Resilience Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Haris Khan
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2015            Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2015
Managing Unit: GSURR                                Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                    Financing
Sector: Flood protection (70%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%)
Theme:
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 150.0
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                       Yes [ ]                  No [ X ]
Simplified Processing                               Simple [X ]              Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 10.00, Para 12.00 (Situations of            Yes [X ]         No []
Urgent Need or Assistance)

2. Project Objectives:

1. The project aims to support restoration of flood protection infrastructure and strengthen
government capacity to manage disasters and climate variability.

3. Project Description:

Project Components

Component 1: Restoring flood protection infrastructure and upgrading flood management
systems– USD 100 million
Component 1 aims to enhance physical resilience through the restoration, rehabilitation and
improvement of critical flood protection infrastructure.

1. Subcomponent 1.1. Flood Protection Works (USD 80 million): This subcomponent will
finance the restoration of flood protection infrastructure damaged during 2014 flood in Punjab
and the following eight districts: Neelum, Hattian, Bagh, Poonch, Haveli, Kotli, Bhimber and
Muzaffarabad (collectively, the “Northern Districts?). These investments will include:

    a) Restoration of flood embankments to resilient standards
    b) Rehabilitation of other infrastructure such as spurs and river channelization works

2. Potential flood mitigation investments in Punjab and the Northern Districts include some
works that are at an advanced stage of readiness and could be taken up under this subcomponent
in the short term. The Government has shared a prospective list of ready investments with the
Bank in this regard. The financing requirements for these immediate works are USD 65 million
in Punjab and USD 15 million for the Northern Districts.

3. A framework approach will be used to finalize subprojects under this component based on
selection criteria1. This approach is being taken due to the emergency nature of the project. In
addition, the component will finance preparatory work for those additional investments requiring
longer preparation times. It will also support the agency implementing the infrastructure work in
Punjab to further enhance their flood management systems.

4. Sub Component 1.2. Feasibility Studies and Diagnostics for Medium-Long Term Works
(USD15 million): This subcomponent will finance preparatory activities (feasibility studies,
consulting services for surveys, designs, environmental and social impact assessments, etc.) for
proposed medium-long term investments that may bring about significant improvements to flood
protection and have high economic benefits. Once preparatory activities are completed, these
works may also be considered for support through the framework approach.

5. Sub Component 1.3. Upgrading Flood Management Systems (USD 5 million): The sub-
component will support the Punjab Irrigation Department for implementation of non-structural
measures to enhance flood management and its related equipment upgrades and studies.
Specifically, (i) Establishment of a Decision Support System with its required telemetry system
to facilitate evidence based decision making related to selecting optimal breaching sites,
managing flood peaks, and irrigation infrastructure management during flood events; (ii) Safety
evaluation of flood protection structures, which will involve building in-house capacity at PID
and providing the required equipment for structural safety assessments; (iii) Supporting the
Irrigation Research Institute to undertake studies/ trainings on improving design, operations, and
maintenance of flood protection infrastructure, and; (iv) River morphology studies and floodplain
mapping of selected eastern rivers impacted by the 2014 floods (i.e. Jhelum and Chenab Rivers)
as well as floodplain mapping for these rivers, to identify risks and possible mitigation measures.

Component 2: Upgrading Climate Infrastructure – USD 23 million

6.     Component 2 aims to enhance climate resilience by upgrading the national hydro-
meteorological observation network and associated flood early warning systems (FEWS). The
project will support improvement of hydro-meteorological information services through

1
 These criteria will inter alia include: (i) economic impact; (ii) technical readiness and feasibility criteria; (iii)
demand by local communities; (iv) implementation duration; and, (v) scale of safeguards issues and mitigation costs.
As and when the selection criteria are met, activities would be eligible to be included in the Project.
upgrading radar equipment, strengthening flood forecasting capability and early warning
systems, and improving dissemination of hydro-meteorological information. Further, the weather
forecasting system will be upgraded beyond current capabilities, to support 24 hours-per-day,
365-days-per-year operations, with forecast lead-times of 7-days, including forecast verification
to assess forecast reliability. The aging radars will be replaced and upgraded while gaps in radar
coverage would also be addressed through the project.

Component 3: Managing Disasters – USD 18 million

7.    Component 3 aims to strengthen the government’s capacity to better manage disasters.
This component will finance risk identification, institutional strengthening for improved
management of disasters and enhancing fiscal resilience.

8.      Subcomponent 3.1. Risk Identification (USD 2 million): This subcomponent will focus on
identifying the risk environment for informed planning and decision-making, development of
framework to undertake the assessments, as well as tools to allow the optimal utilization of risk
information. Specifically a) Studies on urban and flash flooding in Punjab and; b) Slope
stabilization studies in the Northern Districts.

9.       Subcomponent 3.2. Institutional Strengthening for DRM (USD 12 million): This
subcomponent will provide support towards strengthening the DRM institutional structure as
well as building capacity and equipping the Disaster Management Authorities in Punjab and the
relevant disaster management entity in the Northern Districts. Activities will include: a)
Institutional and policy review; b) Strengthening of DMAs down to district level; c)
Mainstreaming DRM in the planning process in collaboration with Planning and Development
(P&D) Department, Punjab.

10.     Subcomponent 3.3. Fiscal Resilience (USD 4 million): The subcomponent will support
the federal and Punjab governments to develop a National Disaster Risk Finance Strategy. The
strategy will formalize objectives and scope, evaluate various financial instruments to finance
contingent liability to natural disasters, and recommend implementation of selected instruments.

11.       The project will also provide advisory services to Punjab Provincial Disaster
Management Fund (PDMF). The project will support the development of an appropriate
governance structure, SOPs, fiduciary safeguards and controls, and transparent allocation
criteria, drawing on international good practices.

12.     The Government of Punjab used early recovery cash transfers for the floods in 2010,
2011, and 2014. The sub-component will support the development of a standard emergency cash
transfer system in collaboration with the PDMA and Punjab Social Protection Authority (PSPA).

Component 4: Project Management – USD 9 million
13.     The project will be implemented through mandated government departments including
Pakistan Meteorological Department, Punjab Irrigation Department, Punjab Disaster
Management Authority, and the apex planning and development agency for the Northern
Districts. This component will support engagement of additional resources at Project
Implementation Units within these departments.
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response– USD 0 million
14.     Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the government
may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This
component would draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and allow the
government to request the Bank to reallocate financing from other project components to
partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to
channel additional funds should they become available for the emergency.

4. Project Location

15. The physical interventions under the project (components 1 and 2) will be carried out in
Punjab and the Northern Districts, mostly along the rivers– Chenab, Jhelum and possibly Indus.
16. The Punjab province is predominantly plain area with most parts having fertile lands and
availability of irrigation water. There are some hilly areas in the northwest and extreme
southwest. There is also a plateau adjacent to the mountains known as the Pothohar plateau and a
desert belt in the southeastern part known as Cholistan. The province is traversed by rivers and a
large network of irrigation canals that emanate from them. The fertile land and availability of
irrigation water facilitate extensive cultivation and other agricultural activities such as livestock
rearing. The province supports a large road and railway network; river navigation is also carried
out at some places. Population density is high particularly in the canal-irrigated areas; the
population density was 353 persons per square kilometer as compared to the national figure of
164 according to the 1998 census. The project interventions will be carried out mostly along the
rivers, in plain areas.
17. The Northern Districts are mostly hilly in nature with a network of valleys, steep to
moderately steep slopes, and small streams and rivulets flowing through the bottom of the
valleys. The streams and rivulets eventually drain into the Jhelum River. The slopes are covered
with mostly scrub vegetation at lower elevations while conifer forests also exist at higher
altitudes. Cultivation is scant and is possible only where flat land and irrigation water is
available – mostly along the rivers and streams. The population density is likewise low
compared to the plain areas. The road network also exists though the hilly terrain and makes it
difficult to build and maintain roads. The project interventions will mostly be carried out along
the rivers and streams at lower altitudes.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Javaid Afzal
Samina Mussarat Islam

Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                                         Yes   No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
The project components 1 and 2 include activities that can potentially cause environmental impacts
                                                                                                     X
of low to moderate intensity and significance. Hence the project has been categorized as
Environment Category B.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
                                                                                                           X
The project interventions will be carried out in areas where the natural habitat has already been
modified. In addition, the ESMF includes a screening process for the subprojects to ensure that no
activities are planned at/near any sensitive habitat and or protected areas and that the proposed
activities do not have any significant impacts on natural habitat.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
The project interventions will be carried out in areas that are not forested. In addition, the ESMF
                                                                                                               X
includes a screening process for the subprojects to ensure that no activities are planned at/near any
forests and that the proposed activities do not have any significant impacts on forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
The project does not involve procurement or usage of agro-chemicals nor will it promote any                    X
increase in the usage of these chemicals.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
No damage to physical cultural resources is expected. In addition, the ESMF includes a screening
                                                                                                               X
process for the subprojects to ensure that no activities are planned at/near any physical cultural
resources and that the proposed activities do not have any significant impact on such resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
No indigenous communities as recognized by the Bank and other development partners reside in the               X
Punjab province or the Northern Districts.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
                                                                                                           X
The project components 1 and 2 can potentially cause resettlement impacts.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
                                                                                                               X
The project does not involve any works on dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
As the tributaries of Indus River are international waterways, the Project triggers the Bank’s policy
on Projects on International Waterways. Proposed project activities however only entail
rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing infrastructure and technical studies and as such fall under
                                                                                                           X
the exception to the notification requirement under paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of OP 7.50. In
accordance with the requirements of the policy, a memo outlining the rationale for the decision not
to notify riparians has been prepared and approved by Bank Management.



II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
18. The project is expected to have many positive impacts including reduction of poverty,
protection of vulnerable and marginalized groups such as women, male and female children,
elderly, minorities and the poor living below the poverty line. More specific positive impacts
include: protection of villages and settlement, protection of grazing areas for livestock, decrease
in area of land lost due to erosion, social protection, improvement in local environmental
conditions, reduced incidence of water borne diseases, decrease public health risks, protection of
damages to crop, public and privately owned infrastructure, increase in agricultural produce and
economic gain, provision of better conditions for intensive agriculture, reduction in poverty and
generation of employment opportunities for the locals, protection of wildlife and development of
new habitats. Most of the negative environmental impacts will be short-term and limited to the
physical works phase. These can include: water pollution, diversion of water for construction,
elimination of washing areas/sites, leakages of chemicals and hydrocarbons, runoff from roads,
change in natural flow of river, land pollution (if solid waste material, camp site area, stone
stacking area, stock yard area and removed vegetative cover is left unattended), noise and
vibration due to movement of machinery, air pollution due to smoke and dust, traffic and public
nuisance, removal of trees, vegetation cover during site clearance. And low to moderate social
impacts may occur such as minor loss of crops due to loss of encroached public lands, damages
to kacha rooms used for storage of agriculture inputs and grains, and animal sheds; and in few
cases loss of grazing land. The physical work-related social impacts will involve health and
safety, and access issues of professional staff/labor and communities residing near the area where
the subprojects are carried out.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

19. No potential indirect and/or negative long term negative environmental or social impacts are
expected in the project areas due to project activities. Both Punjab and the Northern Districts
have seen significant population growth and urbanization in the last few decades and the trend is
expected to continue irrespective of project activity. Over the last decade an increase in the
intensity and frequency of extreme weather events has also been observed in the project area and
that uncertainty may worsen due to exacerbating climate change effects. Project activities will go
a long way towards building resilience in communities against climate change induced disasters.


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

20. An indicative list of activities includes minimum intensive interventions focused on
repair/restoration and rehabilitation of flood protection infrastructure. The activities are not
expected to have significant or irreversible social and environmental impacts that are negative,
but is expected to have intensive positive impacts on the environment and socio-economic
conditions of the population residing in the project area. Hence the project is a better alternative
compared to no-action.
21. At the sub-project level, the alternatives will be considered at the time of designing and
assessing of each intervention from the social and environment perspective, with the help of
checklists and procedures laid down in the ESMF. During the social and environment
assessment of each sub-project, its design and construction alternatives will be evaluated by the
technical staff and consultants with the participation of potentially affected and intended
beneficiary communities and their respective environmental and social impacts will be
considered to explore alternative; but alternatives with respect to the sub-project sites will
usually not be needed owing to the fact that most of these interventions will be
rehabilitation/restoration of existing structures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

22. The borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
including a Resettlement Policy Framework to identify and mitigate all potential environmental
and socio-economic impacts. The ESMF includes list of screening instruments adequate to the
activity scale and impact and takes into account the geographic variation and difference in
environmental resource base between Punjab and the Northern Districts. The developed ESMF
has been presented to the Bank for review, and cleared by the Bank. The ESMF has been
disclosed in-country by the clients on their websites, through placement of document in the
Implementing Agencies (IAs) and line agencies offices, and distributed among other
stakeholders, and internationally at the Bank InfoShop on April 28, 2015. The executive
summary of ESMF translated into local language and disclosed on the websites of IAs and
distributed among institutional stakeholders, will also be distributed to affected and beneficiary
communities at the early stage of sub-projects.
23. The ESMF includes a screening criteria for selection of the project activities that will ensure
that the activities selected; a) do not have any significant, irreversible or long-term
environmental or social impacts, b) do not involve any greenfield construction, c) do not involve
any works in protected areas or in or around sensitive natural habitats, d) do not cause any
degradation of forestry or damage to physical cultural resources, e) do not involve work on any
flood infrastructure up to or more than 10 meters in height, f) does not require an Environmental
Impact Assessment according to Pakistan Environmental Act and relevant guidelines and g) does
not cause any land acquisition and significant resettlement impacts such as displacement and
loss of livelihood.
24. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared as part of the ESMF, it will
allow application of OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy requirements. RPF defines
objectives and principles of resettlement, provides sub-projects screening mechanism to explore
alternative design options, to avoid or minimize resettlement impacts. It identifies adverse social
impacts and provides an estimation of magnitude/extent of potential impacts, mechanisms for
organizational arrangements including supervision, monitoring and Grievance Redressal
Mechanism. It also includes mechanism for preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to
efficiently mitigate/compensate social impacts and lay down funding mechanism for their
implementation. The RAPs will be developed to systematically assess, avoid/minimize and
mitigate or compensate involuntary resettlement impacts within an agreed timeframe expected
from loss of encroached government land mostly used for agriculture purpose, storing agriculture
inputs/grains and keeping animals in kacha structures.
25. The ESMF includes a social and environmental checklist that shall assess the potential
subproject impacts on the basis of its scale, nature and potential negative impacts. The checklist
prescribes further screening and environmental management instruments to be prepared for
activities which might have relatively more extensive impacts. For all flood works restoration
activities that are likely to cause environmental degradation/impacts, an Environmental and
Social Management Plan shall be prepared. Where necessary, the project team shall engage
consultants to prepare a detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment in compliance
with the OP 4.01 (OPs 4.04, 4.36, 4.09, 4.11, and 4.37 have not been triggered as explained
under Section 5). The screening checklist proposes mitigation measures for low and moderate
impacts, including compensatory tree plantation at a ratio of four for each tree felled, water
sprinkling for keeping dust and air pollution down, provision of employment to local labor to
avoid social conflicts, proper maintenance of vehicles, generators and machinery, waste pits for
solid waste management, designated areas for vehicles and generators with potential oil spills
away from the water bodies, labor and working conditions, health and safety measures for
professional employees, skilled and unskilled labor, and communities residing in sub-project
areas. Additionally the ESMF proposes institutional arrangements to ensure that the mitigation
measures are implemented effectively and efficiently, and also proposes monitoring, reporting
and documentation protocols by the IAs, designing and supervision consultants, and civil works
contractors.
26. Both the Punjab and the Northern Districts PIUs shall employ environmental and social
safeguards specialists, to oversee and ensure compliance with the ESMF and the RPF, also
before identifying and designing the subprojects that may have environmental and or social
impacts.
27. The project will employ a three tiered monitoring structure with focal persons nominated
from the concerned staff to monitor implementation of safeguards instruments during works
phase. The safeguards specialist will compile the monitoring checklists to prepare and collate a
quarterly environmental and social progress report.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

28. During preparation of ESMF, SEMU (PID, Punjab) and the apex planning and development
agency for the Northern Districts organized consultations with intended beneficiaries, potentially
affected persons and other key institutional stakeholders. Consultations were held with key
government and civil society stakeholders at different levels through meetings, focus group
discussions and key informant interviews with smaller groups of grassroots stakeholders such as
potentially affected persons, project intended beneficiaries and local communities residing near
proposed sub-projects. Whereas discussions with institutional stakeholders were arranged
through meetings and consultation workshops. The ESMF includes feedback/comments and
suggestions/recommendations received from consultations. Additional subproject-specific
consultations will be carried out during the project implementation at the designing and
implementation stages.
29. The ESMF has been disclosed in compliance with Bank’s Access to Information Policy. The
ESMF and Urdu translation of its executive summary have been placed on the official websites
of the Implementing Agencies on April 28, 2015 and disclosed on the WB InfoShop on April 28,
2015. The EMF and Urdu translation of its executive summary are being placed at all regional
offices of the relevant departments/line agencies and sent to all institutional stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  April 17, 2015
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              April 28, 2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                               April 28, 2015
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                   N/A
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: ESMF
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  April 17, 2015
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          April 28, 2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                           April 28, 2015
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [X ]   No [ ]     N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     Yes
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No [X]     N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [X]     N/A [ ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]     N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11– Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to           Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]   No[ ]     N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         NA
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the    NA
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [X]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes [X]
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [X]     N/A [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the    Yes [X]   No [ ]     N/A [ ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:      Proposed Project activities only
                                                             entail rehabilitation or reconstruction
                                                             of existing infrastructure and
                                                             technical studies (paragraphs 7(a)
                                                             and 7(b) of OP 7.50).
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                      Yes [X]         No [ ]       N/A [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]       No [ ]        N/A [ ]
the World Bank's InfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]       No [ ]        N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name                            Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Haris Khan                                     April 28, 2015
 Environmental Specialist:           Javaid Afzal                                   April 27, 2015
 Social Development Specialist       Samina Islam                                   April 27, 2015
 (consultant)
 Additional Environmental and/or     Fouad Khan                                     April 27, 2015
 Social Development Specialist(s):
 Social Development Specialist       Rana Sarwar                                    April 27, 2015
 (consultant)
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Francis V. Fragano / Zia Al Jalaly             April 28, 2015
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:                   Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst                      April 28, 2015
   Comments:
