Page  1
1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated) 
Report No: 34399 
Section I - Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2005 
 
A. Basic Project Data (From PDS)
 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
Country:
 PAKISTAN 
Project ID:
 P010556 
Project:
 Highways Rehabilitation 
Task Team Leader:
 Zafar Iqbal Raja 
Authorized to Appraise Date:
 April 23, 2003 
IBRD Amount ($m):
 150.00 
Bank Approval:
 December 23, 2003 
IDA Amount ($m):
 150.00            
Managing Unit:
 SASEI 
Lending Instrument:
 Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
Status: 
Lending 
Sector:
 Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:
 Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (P);  Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P) 
 
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS) 
 
The project development objective is the sustainable delivery of a productive and efficient National 
Highway System, contributing to lower transportation costs.  
 
The Government of Pakistan is implementing a National Highway Improvement Program (NHIP) to 
increase the efficiency of the National Highway Network, through phased improvement of approx. 
2700 km of highways. The program was initiated during FY02 using GOP’s own resources. The 
Highway Rehabilitation Project is financing a distinct segment of NHIP works (about 856 km of 
highway improvements along the national highway N-5) over a five year implementation period, 
while also supporting essential reforms in the sector and the strengthening of the National Highway 
Authority (NHA). 
 
In addition, the Project will also finance reconstruction and rehabilitation of about 180 km of roads 
damaged by the earthquake of October 8, 2005. The proposed project will be carried out in Azad 
Jammu & Kashmir, an area over which India and Pakistan have been in dispute since 1947. By 
financing the proposed Loan, IBRD does not intend to make any judgment as to the legal or other 
status of any disputed territories or to prejudice the final determination of the parties’ claims. 
 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS): 
 
The project has the following three components:   
 
a
.
Network Conservation Component -
 this consists of civil works along the national highways N-
5
and M-9 comprising: 
 
i). 
Rehabilitation and Improvement of about 550 km of highway (including structures),  
ii). 
Resurfacing and Strengthening of 306 km of highway, 
iii).  Safety Improvement works at 15 - 20 locations, 
iv).  Afforestation (tree planting) along the project corridor for a length of about 2,500 avenue 
km, 
Page  2
2
v). 
Relocation of utilities, 
vi).  Consultancy Services for design, contract administration and construction supervision, and 
vii). Resettlement & Land Acquisition. 
 
b
.
Policy Support and Institutional Development Component -
 this includes technical assistance, 
training, equipment support and incremental operating costs:  
 
i). 
to help implement improved sub-sectoral policies (MTBF - to improve targeting of public 
sector resources; RMA - to provide stable and secure funding for maintenance), and  
ii).  to strengthen NHA institutional capacity, improve performance and efficiency (business 
process re-engineering and corporate strengthening; improved road asset management; 
improved road safety practices; enhanced environmental management and resettlement 
practices; sector studies and future project preparation). 
 
c
.
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Earthquake Damaged Roads Component
 
–
this 
consists of civil works including: 
 
i). 
Reconstruction of about 65 km of national highway N-15 (including structures),  
ii). 
Rehabilitation of about 45 km of national highway N-35, 
iii).  Rehabilitation of about 15 km of national highway S-2, 
iv).  Rehabilitation of about 55 km of Jhelum Valley Road in Azad Jammu & Kashmir, 
v). 
Relocation of utilities, 
vi).  Consultancy Services for design, contract administration and construction supervision, and 
vii). Resettlement & Land Acquisition. 
 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social 
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, 
or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
 
N-5 and M-9
The N5 Highway stretches across the Karachi–Lahore–Rawalpindi–Peshawar–Torkham corridor for 
over 1,760 km. The Karachi–Hyderabad Super Highway (M9) provides an alternative route to the 
N5 from Karachi to Hyderabad at the southern end of the north-south corridor.  The northern part of 
the corridor passing through the Punjab and NWFP provinces, falls within the Potohar Plateau and is 
characterized by heavily eroded topography and low hill ranges.  The southern corridor extending 
through the Sindh province consists of stretches of level alluvial plain and is fringed by the Cholistan 
and Thar deserts.  The corridor runs parallel to the Indus River and its five main tributaries and is 
also drained by an extensive contiguous irrigation system.  In general, the areas traversed by the 
project corridor are poorly vegetated, falling under tropical thorn forest and sand dune desert.  Much 
of this region has been cleared for cultivation, and even in the five protected areas identified along 
the project corridor, biological diversity is very low.  
 
The corridor’s highway sections pass through a region that collectively sustains almost 92% of the 
country’s population.  Apart from the cities and towns located in the vicinity of the project corridor 
where economic diversity is relatively high, the rural communities here are essentially involved in 
agriculture or associated occupations.  Encroachments and squatter settlements within the right of 
way (RoW) are common on almost all sections of the project corridor, with about 200 structures 
(involving an estimated 350 PAPs) falling within the corridor’s proposed construction limits.  The 
squatter settlements located along the project corridor are primarily concentrated in areas where rural 
Page  3
3
settlements and towns are located fairly close to the highway.  These settlements are solely 
commercial in nature.   
 
N-15, N-35, S-2 and Jhelum Valley Road
All the four damaged roads are located in mountainous terrain with lush green valleys. These 
highways are strategic roads of national importance. N-35 (popularly known as the Karakoram 
Highway) links the Northern Areas (NA) of Pakistan with rest of the country and is the overland 
trade route to China. S-2 links Muzaffarabad, the capital of Azad Jammu & Kashmir (AJ&K) with 
rest of Pakistan. And, N-15 provides basic access to a number of towns and villages along the 
Kaghan/Naran valleys that are also among the top summer tourism attractions in Pakistan. The 
Jhelum valley road provides vital links to a number of towns and villages along the valley. 
 
The rural communities here are essentially involved in agriculture or associated occupations.  
Encroachments and squatter settlements within the right of way (RoW) are not as common as on N-5 
and M-9. The squatter settlements located along these four highways are primarily concentrated in 
areas where rural settlements and towns are located fairly close to or along the highway. These 
settlements are solely commercial in nature. 
 
B. Check Environmental Classification: 
 
B
(Partial Assessment) 
Comments:
 
At the time of PCD clearance in 1998, the project was classified as an environmental 
category A’ project given the potentially large-scale degree of resettlement involved.  However, in 
view of the current reduced scope of the HRP and its limited potential environmental impacts, 
SASES has reclassified the project to category ‘B’.  
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS) 
(click on 
for a detailed description 
or
click on the policy number for a brief description) 
 
Policy Triggered 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01) 
Yes 
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04) 
No 
 
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36) 
No 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
No 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
No 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
No 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
Yes 
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37) 
No 
 
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50) 
No 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)* 
Yes 
 
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management 
 
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not 
available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data. 
 
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Page  4
4
Environmental Issues
.
Apart from the construction of one bypass in Matiari, Sindh, the project’s 
construction works will be confined within the NHA’s existing RoW.  Environmental issues 
associated with the project include managing the procurement of borrow material and topsoil 
conservation, including the clean-up and restoration of disturbed areas; appropriately locating 
temporary construction camps, asphalt plants, and waste disposal sites, and managing dust, noise and 
other environmental impacts of operating these facilities; traffic management and safety during 
construction and operation; avoiding obstruction of highway drainage systems during construction 
and operation; and enhancing and maintaining avenue tree plantation along the proposed highway 
sections. NHA has prepared and submitted to the Bank supplementary EIA reports for its Lahore-
Gujranwala and Turnol-Chablat sections due to major changes in the design. However, the World 
Bank has cleared the two reports under the condition that the existing EMP for rehabilitation projects 
Phase II be updated to accommodate the mitigation measures proposed in the two supplementary 
EIA Reports.  
 
Besides, for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of earthquake damaged roads safe and appropriate 
disposal of debris accumulated at various reaches will be a challenge and appropriate disposal sites 
will have to be identified either within or outside the project area. Since majority of the roads (road 
sections) to be reconstructed and rehabilitated are the only road links for traffic in the area, provision 
of suitable alternate route during the construction phase will have to be ensured to keep the road link 
operative. 
 
Social Issues
.
The key social issues associated with this project concern resettling approximately 
350 squatters and vulnerable encroachers presently operating businesses within the proposed 
construction limit of the project corridor; minimizing the project’s impact on cultural sites or 
structures and community-owned assets during construction and operation; and ensuring pedestrian 
and traffic safety during construction and operation. 
 
The bypass at Matiari on the Hyderabad–Hala section in Sindh is the only segment where about 6 ha 
of land needs to be acquired to extend the RoW. There are also some assets on the land including 2 
houses and 6 huts that may need to be partly demolished.  The land for Matiari has been acquired 
following the process of willing seller-willing buyer, after reaching consensus on the price, and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) followed.   Under Phase I, there were 28 structures located 
within the proposed construction limit, i.e., 16 on the Hyderabad–Hala section and 12 on the Hala–
Moro section.  All 28 were commercial units; whose removal would affect the business income of a 
total of 36 project-affected persons (PAPs). 3 PAPs have been provided with kiosks while 4 others 
declined to accept the kiosks (after agreeing to it during consultation), The rest of the PAPs were 
mobile vendors who were facilitated in shifting their structures to a location close to the original 
location.   An initial estimation based on preliminary surveys of the project corridor indicates that 
during Phase II, approximately 158 structures falling within the proposed construction limit will 
need to be relocated.  The exact number of PAPs whose livelihood will be affected during Phase II is 
currently being documented by the NHA.  The project’s RSP contracts will not entail any 
resettlement during either Phase I or II, since all squatters’ settlements lie outside the proposed 
construction limit.  Under Phase I, there are 24 mosques, 12 graveyards, 4 shrines and a number of 
public utility structures that fall within the proposed construction limit.  The RPF provides 
mitigatory measures and will be applied for payment of compensation/relocating these 
assets/infrastructure.  However, with a change in the design, none of the infrastructure 
(mosques/graves/shrines etc) has been affected. 
 
The social issues for the 180 Km of additional roads destroyed by the earthquake are expected, to 
require acquisition of small pieces of land, and impact on livelihood of squatters, and vulnerable 
Page  5
5
encroachers. The Social Assessment that will be conducted will inform the project regarding the 
magnitude of the social issues.  
 
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard 
policy or due to multiple project component.  
N.A. 
 
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project 
area. 
 
Potential long-term impacts include changes in land use patterns and economic activity in and 
around the project corridor as a result of ribbon development and increased traffic inflow.  Since the 
N5 and M9 are pr
imary arteries already carrying the bulk of the country’s north-south traffic, it is 
difficult to attribute additional traffic to the improvement of the highway sections included in the 
project. In fact, better highway conditions will improve the speed and flow of traffic along the 
corridor, leading to lowering of emissions and improvement in air quality in the short term, in 
comparison to a no-project option.  Noise generated by vehicular traffic during highway operation is 
likely to affect sensitive receptors located within about 50 m of the highway. In the medium term, 
highway safety conditions will improve as a result of (i) the proposed road improvement works as 
well as specific safety improvements included as part of the project civil works, based on detailed 
road safety audits undertaken during the design stage (e.g. junction improvements, pedestrian 
crossings, service lanes to separate slow moving traffic near major urban areas, additional road 
signage and pavement markings, etc.); (ii) improved NHA road asset management practices and 
increased institutional accountability to external stakeholders being promoted through the project; 
(iii) introduction of regular highway patrols and more effective enforcement of traffic rules along the 
Highway N-5 by the newly inducted National Highway and Motorway Police, under the Ministry of 
Communications; and (iv) community-level safety awareness campaigns along the project corridor 
proposed under the project 
 
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required) 
 
There are two investment options available for improving the main north-south highway corridor in 
order to meet the increasing transport demands of a growing economy.  One option is to 
develop a 
new
 highway/road system, while the other option is to 
improve the existing
 network.  The second 
option is more viable in view of economic considerations and is consistent with the NHA’s present 
policy objectives.  The no-project option is not desirable as it would impede national economic 
growth, contribute to environmental degradation, and lead to deteriorating road safety conditions.  
As far as project design alternatives are concerned, demarcating an alternative route would require 
vast amounts of land acquisition, disrupt rural communities, interfere with established natural and 
agro-ecosystems, and result in further environmental and social degradation.  
 
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues 
 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues
:
The Borrower has prepared and provided a sectoral 
social and environment assessment (SEA), environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for Phase I 
rehabilitation and maintenance projects (RMP) and resurfacing and strengthening projects (RSP),  
environmental management plans (EMPs) for Phase I projects, environmental impact assessments 
(EIAs) for Phase II (RMP as well as RSP), environmental management plans (EMPs) for Phase II 
projects, supplementary EIAs for Phase II (RMP) Lahore-Gujranwala section and Turnol-Chablat 
section and EIA for Phase I (RMP) construction of Matiari Bypass.  The EMPs developed by the 
Page  6
6
NHA will help the organization address the adverse environmental and social impacts, enhance 
project benefits, and introduce standards of good environmental and social practice for highway 
construction and operation within the organization and in the country.  A Social Assessment (SA) for 
phase II has been prepared while a rapid SA for the additional portions of the roads (located in the 
earthquake affected areas) will be conducted and the agreed upon RPF implemented. 
 
Principal environmental mitigation measures proposed in the EMP include the following: 
 
·
Location of borrow areas on land prone to low impact, e.g., agriculturally unproductive land 
·
Measures to prevent topsoil erosion e.g., limiting the excavation of soil to specified depths, 
and protecting embankments with vegetation barriers or stone pitching 
·
Location of project facilities more than 500 m from inhabited or protected areas 
·
Measures to manage the environmental impact of operating project facilities, including 
waste disposal measures preventing soil and water resource contamination; cleanup and 
restoration of disturbed areas such as asphalt plants, borrow areas, waste disposal sites, labor 
and construction camps, etc. 
·
Tree plantation program to compensate for the anticipated loss of vegetation during 
construction activities, and to help abate pollution caused by emissions, dust, and noise 
during highway operation 
·
Provisions in the project’s outline design to prevent the obstruction of the corridor’s drainage 
system 
·
Wall barriers to mitigate the impact of noise on sensitive receptors such as schools and 
hospitals during construction and operation 
·
Provisions for highway safety facilities to reduce the risks faced by pedestrians 
·
Implementation of traffic management plans and road safety awareness campaigns among 
local communities. 
 
In addition, NHA will prepare
1
an 
Environmental Assessment Framework (EAF)
 containing 
appropriate environmental mitigation measures and will clear it with the Bank before commencing 
implementation of the earthquake rehabilitation works. 
 
Implementation of Environmental and Social Compliance
:
The EMPs also define the 
responsibilities of project proponent, contractors and other role players; identify training 
requirements at various levels; define supervision and monitoring mechanisms and parameters; and 
specify the budgetary requirements for implementation to ensure that all mitigation measures are 
effectively implemented.  A high-level NHA steering committee formed to oversee the project will 
have the ultimate responsibility for environmental management and compliance with the project’s 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  Senior staff positions have been provided for supervising 
environmental and social assessments, and providing inputs and guidance on environmental matters 
during the project’s planning, design, contracting, construction, and operation phases.  An 
international supervision consultant to be appointed by the NHA will assist the organization in 
supervising the construction contractors and ensuring that all contractual obligations related to 
environmental and social compliance are met.   
 
Resettlement Safeguard Issues
:
In accordance with the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.12 on 
involuntary resettlement, the resettlement of PAPs and the relocation of affected structures will be 
1
The Sectoral Environmental Assessment (SEA), Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management 
Plans (EA/EMPs), and Social Assessment and Resettlement Action Plans (SA/RAPs) for the existing project will 
serve as templates for the EAF. 
Page  7
7
carried out under a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the project.  The RPF 
addresses the compensation of property, structures, and livelihood, and defines implementation 
responsibilities.  Its main provisions are listed below: 
 
·
The loss of privately owned land or built-up property will be compensated on current market 
value /a replacement-cost basis under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
·
New 8 x 8 ft kiosks will be constructed to accommodate displaced squatters and vulnerable 
encroachers who operate fixed structures that cannot be moved any further back from their 
current location within the proposed construction limit. 
·
Squatters and vulnerable encroachers whose structures are mobile will be provided only 
shifting assistance. 
·
The main highway construction sites will not be handed over to the contractors until the 
kiosks have been constructed.  However, if new kiosks are not provided at the time of 
shifting, eligible squatters/vulnerable encroachers will be exempted from kiosk lease 
payments for a specified period; and will be provided livelihood assistance the new kiosks 
are made available. 
·
Labor employed by squatters/vulnerable encroachers will be protected by making their 
employers’ livelihood assistance conditional on the employees being retained
 
·
Existing public utilities that may be affected within the proposed construction limit will be 
relocated with the prior approval of the concerned agencies and utilities. 
·
Community-owned utilities, e.g., hand pumps and wells that may be affected within the 
proposed construction limit will be relocated in consultation with local communities. 
·
All culturally significant structures that may be affected within the proposed construction 
limit will be relocated in consultation with the local community. 
 
Under this framework, of the 28 businesses/structures falling within the proposed construction limit 
under Phase I, nine business operators (including one vulnerable encroacher) were to be provided 
new kiosks within the RoW on a lease-payment basis; 16 business operators were to be assisted in 
moving out of the proposed construction limit and further back within the RoW; and a total of 25 
businesses were entitled to shifting assistance.  The remaining three structures are encroachments 
owned by non-vulnerable business operators and were to be removed.  As mentioned earlier 3 PAPs 
were provided with kiosks, 4 other declined   to accept the kiosks while the rest of the PAPs were 
facilitated in moving to a location in close proximity to the original location. 
 
Environmental and Social Monitoring
.
An environmental monitoring committee drawn from 
senior NHA staff will monitor and document the progress of the project in accordance with the 
planned schedule of activities; and liaise between the NHA, environmental protection agencies, and 
World Bank in the context of compliance.  The committee will be assisted by an environmental 
specialist provided by the Supervision Consultant.  In addition, the NHA has already concluded 
agreement with the Punjab forest departments to enhance and manage the avenue plantations 
proposed under the project while a similar agreement is under process with the Sindh Forest 
department.  A plantation committee drawn from staff of the provincial forest department concerned, 
and the NHA will supervise the plantation and maintenance of trees along the project corridor.   
 
The NHA’s environmental monitoring committee, in consultation with the concerned EPAs, will 
engage independent monitoring agencies including NGOs and/or local community-based 
organizations (CBOs) operating along various project reaches to verify the efficacy and ensure the 
transparency of the environmental and social compliance process carried out by the NHA.  These 
NGOs/CBOs will be engaged on the basis of well-defined criteria including their experience and 
resources.  The NHA will provide the necessary logistical support to NGOs/CBOs to facilitate them 
Page  8
8
in the monitoring process.  The NGOs/CBOs engaged for independent monitoring will also report 
their findings on a monthly basis directly to the NHA, the World Bank, and concerned EPAs. A 
Request for proposal has been issued for conducting a Third Party Validation (TPV) where it has 
been agreed with the Bank to undertake a TPV at MTR and ICR phases of the project.  
 
Resettlement Monitoring
:
A
Social and Resettlement Committee consisting of senior NHA staff 
will monitor the implementation of the land acquisition and resettlement process to evaluate 
compliance with the RPF adopted under the project. Besides, monitoring of social and resettlement 
issues will also be undertaken by project staff dedicated to implementing and reporting on social 
resettlement issues at different levels including field, regional and federal levels. A grievance 
redressal system managed by the NHA’s deputy project coordinators (based at each sub-project site) 
will maintain a community complaints-management register to record grievances brought forward by 
affected communities, and to ensure that these are appropriately addressed.  The committee will 
track the progress of various resettlement monitoring indicators including impact indicators (e.g., the 
number of livelihood affected), process indicators (e.g., resettlement and compensation budgets), and 
output indicators (e.g., the number of PAPs successfully resettled or otherwise). A list of monitoring 
indicators has been provided in the PAD.  
 
Participatory Monitoring will be undertaken in partnership with local NGOs/CBOs in the different 
reaches to provided the stakeholder and community perspective.  They will verify the efficacy and 
ensure the transparency of the resettlement process carried out by the NHA.  This will include  
among other, reconfirming the identity of PAPs; explaining resettlement entitlements and the process 
to PAPs, where required ; ensuring that resettlement and compensation is carried out according to the 
entitlement policy framework; and facilitating dispute resolution, if any. They will thus monitor the 
implementation of the RPF as well as the grievance redressal mechanism in place.   
 
Environmental and Social Training and Capacity Building
.
The project finances an Institutional 
Strengthening Plan that will help build the capacity of the NHA.  The plan will include the 
appointment of dedicated environmental and social staff with clearly defined qualifications, 
responsibilities, and authority.  An environmental training and technical assistance (TA) program 
will be carried out to build the capacity of the NHA and key stakeholders to effectively implement 
this EMP, as well as to facilitate the improved environmental management of future highway 
projects.  Cost estimates of mitigation and other environmental management measures have been 
included in the EMPs and incorporated into the project budget. In this regard NHA has already 
completed training program for its staff, staff of supervision consultants and contractors in its Phase-
I
and trained around 170 persons on environmental and social aspects of roads construction. Phase II 
is expected to start in November. A social training program was  prepared to build and strengthen the 
capacity of NHA to facilitate the implementation of social and resettlement aspects of the project, 
and implemented by recruiting a training institute and 170 staff of NHIP?NHA trained under phase I 
.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Stakeholder workshops were organized to discuss project-specific issues.  The Association of Road 
Users of Pakistan (ARUP) organized a series of regional discussions in 2000 and 2001 that have 
provided valuable inputs for the project design.  At the screening stage, stakeholder meetings were 
held in Sindh and Punjab by the NHA’s EIA consultants, involving government and NGO 
representatives, field specialists, road contractors, and a cross-section of PAPs. Roadside 
consultations and scoping sessions were carried out mainly with pedestrians, vehicle drivers, public 
Page  9
9
transport passengers, roadside vendors and shopkeepers, local inhabitants, government officials, and 
NGO representatives at various locations along the project corridor. 
 
Following the finalization of the draft EA and EMP reports and the RPF, NHA has disseminated the 
key features of these documents among PAPs and local stakeholders, along Phase-I sections of the 
project corridor. The consultation process for the EAs has been concluded through a set of public 
hearings organized by the Federal EPA in coordination with the Provincial EPAs. Hearings were 
held in at Peshawar, Lahore, Hyderabad and the federal capital, Islamabad during August 2003. The 
hearings were reasonably well attended by a cross-section of stakeholders. Final environmental 
clearance is awaited. 
 
Similar consultations and disclosure will be undertaken for Phase-II 
 
A
consultation strategy to be implemented over the project cycle has been annexed in the PAD. 
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select in SAP).
 Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or 
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is 
triggered the provisions of that policy apply. 
 
[
]
S1. 
–
Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and 
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas  
[X] 
S2. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are 
technically and institutionally manageable 
[
]
S3. – No safeguard issues 
[
]
SF. – Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development 
or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address 
safeguard issues. 
Page  10
10
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
7/10/2003 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
4/23/2003 
7/15/2003 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/22/2003 
7/17/2003 
 
 
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive 
Directors 
(For category A projects) 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
7/10/2003 
 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
4/23/2003 
7/15/2003 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
4/22/2003 
7/17/2003 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
 
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.  
The disclosure dates indicated above, reflect the submission of draft Environmental and Social 
Safeguard Documentation to the Info Shop and the 'in-country' disclosure at the start of Appraisal. 
Following the Appraisal mission, the Final Environmental and Social Safeguard Documentation 
(Ph-1EAs, EMPs and SA dated May 30, 2003; and Sectoral Assessment and Executive Summary 
dated June 12, 2003) was submitted to the Info Shop on July 15, 2003. These documents have been 
disclosed in-country during the first week of September 2003.  
 
Signed and submitted by 
 
Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Zafar Iqbal Raja 
Nov 8, 05 
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: 
Javaid Afzal 
Nov 8, 05 
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: 
Zia Aljalaly 
Nov 8, 05 
 
Approved by:
Name
Date
Acting Sector Director: 
Kseniya Lvovsky 
Nov 9, 05 
 
Acting Sector Manager SASEI: 
Sally L. Burningham 
Nov 9, 05 
 
