Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1501 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/18/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P094086 
Project Name: Improvement of Access and Quality in Primary Education 
Task Team Leader: Ameer Hussein Naqvi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to increase access to low tuition quality private primary education with special 
attention to girls.  All schools meeting the eligibility criteria throughout the Province would be 
eligible for IDA-support.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project has two components: (1) Increased Access; and (2) Community Mobilization, 
Support and Capacity Building.  
 
(1) Increased Access:  
 
1.1.  Support to communities to set up new low cost private schools to increase access in urban 
and rural areas:  
 
The Urban Fellowship Program would promote access to low cost quality private education in 
semi-urban and urban areas.  
 
Eligibility criteria  
Page  2
New schools would be established if there are at least 50 children (age 4-9) out of school and 
with no government primary school for girls in a radius of 1 km.  
 
The Rural Community Support Program would provide support to community driven school 
establishment in villages.  
 
Eligibility criteria  
 
Villages with more than 30 school aged children with no school in the village or within a radius 
of 1 km.  
 
Important conditions:Communities willing to: (1) give an appropriate piece of land and to 
contribute to the school construction in cash or labor or to rent classrooms; (2) allow a local male 
teacher to teach in case a female local teacher is not available; and (3) in the Urban Fellowship 
Schools: contribute to the school by paying tuition fee Rs 100 for a girl, Rs 150 for a boy, Rs 50 
for the youngest child of a family paying tuition fee for two older children in the school. 
Deviations from these amounts could be discussed on a case by case basis on request of a 
community and its supporting NGO.  
 
Financing  
 
Each school with a minimum of 25 pupils, would receive a per capita subsidy during a period of 
4
years to cover the costs of the teachers, the quality inputs and monthly savings. Each month the 
school should save Rs 5.000 per 100 enrolled children of the subsidies (or a proportion of this 
amount) in a frozen savings account to build up the capital of an endowment fund which would 
generate income to maintain the school once the subsidies are discontinued. Details of the 
establishment and the management of these school endowment accounts by the parent education 
committee (PEC) of the Urban Fellowship Schools or the parent teacher school management 
committees (PTSMC) of the Rural Support Program Schools will be elaborated during project 
preparation.  
 
Implementation  
 
The community would be supported by an NGO to establish a PEC/PTSMC and provide 
technical assistance in monitoring, planning and financial management. Members of the 
PEC/PTSMC would be elected every 2 years. The PEC/PTSMC would hire a private school 
operator/manager and would enroll both boys and girls, but with the requirement that a minimum 
of 25 pupils from the community would be enrolled. Classes should not exceed 50 pupils.  
 
Teacher recruitment, Curricula and Textbooks  
 
Teachers would be hired by the PEC/PTSMC with the help of an NGO and should have at least 
a
grade 10 pass. The project would support initiatives to ensure that all teachers in these new 
schools receive a minimum of 1 week per year of in-service staff development. Schools could 
adopt the government curriculum and textbooks and would be permitted to supplement the 
curriculum with other textbooks. The Balochistan Education Foundation would disseminate 
information on textbook options available to schools including the addresses of suppliers.  
 
Appraisal, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
School Development Plans developed in partnership with the community and the NGO should 
indicate baseline data, enrollment targets, completion targets, number of teachers and a financing 
Page  3
plan for quality inputs, salaries, refurbishment and savings. The School Development Plans 
would be submitted for appraisal to the BEF by the supporting NGO. The BEF would assess the 
feasibility of the plan and seek evidence of the community involvement and ownership. Where 
necessary the BEF could request the NGO and the community to provide additional information 
or to revise the plan. The agreed school development plan would form the basis of the Letter of 
Agreement between the BEF, the PEC/PTSMC and the supporting NGO. Implementation 
progress would be monitored against the development plan targets. Following the approval, the 
BEF would release the funding for the first year of operation of the school to the Bank account of 
the PEC/PTSMC.  
 
School performance in terms of the number of girls enrolled, retention rates and teacher 
absenteeism would be routinely monitored by the PEC/PTSMC and every school would be 
assessed by the BEF on these criteria at the end of each fiscal year . Schools that meet or exceed 
the performance targets would receive a grant to top up the level of savings which the 
PEC/PTSMC created from the subsidy, so that the total savings were sufficient to become an 
endowment fund.  
 
Sustainability  
 
The endowment fund would be held in an interest bearing account where the PEC/PTSMC 
would have access to the interest payments but not to the principle. The income of the 
endowment could be used to pay the teachers and for quality inputs to supplement the income 
from tuition fees after project completion. Withdrawals from the account could only be made 
through statements of eligible expenditures and the accounts would be audited on a regular basis.  
 
Role of the BEF: The BEF would take the lead in developing mechanisms and criteria to 
appraise NGOs/CBOs to facilitate community mobilization and strengthen PECs /PTSMCs to 
take care of the day-to-day management of schools including financial management and 
procurement. Currently in Balochistan, there are at least 50 NGOs and private institutions with 
education programs, which could be the future contractors for the BEF. The BEF would monitor 
implementation progress against the school development plan targets as part of the management 
responsibility of the BEF. Following the endorsement of the progress made, the BEF would 
release the funding for the following year of operation of the school. The BEF would consolidate 
the information on progress made throughout the Province on a yearly basis. An independent 
third part supervision would evaluate the monitoring results of the BEF and assess the 
functioning of the BEF.  
 
Important legal covenant: Restructuring and reorganization of the BEF  
 
Conditions: Independent Board; professional management; clear operating policies and 
procedures; and transparent eligibility criteria.  
 
1.2 Support to communities to increase enrollment and promote quality in existing fellowship 
schools, NGO schools and low tuition fee private schools:  
 
The Enrollment Expansion Program would promote additional access to existing low cost 
quality private education throughout the Province.  
 
Eligibility criteria  
Page  4
Support would be available for schools, in operation for at least 3 years with a minimum of 30 
children enrolled.  
 
Appraisal, Financing and Monitoring  
 
This component would allow schools to submit School Plans for 4 years linked to the projected 
increased enrollment of pupils, especially girls.  The School Plans would be submitted for 
appraisal to the BEF by the NGO / private organization (in case of a private school) supporting 
the school and would identify the investments needed to increase enrollments and promote 
quality with a link to performance indicators. Overcrowded classes are an issue in many schools, 
especially in urban areas, and in many cases facilities will need to be expanded to increase 
enrollment. NGOs and schools will be briefed by the BEF on initiatives to promote practices as 
double shifts classes. Only schools that can demonstrate that they have explored possibilities 
such as double shift classes would be eligible to build new classrooms. In any case no more that 
50% of the grant allocation in any one-year could be spent on construction of new class rooms 
and the aggregate expenditure on civil works for the 4 years of the project may not exceed 30% 
of the total grant to the school.  
 
The grants would be made available through the BEF to the accounts of the PECs/PTSMCs of 
the fellowship schools and the NGO-schools and to an account established for the purpose for a 
private school. The BEF would monitor the progress against the agreed upon performance 
indicators and following approval, transfer the funds to each school every year of the project.  
 
Special conditions: Communities to provide labor or cash for civil works. Tuition fee waivers 
and free textbooks would be made available by each school for disadvantaged children unable to 
pay tuition fees to the value of 30% of the grant in addition to the scholarships already in place 
and monitored by the BEF.  
 
For both new and existing schools support would be available to ensure provision of safe water 
and adequate sanitation and also would include specific health interventions.  
 
(2) Capacity Building of the BEF,  intermediate organizations, communities and PEC/PTSMCs 
:
The project would support the mobilization of communities, coaching of communities and 
capacity development of NGO?s and the BEF. For the BEF this would include strengthening 
appraisal and monitoring processes, financial management systems, procurement, training and 
exposure to best practices that would build a cadre of committed and professional staff within the 
BEF. Capacity building would also be available for the intermediate organizations (NGOs and 
CBOs), PTSMCs, PECs, Headmasters and teachers to contribute to a better functioning of 
primary schools. The BEF would elaborate a comprehensive institutional capacity building plan 
after consultation with all involved parties and a roadmap to implement this plan.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in Balochistan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  5
BEF can handle, through the NGOs, the safeguard policies.  Apparently no safeguards issues or 
environmental issues would arise. However, relevant safeguard policies, if invoked, would be 
made part of the agreements to be signed between the BEF and the NGOs.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
As the BEF would be funding subprojects such as schools and possibly sanitation, the project 
is most likely to be assigned a Financial Intermediary/Social Fund category. Though such 
subprojects financed by the BEF would  have no or only minor environmental issues, still it 
would be prudent for the BEF to establish simple environmental assessment procedures to avoid 
causing any harm to the environment and human health.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This would only be triggered where involuntary taking of land takes place, for instance land 
for a school. In which case BEF would need to have a mechanism to either avoid involuntary 
resettlement or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts. In case where 
land is donated for a school it would be very important for BEF to establish if it is indeed a bona 
fide gift.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/12/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/12/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
week before the appraisal date.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ameer Hussein Naqvi 
03/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/30/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
03/30/2005 
Comments:   
