INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: XXXX
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 26, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Peru                         Project ID: P090116
Project Name: PE - Rural Electrification  Task Team Leader: Susan V. Bogach
GEF Focal Area: Climate Change        Global Supplemental ID: P090110
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2005  Estimated Board Date: January 2006
Managing Unit: LCSFE                  Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sectors: Power, Renewable energy      Theme: Rural services and infrastructure
(P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Alonso Zarzar Casis (Senior Social
Specialist); Renan Poveda (Environmental Specialist)
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 50
Other financing amounts by source:                              ($m)
Government of Peru                                               50
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY                                      10
B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed Project would aim to: (a) develop and demonstrate a framework for public-private
electricity provision in rural areas of Peru that would attract investment from the private sector as
well as national, regional and local governments; (b) provide electricity services to about
100,000 households (half a million people) and about 1000 public facilities, such as schools and
health clinics, using both conventional grid extension and renewable energy sources to serve
remote populations; and (c) pilot a program to increase productive uses of electricity that would
increase opportunities for income generation in rural areas.
Through demonstration of the framework, and introduction of a mechanism for sustainable
financing, the project is expected to trigger expanded activities beyond the specific project
components to enable the government to meet its rural electrification goals.
With expansion of electricity service, the proposed project intends to improve the quality of life
in rural areas through cheaper and higher quality lighting, improved access to information
through TV and radio and -- in coordination with the productive uses promotion program-- new
opportunities for commercial and agro-industrial activities.



C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Project would have three main components: (i) technical assistance for the
development of a new legal and regulatory framework for rural electrification, including
decentralized planning; (ii) financing for incentives to private and publicly owned enterprises to
provide electricity to about 100,000 households using both conventional grid electricity or
renewable energy systems that would serve remote populations; and (iii) a pilot component to
promote productive uses through an information campaign, access to business development
services and micro-credit. Each of these components is described below:
(i) Technical Assistance for Public-Private Provision of Rural Electrification including
development of:
a. regulations for grid-connected rural electricity service specifically designed to improve
the economic and financial efficiency of the sector, including procedures for issuing rural
concessions; norms for electricity systems design and construction appropriate for rural
areas; norms for operations; procedures for calculating rural tariffs; and norms for rural
quality of service.
b. regulations specifically designed for off-grid service, including renewable energy,
covering the same subjects mentioned in (a), but adapted appropriately;
c. decentralized planning and prioritization of projects, that are effectively linked to
regional development plans. MEM has already begun to transfer planning responsibilities
to regional governments. The project would assist this process, as well as strengthen the
capacity of regional and local governments to coordinate planning and management of
electrification projects with other rural development activities (including definition of
concession areas).  The project would support selection of appropriate, least-cost
technologies --such as renewable energy-- to electrify remote areas, or regions with
dispersed populations, where grid extension would not be economically viable.
d. facility to provide targeted financial incentives for rural electrification investment This
would involve a subsidy to buy-down the capital costs of service provision. l The process
would involve competition among qualified service providers. The management of the
incentive mechanism for electrification investments would be designed to increase
transparency and the economic soundness of selected projects. Eligible activities would
include: (a) projects to increase connections in already electrified areas; (b) projects to
extend the grid to provide service to new communities; and (c) projects to provide
isolated communities with service through mini-grids (diesel, small-hydro or wind
systems), or through individual household systems (solar). Potential investors could
include existing distributors (public and private), cooperatives, and other small and
medium enterprises.
e. development of specific renewable energy projects to supply remote communities.
Cross subsidies for operating expenses could also be provided, separately, under the existing Fondo Social de Electrificaci6n
(FOSE) scheme. This issue would be investigated during preparation.



(ii) Provision of Electricity Service to about 100,000 households (500,000 people), health
centers, schools and community centers, in a number of priority regions in Peru. These
regions would be selected using criteria such as: counterpart funding from regional and local
governments, development potential of the region, number of rural households without
service, and complementary infrastructure investments. Bank resources would be combined
with funds from the national and regional governments, and interested communities, to
provide targeted incentives for rural electrification projects that would be carried out by
private or public enterprises. Such incentives would be provided using the procedures
described in point (i)d above.
(iii) Pilot Program for Productive Uses of Electricity. Most rural households in Peru use only
one or two electricity bulbs, for a few hours daily. There is little use of electricity in rural
areas for income-generating activities. This project component would promote productive
uses of electricity, such as processing of agricultural products, milling of grain, or use of
electric motors for carpentry or equipment repair. It would include an information campaign,
as well as business development assistance and, possibly, micro-credit programs in rural
areas. This project component would be tested firstly in recently electrified areas and then
expanded to project areas, including those using renewable energy.
The instrument proposed is a Specific Investment Loan, whereby the Bank will disburse against
the completion of specific targets, to be agreed upon during project preparation (for example,
implementation of subprojects and new connections). The financing would be US$50 million of
World Bank loan, US$50 million    from  other sources (including regional and central
governments and private investors), and $10 million from GEF.
The project would be implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Mines, in coordination with
the regulator of the energy sector (OSINERG) and selected regional governments.
During the detailed project design and implementation, efforts will be made to leverage the
Bank's other on-going and under-preparation projects on rural infrastructure (roads, water) and
rural and social development (indigenous peoples, Sierra rural development, health and
education). In addition, the project will coordinate with the implementation of the technical
assistance and programmatic loans of the World Bank for decentralization in Peru. The team
will also investigate the potential for using the proposed Infrastructure Guarantee Facility to
assist in financing private sector investments in rural electrification.
D. Project location (if known)
This is a National Project with specific locations for projects to be determined during project
preparation. Such locations will include rural areas of Peru currently without electricity service.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The project's EA work should also address institutional environmental management
responsibilities and capacities, and set forth enhancement provisions as needed to ensure that
participating institutions have the capacity to address any environmental impacts associated with
the project. The project may be supporting investments through a dedicated fund, in which case



it may be necessary to include suitable environmental screening criteria and management
procedures as part of the project's environmental management framework. The project
envisages the preparation of such a framework approach to address safeguard policies issues.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable? Safeguard Policy
Applicable?  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[X]      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
[ ]     Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)
[ ]     Pest Management (OP 4.09)
[X]      Involuntary Resettlement (2P/BP 4.12)
[X]      Indi2enous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[ ]     Forests (QP/BP 4.36)
[ ]     Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)
[ ]     Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[ ]     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
[ ]     Projects on International Waterways (OPIPP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared.
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                                        I
Task Team Leader:                     Susan V. Bogach           -            v              Date tt°;O
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name                     t .) 3/ k                    Date
Comments                                    (AA~~Dt                                              ~~'
Sector Manager:                   Lk  Name                                                 /Date 0/0 V/Oc
Comments
2 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



