Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1667 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P096174 
Project Name: National Program-Support to Environment and Natural Resources 
Management 
Task Team Leader: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihou 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P091147 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (85%);General public 
administration sector (10%);Mining and other extractive (5%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The principal objective of the project would be to assist the DENR implement a long-term 
institutional, policy, regulatory and investment framework for the environment and Natural 
resources (ENR) management and protection with a more efficient and effective delivery of its 
key service thrusts and agreed Major Final Outputs (MFOs). The proposed project would 
institute the first phase of a long term program that assists the Government in ensuring that 
environment and natural resources management become critical drivers of economic growth, in 
the absence of which imputed costs could fast outstrip short term benefits.  In line with the 
agency?s MFOs, five specific project objectives would include: (i) effective ENR policy; ii) 
protection and rehabilitation of prioritized ecosystems; (c) development of a framework for 
responsible and equitable resource use in sustainable development; (iv) improved enforcement 
and monitoring of ENR laws and policies; and (v) promotion of environment-friendly 
technologies.  Clearly, not all these outputs can be achieved in the lifetime of a single project as 
the process needs to be long term, dynamic and programmatic.   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The initial Bank project would be designed to set the institutional trajectory towards a more 
effective and responsible ENR management and using this and budget support as the basis for 
expanding and developing strategic partnerships with other stakeholders to maximize impact.  
 
In line with DENR?s Medium Term Development and Investment Plans as well as the Bank?s 
CAS and Way Forward NRM Action Plan (2004), the project would, have a two pronged 
approach in providing support: (i) institutional strengthening of DENR?s core functions and 
mandate in line with the agency?s Major Final Outputs (MFOs); and (ii) financing of 
investments in agreed priority areas; including provision of technical assistance to various key 
environment mandates.  
 
Components:  The project would have five components to support DENR?s core mandate 
(MFOs) and its ongoing institutional, policy and expenditure rationalization program. These are 
summarized below  
 
ENRMP Component 1:  
 
1.  Environment Information,  database strengthening and M &E  
 
Key Activities to be supported  
 
(Preparation of each activity to be supported through a PHRD grant):  
 
(i)Rationalized classification of Forest lands  
 
(ii)Up-scale Forest, Protected areas & biodiversity mgt.  
 
(iii)Strengthen mapping and database capacity -land use, cadastral, & geologic  
 
(iv)Strengthen information databases  
 
(v)Strengthen educational  programs for brown, blue & green agendas  
 
ENRMP Component 2:  
 
2. Integrated Priority Eco systems Dev.  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
(i)Integrated Action Plans for Critical Watersheds.  
 
ENRMP Component 3:  
 
3. Institutional strengthening and improved Capacity & Service Delivery  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
(i)Devolve functions in line with LGC policies  
 
(ii)Skills & capacity strengthening including LGUs and key stakeholders  
 
(iii)Training & capacity building to strengthen enforcement of environmental laws  
 
ENRMP Component 4:  
 
4. Strengthen Environ. Mgt. &  Enforcement  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
 
(i)Refine jurisdictional, legal and regulatory basis for ENRMP implementation  
 
(ii)Issue guidelines and codes of conduct in for environment & social policy.  
 
(iii)Improve management artisan and small-scale mining  
 
(iv)Remediate & rehabilitate abandoned mine(s)  
 
ENRMP Component 5:  
 
5. Institutional Management Support  
 
Key Activities to be supported:  
Page  3
(i)Strengthen linkage between strategic plans, policies, budget and MFOs  
 
(ii)Facilitate ENRMP implementation through Program Contracts & Agreements with bureaus 
and agencies   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project?s implementing agency, the DENR, is the primary agency with the mandate to 
review environmental impact assessment (EIA) studies for any investment operations that fall 
within the purview of the Philippine EIA system. The EIA study and review is a requirement for 
the issuance of environmental compliance certificates (ECCs) by the DENR to any investment 
operations prior construction or implementation. The EIA system has been in existence for more 
than two decades and there have been several previous efforts to improve its implementation 
and, as such, the Central and Regional Offices of the DENR have substantially improved their 
capacity to review project impacts and ensure that these are addressed in the design and 
investment implementation. The DENR has offices at the Regional, Provincial and Municipal 
levels that could handle environment concerns of subprojects. Moreover, DENR has 
led/facilitated the establishment of multi-stakeholder structures to deal with environmental 
management (as in the case of PAMBs in protected areas) and environmental monitoring (as in 
the case of multi-partite monitoring teams for environmentally critical projects).  
 
However, several core problems remain to be addressed in terms of environmental performance 
monitoring and evaluation, effectiveness of reach of the EIS system, uneven application of 
existing screening criteria and technical specifications to subproject selection and design, and 
time-cost effectiveness of processes.  With the added/emerging tasks/roles of DENR brought 
about by recent environmental legislation, the institutional capacity of DENR to provide 
safeguards oversight functions are further strained.  
 
Having said this, the project, as part of the component on strengthening environmental 
management and enforcement, will help the DENR strengthen its safeguard capacity, especially 
at the provincial and municipal level, as well as, related multi-stakeholder structures involved in 
safeguards oversight and implementation.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
There are project activities that may pose potential negative environmental and social 
impacts if not addressed in the design and implementation. These activities are related to the 
component on integrated priority ecosystem development, particularly in the implementation of 
NRM, livelihood and infrastructure support facilities in critical watersheds.  Also, the 
remediation and rehabilitation of abandoned mine sites may involve proper safeguard measures 
to protect the environment and the people.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The implementation of integrated action plans for critical watersheds may affect forested 
areas and/or forest dwellers, which are dependent on forest and forest products for their 
subsistence. The project needs to ensure that these are seriously considered and addressed in the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
design and implementation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Potential impact on cultural property/historical sites of NRM-related plans in critical 
watersheds to be prepared/supported under the project cannot be ascertained at this point. 
However, the assessment of such is covered under the Philippine EIA system where DENR plays 
a
key role.  Also, as an additional safeguard measure, DENR shall include a clause on all civil 
works contracts concerning actions to be undertaken in the event such sites are found.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Indigenous peoples are known to inhabit many of the critical watersheds.  Hence, 
plans/interventions to be proposed or facilitated by DENR will need to ensure that IP?s interests 
are well considered and that they are meaningfully engaged, following the provisions of IPRA.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/20/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The documentation to be readied by Fenruary 2006.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
06/17/2005 
Approved by: 
 
R
egional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/22/2005 
Comments:  Please remember to schedule an initial safeguards review meeting if this has not already 
been done.  Kaye Henry will assist with scheduling of the review meeting 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
06/21/2005 
Comments:   
