Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1561 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/01/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P094063 
Project Name: PH-NAT'L PROGRAM SUPPORT FOR BASIC ED. 
Task Team Leader: Dingyong Hou 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed program would contribute to the attainment of the GoP's national EFA goals and 
its objective of ensuring that all Filipinos will acquire basic education competencies.  
 
The Program Development Objectives (PDOs) are to:  
 
a. 
increase access to basic education, particularly among the poor and disadvantaged;  
 
b.
improve quality of basic education in the Philippines; and  
 
c. 
strengthen education sector governance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed National Program Support for Basic Education (NPSBE) is a strategic budget 
support program of $US100 million to be provided to the GoP in the context of a Sector Wide 
Approach (SWAp) to finance select priorities within the government basic education budget and 
linked with the DepEd?s reform agenda covering the fiscal years 2006-2008. The proposed 
operation is designed to achieve the development objectives by focusing on improving 
governance through strong support for decentralization through school-based management 
(SBM), accompanied by strengthened quality assurance and accountability, enhancing teaching 
effectiveness and addressing resource gaps through improved resource mobilization. By assisting 
in the implementation of the SFI, the GoP's recently developed comprehensive basic education 
Page  2
reform agenda; the operation would support a key plank in the GoP's wider education reform 
strategy.  
 
The relationship between this wider GoP education reform strategy and the NPSBE is depicted 
in Figure 1.  The former consists of a number of policy processes, including EFA, the SFI, and 
the Rationalization Plan for Education and the MTPDP.  
 
The proposed program will comprise four policy reform areas (components):  
 
a. 
strengthened School-Based Management (SBM) for delivery/governance/outcomes  
 
b.
improved teacher effectiveness;  
 
c. 
assured quality through standards, assessment and support; and  
 
d.
effective resource mobilization.  
 
These four policy areas encompass 30 individual policy initiatives are aimed to enhance access, 
provide greater equity and improve quality in basic education outcomes.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project locations are yet to be determined. As a national program support, the reform actions will 
be systemwide with specific interventions targeted at poor and disadvantaged 
groups/communities where the resouces constraints are more severe and the capacity to 
implement change is limited.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Lack of local stakeholder ownership and weak institutional capacity to implement change could 
affect the pace and results of the program. An action plan to strengthen local ownership and 
capacity and proper sequencing of the reforms actions is being developed and supported by the 
PHRD grant. Technical assistance will be provided to enable the following steps:  
 
Review and consolidate previous stakeholders analysis relevant to the proposed reform actions;  
 
Conduct rapid stakeholders analysis for areas that were not previously covered but would have 
critical roles/influence on the reform actions (e.g. local government units, students, PTCA, 
NGOs, private schools)  
 
Based on stakeholders' analysis, prepare a social marketing/change management plan that will 
provide measures to reduce the potential resistance to the reforms  
 
Develop a participation strategy paper that will guide the project  design and implementation in 
ensuring that participatory mechanisms are imbedded in all components/reform actions, 
particularly with reference to the preparation of the SIP and organization of the SGC. A specific 
section of the strategy paper shall focus on the mechanisms for mobilization/participation of 
indigenous people during the project design, implementation, operations, monitoring and 
evaluation. 
 
Ensure equity provisions in all reforms   
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
This strategic budget support operation aims to improve access to quality basic education and 
enhanced learning outcomes, especially by the poor, disadvantaged and the indigenous groups. 
The proposed reforms are designed to benefit these groups through a more enabling education 
policy enviornment and specific education practices that help advance the education 
opportunities and the acquisition of skills and competencies of indigenous people to participate 
equally in social and economic development.  
 
The mechanisms for participation of indigenous people throughout the project and to ensure 
that their concerns are addressed in all aspects of the proposed reforms shall be defined in the 
strategy paper.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  08/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
stakeholder analysis is being planned for the areas that were not covered by previous 
analysis during program preparation. A participation strategy is also being planned with an 
indicative time frame of May - September, 2005.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dingyong Hou 
05/09/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
 
Comments:   
