                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC147
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PHILIPPINES                                          Project ID: P073206
Project: LAND ADMINISTRATION AND MGT II                       Task Team Leader: Wael Zakout
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 30, 2004                    IBRD Amount ($m): 32.70
Bank Approval: November 2, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASRD                                          Sector: General public administration sector (50%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Land management (P); Other public sector
                                                              governance (P); Other rural development (S); Other
                                                              urban development (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Land Administration and Management Program (LAMP) is a long-term commitment of the
Government of the Philippines to increase land tenure security and improve the efficiency of the land titling
and administration system. The overall goal of the LAMP program is to alleviate poverty and enhance
economic growth by improving land tenure security and fostering the development of efficient land markets
in rural and urban areas, through the development of an efficient system of land titling and administration,
which is based on clear, transparent, coherent and consistent policies and laws, and is supported by an
appropriate institutional structure. The proposed LAMPII addresses the GOP's medium-term goal of (i)
Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization with social equity, and (ii) Good Governance, which is serves the
overarching national goal of poverty reduction and growth.

The development objectives of the proposed project are to increase land tenure security and improve land
administration services though implementation of institutional and legal reform, realization of an
accelerated land titling program, and establishment of a fair and uniform property valuation system. This
would be done through: (i) development of national policies, a regulatory framework, and reform of the
institutional structure for land administration and management; (ii) issuance of titles in urban and rural
areas; and (iii) standardization of the land valuation system through establishment of an efficient and fair
property valuation system that meets international standards.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project would include the following components:

         Component I: Development of Land Policy and Regulatory Framework

         a.       Policy, Legislative and Regulatory Activities Initiated Under LAMP I
         b.       Formulation of Policies on Government Land Management
         c.       Information Dissemination and Consensus Building

         Component II: Institutional Development and Capacity Building
         a.       Strengthen Existing Coordination Arrangements for Land Administration
         b.       Development and Implementation of Minimum Service Standards in Land

                                                         2
                                                                                                              ISDS


         Registration
         c.       LAM Education and Training
         d.       Transition to New Institutions

         Component III: Tenure Security
         a.       Community Engagement
         b.       Systematic Land Titling
         c.       Land Registration System

         Component IV: Property Valuation
         a.       Development of Property Valuation Policy and Implementation of Institutional
                  Development
         c.       Development of guidelines, standards and procedures for property valuation
         d.       Establish Recognized Valuation Professional Body
         d.       Implementation of property valuation system
         e.       Valuation Education and Training

         Component V: Project Management
         a.       Project Coordination and Management
         b.       Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Assessment
         c.       Public Relations



I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will cover around 5 provinces in Regions 7 and 8. The final selection of the provinces and
districts will made against eligibility criteria which includes poverty level, economic potential and high level
local government committement to the program.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:

The environmental effects of the project, if any, are minor and indirect. Other than the minor civil works
activities for the construction of office buildings, field land offices and adjudication centers, the project will
not support land titling in areas of environmental significance until after decisions have been made with
regard to its status and boundaries nor will it support land conversion and other huge civil works that
would adversely affect the environment. All buildings will be designed and constructed in accordance with
sound architectural and engineering practices. A screening procedure, which will consider the DENR
project thresholds as regard EA coverage or non-coverage, will be conducted to screen and address the
direct impacts from civil works. All contracts will include clauses for construction site management and
adherence to appropriate dust and noise control, proper disposal of solid wastes, sanitary facilities and
occupational health and safety. Detailed analysis of the project's environmental impact appears in Annex
12.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)

                                                        3
                                                                                                           ISDS


(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Regarding the Environmental Assessment, all buildings will be designed and constructed in accordance
with sound architectural and engineering practices. A screening procedure, which will consider the DENR
project thresholds as regard EA coverage or non-coverage, will be conducted to screen and address the
direct impacts from civil works. Based on the findings of the screening, and in compliance with the
Philippine EA Law, an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Checklist or an IEE Report may be
required from the Proponent. All contracts will include clauses for construction site management and
adherence to appropriate dust and noise control, proper disposal of solid wastes, sanitary facilities and
occupational health and safety.

On the social safeguard policies, the project will not involve resettlement nor issuance of individual land
titles in indigenous peoples areas. To ensure that people who live on forest areas are not affected by the
delineation of forest boundaries, they will receive long term forest management contract. The provincial
steering committee will include a member of the Indigenous Peoples Commission if the province includes
Indigenous peoples to ensure that no land titles is issued on the indigenous people land.

Project monitoring reports will ensure that the compliance with the safeguard policies. In addition, the task
team will include a safeguard specialist who will participate in supervision missions.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Overall, the impact of the project on the physical environment would not be insignificant. Findings of a
socio-economic evaluation study in a land titling project in Thailand indicated that issuing of land titles to
farmers has had a positive impact on land and soil management, and therefore on the environment in
general. Farmers have begun to invest on their lands, knowing that their titles are secure. Also, as their land
is now a "tradeable" asset, farmers realize that any investment in land improvements can be recovered
should the land be sold. This positive change in land use behavior and attitude is seen as important
environmental enhancement.

                                                       4
                                                                                                           ISDS




II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Long term impacts of the project will be positive. Aside from the positive impacts on land and soil
management, land titling may promote economic growth and could result in increased investment in
infrastructure and property development. The environmental regulations in the Philippines is adequate for
small scale investment such these and therefore, it is not anticipated to cause significant environmental
impact.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Regarding the Environmental Assessment, all buildings will be designed and constructed in accordance
with sound architectural and engineering practices. A screening procedure, which will consider the DENR
project thresholds as regard EA coverage or non-coverage, will be conducted to screen and address the
direct impacts from civil works. Based on the findings of the screening, and in compliance with the
Philippine EA Law, an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Checklist or an IEE Report may be
required from the Proponent. All contracts will include clauses for construction site management and
adherence to appropriate dust and noise control, proper disposal of solid wastes, sanitary facilities and
occupational health and safety.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary beneficiaries are landowners currently without a formal title to their land. The systematic
adjudication process proposed for the project is one that is based on a participatory approach whereby all
landowners in the area are involved in the process. Similar to other projects in the region, stakeholders will
be involved in the preparation, implementation and monitoring of the project as follows: during preparation,
stakeholders have been involved in the social assessment and in several consultation workshops and
seminars related to project design. During implementation, community groups will participate in the
community participation campaign, a key activity in the project, which will be used to disseminate
information, build community relations, and encourage community participation and public awareness in
general. Furthermore, it is proposed that the project develop and establish a mechanism to monitor project
implementation at local level, involving the participation of community members, local representatives,
NGOs and POs.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                     5
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/1/2003        2/18/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/9/2003        2/25/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/19/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/19/2003       2/18/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/19/2003       2/25/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/19/2003       2/25/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Wael Zakout                                        6/26/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Glenn S. Morgan/Person/World Bank                  6/28/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Mary P. Judd/Person/World Bank                     7/01/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Josefo Tuyor/Person/World Bank

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                         6/28/2003
Comments
Regional Safeguards Director, Maria Teresa Serra

Sector Manager/Director               Mark D. Wilson                                     3/18/2004

