                                                                                                                      104872
                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
  Date prepared/updated: 13-April-2016

    1. Basic Project Data
    Country: Philippines                            I Project ID: P147646
    Project Name: Philippines Renewable Energy Development
    Task Team Leader: Alan Townsend
    Estimated Appraisal Date: Ongoing              I Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2016
    Managing Unit: GEE02                           I Lending Instrument: Guarantee
    Sector: Other Renewable Energy (60%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (40%)
    Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
    (50%)
    Borrower/Recipient (existing capital in GOP guarantee fund) Amount (US$m.):         16
    CTF (as guarantee) Amount (US$m.):                                                  44
    Other (Private debt and equity) Amount (US$m.):                                    500
    Environmental Category: Guarantee
    Simplified Processing                             Simple [X]            Repeater[]
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
                                                                            Yes []       No [X]
    8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project development objective is to catalyze private investment in renewable energy and
electrification.
3. Project Description

The project is designed as a stand-alone Clean Technology Fund (CTF)-financed guarantee in the amount
of $44 million. The guarantee will be provided to the LGU Guarantee Corporation (LGUGC), a private
entity that operates the Electric Cooperative Partial Credit Guarantee (ECPCG) program for the benefit of
the Republic of the Philippines, which owns ECPCG. The CTF Guarantee will be contingent finance that is
callable cash, and as such, counts as Tier 1 capital. It can therefore be leveraged in the same manner as
the cash which is today sitting in ECPCG-owned accounts, which are managed by an escrow agent (the
Development Bank of the Philippines provides escrow services). 1 In terms of financial risk, the guarantee
only covers 80% of regular principle and interest payments and there is no option for accelerated
payment, both of which provide incentives to keep the lender in the deal. ECPCG cash will be first loss;
the CTF Guarantee will be second loss, and will only be drawn upon in the event that ECPCG's cash in
escrow is insufficient to pay a call. There have been no defaults to date in the ECPCG program, through
more than five years of exposure.

The proposed project will greatly expand the capacity of the ECPCG program. As stated above, ECPCG
has approximately $16 million in Tier 1 capital. This capital can be leveraged five times, meaning that $80
million in lending can be covered. ECPCG covers 80% of the underlying loans to Electric Cooperatives


1DOE and DOF have been the joint owners of ECPCG since its inception; "ownership" in this case has two meanings: (i) ECPCG as a part of the
policy program is the concern of two Departments; and (ii) DOE and DOF are joint account holders of the ECPCG escrow account and "own" the
program capital.

                                                                                                                                          1
(ECs), so the program leverages another $20 million in uncovered debt, and leverages additionally the
10% equity required from the borrowing EC. $44 million from the CTF will increase ECPCG capital to $60
million. At five times leverage, over $440 million in total investment could be supported and with reflows
a total of $500 million should be achievable. The default rate of ECPCG will be closely monitored and, if
the defaults remain low, higher levels of leverage can be allowed.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

The project will support the development and rehabilitation of renewable energy facilities and equipment
and related support services in the entire Philippines.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Gerardo F. Parco (GENDR)
Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSURR)




                                                                                                        2
6. Safeguard Policies Trigger   Explanation (Optional)
Triggered              ed?
Environmental          Yes      The project has an environmental category of Financial
Assessment    (OP/BP            Intermediary (Fl). Depending on the type of technology, scale and
4.01)                           project location, the subprojects will fall under the World Bank's
                                Environmental Assessment Categories A, B or C and under the
                                Philippine EIS System Project Categories II and Ill. The LGUGC,
                                assisted by NEA, will conduct the screening and scoping of the
                                individual subprojects to          determine the appropriate
                                environmental categorization and lead the review and clearance
                                process for the safeguards compliance to the ESSF. The potential
                                adverse direct impacts of the subprojects are related to: (i)
                                localized environmental and social impacts and potential site-
                                specific damages due to construction activities (water, noise,
                                safety, air pollution); (ii) management of environmental flow and
                                habitat alterations in the case of mini hydropower projects, (iii)
                                change in land use or disturbance in protected areas (iv)
                                management of the health and safety of workers during
                                construction and operation; and (v) interaction of workers with
                                the local community. The ESSF provides guidance for the
                                preparation of the applicable Environmental and Social
                                Assessment instruments, Environmental Management Plans
                                (EMP) and Environmental Codes of practice (ECOPs) and
                                appropriate social safeguards instruments for subprojects. This
                                also contains a Grievance Redress Mechanism. The ESSF presents
                                screening and scoping checklists and describes detailed plans for
                                mitigation, monitoring and reporting of all identified impacts. It
                                also lays out institutional responsibilities of the Borrower and sub-
                                project proponents as well as the relevant policy and legal
                                framework, financing, monitoring and reporting. The EMPs and
                                ECOPs will be included in the bidding documents and the
                                technical specifications in the design and construction contract of
                                the subprojects, the details of which will be incorporated in the
                                PhRED Project Operations Manual. Capacity building activities
                                such as Regular project trainings on safeguards requirements and
                                the ESSF to be led by LGUGC for project clients and participating
                                agencies to include lessons learned and pre'ilious implementation
                                experiences.




                                                                                                        3
6. Safeguard Policies     Trigger   Explanation (Optional)
Triggered                 ed?
Natural Habitats (OP/BP   Yes       The project will not fund any subproject proposed to be located
4.04)                               in critical natural habitat or will cause to convert or degrade such.
                                    This policy is triggered because by the nature of the proposed
                                    subprojects, it is most likely that a number of them are located in
                                    places considered as natural habitats. All subproject proposals
                                    will be screened for potential adverse impacts on natural habitats
                                    and protected areas and necessary mitigation measures will be
                                    prepared as part of the subproject specific EA and EMP. Adequate
                                    natural habitats conservation/protection measures will be spelled
                                    out in the EMP and the ECOPs. For small hydropower projects, the
                                    EMP will include monitoring of potential changes in flow
                                    regulation that may be brought about by water retention
                                    structures that may have consequent downstream impacts.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)      No        This policy is not triggered as harvesting of trees or forest
                                    products will not be consumed or used in the subprojects.
Pest Management (OP       Yes       The policy is triggered when the procurement and use of
4.09)                               pesticides will be involved in plantations for providing source
                                    materials or feedstock for biomass plants and in the control of
                                    vegetation cover along transmission lines, power plants and
                                    ancillary facilities.
Physical       Cultural   Yes       For this project, it is required that all construction activities will
Resources (OP/BP 4.11)              include mechanisms to address chance finds to avoid or mitigate
                                    adverse impacts on PCRs. The environmental assessments will
                                    confirm whether PCRs are affected and when present, the policy
                                    is triggered. It will assess possible cause of disturbance to
                                    historical areas such as architectural land marks and other
                                    cultural property. During construction, the landscape of the sites
                                    may also be affected and structural damage to old structures may
                                    result due to vibrations and excavation of adjacent areas. The
                                    EMP will provide for the mitigating measures needed to address
                                    such disturbances or the handling of chance finds. Ways to
                                    address chance finds are elaborated more in the ESSF AnnexS,
                                    Cultural Property and Protection Measures. These chance finds
                                    procedures shall form part of the EMP and the Safeguard
                                    Procedures for Inclusion in the Technical specifications for
                                    Contractors.
Indigenous     Peoples    Yes       It is estimated that 17% of the Philippine population belongs to
(OP/BP 4.10)                        one of the 110 indigenous tribes of the country. The probability
                                    exists that fPs living within or outside their ancestral domain may
                                    be affected (adversely or positively) by some of the subprojects
                                    that are guaranteed by the PHRED. For this reason, an IP Policy
                                    Framework (IPPF) annexed to the ESSF has been developed during
                                    preparation to ensure that adverse effects are mitigated and
                                    benefits to them are enhanced.



                                                                                                             4
 6. Safeguard     Policies   Trigger   Explanation (Optional)
 Triggered                   ed?
 Involuntary                 Yes       Construction of new energy facilities such as substations may
 Resettlement     (OP/BP               require temporary and permanent land acquisition from
 4.12)                                 commercial, residential and agriculture land. Rehabilitation of
                                       existing structures may require small pieces of land for some
                                       expansion. Run-of-the-river mini-hydro power plants will not
                                       have huge water storage but may still inundate some agricultural
                                       lands and affect some crops and access to livelihoods. Involuntary
                                       resettlement impacts will be avoided by considering alternative
                                       subproject sites, using existing road paths for distribution lines,
                                       and engaging in a willing-buyer willing-seller mode of land
                                       acquisition. For unavoidable impacts, the Land Acquisition and
                                       Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework (LARRPF), an
                                       integral part of the ESSF, was developed and disclosed.
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP       Yes       While the project is expected to finance only small dams, those
 4.37)                                 lower than 15 meters in height, in relation with 1 to 10 MW, run-
                                       of-river mini-hydropower plants, OP 4.37 policy is triggered as it
                                       is expected that several subprojects involves the construction,
                                       rehabilitation or of a dam. For dams considered to pose significant
                                       risk, regardless of height, a dam safety framework will be required
                                       that will specify the process to be followed for screening the
                                       hazardous nature of the dams to be financed and determination
                                       of the dam safety instruments required under the Policy (Panel of
                                       Experts (PoE)) for high hazard dams, generic dam safety measures
                                       designed by qualified engineers for other types of dams etc.). The
                                       framework will also include the proposed institutional
                                       arrangements for preparation, implementation, monitoring and
                                       reporting requirements for the dam safety instruments.
 Projects            on      No        There will be no subprojects in international waterways.
 International
 Waterways       (OP/BP
 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed        No        There will be no subprojects in disputed areas.
 Areas (OP/BP 7.60)

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The LGUGC will follow the project's Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF). The
procedures outlined in the framework indicate how their potential clients will carry out the assessment
of environmental and social safeguard issues and the process by which the documents prepared would
be reviewed by LGUGC and the World Bank to ensure that Bank policies are being followed. There are no
large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts anticipated since the targeted projects under the EC-PCG
are small-scale renewable energy projects. It is expected that the significant adverse direct impacts of the


                                                                                                             5
sub-projects will be related to: (i) localized environmental and social impacts and potential site-specific
damages due to clearing of the area that will lead to small-scale vegetation loss and construction activities
(noise, safety, air pollution); (ii) management of environmental flow and habitat alterations in the case of
mini hydropower projects, (iii) change in land use or disturbance in protected areas (iv) management of
the health and safety of workers during construction and operation; and (v) interaction of workers with
the local community. However, to ensure that the appropriate environmental and social assessment and
mitigating measures are incorporated in the planning and design of each investment, each sub-project
will undergo the ESSF process which begins with the screening and scoping to determine its environmental
category and assessment of the scope and coverage of significant impacts. The potential impacts are those
typically associated with the construction and operation of small hydropower plants, installation or
upgrading of power distribution lines and construction of substations. Positive environmental and social
impacts will result from increased power supply from renewable energy, improved efficiency of power
distribution, improved reliability of power supply, and increased access to electricity through
intensification in and expansion of service areas.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Overall, the project will benefit the environment with the promotion of renewable energy sources to meet
the long-term, clean energy requirements of the country. The long term impact of the project is the
provision of electricity in a sustainable manner shifting power generation to renewable sources
particularly in off grid areas supporting the country social inclusion objectives. Any indirect or long term
negative environmental impact is expected to be minor in the project area since each sub-project will
implement and monitor the implementation of a comprehensive Environmental Management Plan.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The use of renewable energy sources is the best means of producing clean, sustainable energy for the
masses. Introducing wholesale financing into the market that could potentially crowd out private
commercial finance, was considered as a component of the project but the success of EC-PCG in leveraging
private lending for the EC sector suggests that renewable energy as well could be more effectively
supported with guarantees rather than IBRD or CTF lending.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PHRED ESSF was developed by the borrower to establish the objectives and procedures and
implementation arrangements for identifying, managing and monitoring potential environment and social
impacts of project activities. This contains a separate IP Policy Framework and a Land Acquisition,
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework in its Annexes. Technical guidance on appropriate
construction designs and practices will be provided by NEA to complement the EMP and the
Environmental Code of Practice that the contractors should follow. LGUGC will also be supported by an
Inter-agency Project Monitoring Board to ensure the success of the EC-PCG program. The same set of staff
of LGUGC and its units will be involved in safeguards supervision. Moreover, additional staff such as
environmental and social development consultants will be hired to augment the current work force.
LGUGC will be organizing regular workshops and symposia with its potential clients - ECs, financial
institutions, renewable energy developers and independent power providers - to regularly update them
as part of their marketing strategy, on the EC-PC process requirements, including the safeguards
requirements described in the ESSF. It is the responsibility of the sub-project proponent to prepare and
carry out the necessary safeguards instruments required by the ESSF, and to obtain the environmental
clearances for each sub-project before starting the construction. The sub-project proponents are

                                                                                                           6
responsible for the quality and accuracy of the information in the EA document, as well as the transmission
of the EA documents to DENR.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the projects are the electric cooperatives, participating private banks, Department
of Energy (DOE), the LGUGC, NEA, NCIP and the consumers of the electricity that will be
generated/distributed which would also include project affected persons. Public consultations with
representatives from the identified key stakeholders was conducted and several meetings with potential
proponents of sub-projects and the oversight agencies to discuss the details of the project including the
safeguards requirements. In addition several workshops and joint site visits were also done by the task
team of the WB and staff of the LGUGC, NEA and DOE to hold discussions with both the EC Officers and -
local citizens. For the future sites, the public consultation process outlined in the ESSF will be followed.
The dates below refer to the disclosure of the ESSF.

   B. Disclosure Requirements

   Environmental Assessment/ Audit/Management Plan/Other

   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   4/7/2016

   Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                4/7/2016

   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary .of the
   EA to the Executive Directors

   "In country" Disclosure

   Philippines                                                                   4/13/2016

   Comments:

   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   4/7/2016

   Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                4/7/2016

   "In country" Disclosure

   Philippines                                                                   4/13/2016

   Comments:

   Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework



                                                                                                         7
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      4/7/2016

   Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                   4/7/2016

   "In country" Disclosure

   Philippines                                                                      4/13/2016

   Comments:

   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
   Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitorin·g Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by
the project decision meeting)


   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                                          '
   Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes I I           No Ix I   NA I I

   OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats

   Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes Ix I     No I I    NA I I
   degradation of critical natural habitats?

   If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes I I      No Ix I   NA I I
   of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
   mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources

   Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [XI      No I I    NA I I
   property?

   Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [XI      No I I    NA I I
   potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

   OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples



                                                                                                          8
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       .Yes [ x l   No I I   NA I l
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X J   No I I   NA I I
Practice Manager review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes I I    No I I   NA [ x I
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
or Practice Manager?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ x I      No [I    NA [I
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [XI    No [I    NA [I
Practice Manager review the plan?

OP/BP 4.36 - Pest Management

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes [X)    No [I    NA [ I

Is a separate PMP required?                                           Yes [ I    No [X)   NA [ I

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams

Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                  Yes [ I    No [ I   NA [ x I

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ I        No [ I   NA [ x I
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and            Yes [ I    No [I    NA [ x I
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [XI        No [I    NA [I
Bank's Infoshop?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [XI      No [I    NA [I
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies




                                                                                                   9
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [X 1     No I 1    NA I 1
  responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
  related t6 safeguard policies?

  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [X   J   No I 1    NA I 1
  the project cost?

  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X 1     No I 1    NA I 1
  the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
  safeguard policies?

  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes IX   J   No I 1    NA I 1
  the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
  legal documents?



D. Approvals


  Task Team Leader:              Name: Alan F. Townsend

  Approved By:

  Regional Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                  Date: 04/14/2016


                                 l-£'1 i~aul
  Sector Manager:                Name: Julia Fraser          \             Date: 04/14/2016
                                  ~·~




                                                                                                   10
