                                                                                    102267

                              fflT EGRAT ED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          CONCEPT STAGE


     Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:

     I. BASIC INFORMATION

     A. Basic Project Data

     Country: Philippines                          Project ID: P 156230
     Project Name: HCFC Phase-out Project
     Task Team Leader: Viraj Vithoontien
     Estimated Appraisal Date: August I,           Estimated Board Date: December 15,
     2016                                          2016
     Managing Unit: GENDR                          Lending Instrument:IPF
     Sector: Other Industry (90%)~ Central Government Administration (10%)
     Theme: Pollution Management and Environmental Health (50%); Environmental Policies
     and Institutions (50%)
     Financing (in US$ million)
     Total Project Cost: US$3.0 m                  Total Bank Financing: US$3.0 m
     Financing Gap:
     Financing Source
             IBRD Amount (US$m.):
             lOA Amount (US$m.):
             GEF Amount (US$m.):
             PCF Amount (US$m.):
             Other financing amounts by source: OTF Grant                     US$3.0 m
~I      __                           __
                                      ia_I_A_s_s_es_s_m_e_n_t
     E o_v_ir_o._n_m_e_n_t_a_I_C_a_te~g~o_r~y_:_B_-_P_art                                       1
     B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN1:

     The project development objective is to reduce the HCFC consumption in the air conditioning
     and refrigeration manufacturing sectors in compliance with the Philippines' obligation under the
     Montreal Protocol.

     C. Project Description

     The proposed project can be considered as a continuation of the Philippines ODS Project as it
     will build on the infrastructure and capacity established under the ODS project (i.e., POD, PMU,
     and Land Bank - the financial agent of the previous ODS project) to deliverthe required
     assistance to beneficiaries and stakeholders primarily in the sectors similar to the previous ODS
     Project. The proposed project is designed to address a specific reduction target (i.e., 2020 35%
     HCFC consumption reduction target) rather than a project that would encompass multiple
     reduction targets and complete HeFC phase-out. The project implementation period will be
     about 5 - 6 years.
 The project will provide technical and financial assistance to eligible manufacturers, primarily in
 the refrigeration and air-conditioning sectors, to redesign their products and retrofit their
 manufacturing processes in order to adopt non-ozone depleting and low global warming
 technologies. The project will also finance technology transfer that may be required by the
 beneficiary enterprises. To ensure sustainability ofHCFC phase-out and to transform the
 markets to non-ozone depleting and low global warming technologies, technical assistance to
 strengthen monitoring and enforcement capacity and to revise relevant safety and energy
 efficiency standards, will be provided to relevant government agencies, non-government
 agencies, and standard bodies andlor agencies. The project will also build capacity in the service
 industry by providing training on the maintenance and servicing of equipment using the new
 technology.

 Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions (US$2.3 million)

The project will finance conversion of manufacturing facilities from HCFC technologies to non-
ozone depleting and low global warming technologies. While facilities using HCFCs are
commercial refrigerator, air-conditioner, electronics, metal processing, fire-fighting equipment
manufacturers, the project will give priority to HCFC phase-out in the refrigeration and air-
conditioning manufacturing sectors as these sectors consume the largest percentage of the annual
HCFC consumption in the manufacturing sector and early HCFC phase-out in these
manufacturing sectors will reduce the build-up .of HCFC equipment installation in the country
and future demand of HCFC for servicing this equipment.

  To eliminate the use of HCFC in the refrigeration and air-conditioning manufacturing processes,
·low GWP alternatives such as R-290 (propane), HFC-32, and others (if any) will be considered.
  Selection of alternatives will take into account safety, performance, and climate impact.

Based on the survey conducted in 2011, there are about 21 air-conditioner manufacturers and 8
commercial refrigerator manufacturers in the Philippines. A few of them may not be eligible as
they are 100% owned by foreign enterprises from developed countries. For eligible enterprises,
the project would finance replacement or retrofit of product design and testing, acquisition of
manufacturing equipment including new refrigerant leak detectors, vacuum pumps, refrigerant
storages, refrigerant charging units, refrigerant transfer pumps and piping, pressure gauges,
refrigerant recovery and recycling machines, brazing machines and air booster compressors,
safety devices, and others.

Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$O.5 million)

The objectives of the technical assistance component are to expedite transfer of manufacturing
 technology of R-290 and/or HFC-32 refrigeration and air-conditioning technologies, and to
ensure safe use and handling of new products. Depending on the final choice's) of technologies,
technical study tours and technical workshops on the design and manufacturing of R-290 and
HFC-32 equipment will be financed. Other technical assistance activities could include revisions
of appliance standards, building codes, modifications of energy efficiency and safety
laboratories, technical training for new and on-the-job refrigeration and air-conditioning
technicians involved in manufacturing, installation and services of new alternative products.
Component 3: Project Management (US$O.2 million)

The project will continue to finance the PMU that has been established within DENR-EMB by
the previous ODS project and is currently implementing the Stage I HCFC Phase-out Project
financed by UNEP. Assessment of the PMU's role and responsibility will be conducted. A
review and restructuring of the PMU is anticipated in order to ensure that the roles and
responsibilities of the PMU are compatible with the new business needs. The project will
explore reengagement of the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) as a financial agent of the
Project.

The project will finance technical assistance to EMB-PMU and LBP, if applicable, for managing,
supervising, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of Components 1 and 2 of the
Project. It will also finance technical assistance to EMB-PMU for the development of sector-
specific regulations and policy, such as, inter alia, rules governing HCFC imports and exports,
and the ban on the use of HCFC in air-conditioners and refrigerators.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics     relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The project activities will. be undertaken at the existing manufacturing facilities which are
located mainly in the Metro Manila area or in the urban areas.

The project activities will be undertaken at the existing manufacturing facilities which are
located in the National Capital Region, mainly in the Metro Manila area and in industrial zones
in Regions 3 and 4. The main activity and investment in the project is the replacement or retrofit
of manufacturing processes which produce air-conditioners and refrigeration equipment
containing HCFC refrigerant in order to adopt non-ozone depleting and low global warming
technologies. A total of 21 air-conditioner manufacturers and 8 commercial refrigerator
manufacturers have been initially identified. These are all large private firms, most of whom
have environmental and quality standards certification (ISO 14000), which demonstrates to a
certain degree that they have some existing environmental and technical management capacity.
No land acquisition will be done under this project. Replacement or tooling of process trains
will happen within the premises of the individual companies.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The executing agency, the DENR is the primary government agency tasked to manage the
natural resources and protect the environment of the Philippines. It is mandated to enforce the
law controlling the use and disposal of chemical substances in the country which includes the
regulation of HCFCs. The Chemicals section of the Pollution Management Division of the EMB
ofDENR is in charge of regulating HCFCs in the country.

EMB has experience in Bank safeguards through World Bank projects they have executed.
Furthermore they are very experienced at EA as they are responsible for the review of
environmental assessments of development projects and monitor compliance of projects. They
will have overall oversight of the safeguards under the project. DENR will also need to
    coordinate closely with the implementing partners including Air-conditioner        and Refrigeration
    Manufacturers, Bureau of Customs and Land Bank of the Philippines.

    F. Environmental        and Social Safeguards   Specialists on the Team:

    Gerardo F. Parco
    Karen J. Jacob

    II. SAFEGUARD           POLICIES      THAT MIGHT APPLY

    Safeguard       Policies Triggered   (please     Triggered?                   Explanation
    explain wh),)

    Environmental Assessment (OPiBP 4.01)                Yes         The project will finance activities which
                                                                     will require a limited scope of site
                                                                     preparation within the factories in order
                                                                     to replace and remove existing
                                                                     equipment and make room for new
                                                                     equipment. The impacts will be mainly
                                                                    due to these limited site preparation
                                                                    works. Waste generated from the
                                                                    conversion activities are generally non-
                                                                    toxic, non-hazardous. The
                                                                    manufacturing companies usually
                                                                    contract out the safe disposal of their
                                                                    waste materials to DENR registered
                                                                    TSD (Transport Storage and Disposal)
                                                                    firms. The impacts are therefore not
                                                                    insignificant although they are
                                                                    temporary and can be mitigated through
                                                                    a properly implemented ESMP.
                                                                   The team proposes a Category B rating
                                                                   for this project.
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                     A generic Environmental and Social       I
                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                              ,
i                                                                    Management Plan (ESMP) will be
I                                                                    prepared for the project to serve as a
                                                                     template. This generic ESMP will be
                                                                     the basis for preparing specific ESMPs
                                                                     for each beneficiary identified during
                                                                                                to
                                                                    project preparation in order ensure
                                                                    that impacts are properly screened and
                                                                    mitigated. The generic ESMP will also
                                                                    be the basis for preparing ESMPs for
                                                                  ; beneficiaries identified during
                                                                  I implementation. These ESMPs will
                                                                    reflect the potential environmental and
                                                                    social issues based upon site screening
                                                                    of the air-conditioner and commercial
                                                                    refrigerator manufacturers, proposed    I
    Safeguard Policies Triggered (please         Triggered?                  Explanation
    explain why)
                                                               environmental and social measures,
                                                               including proper and/or safe disposal
                                                               and management of replaced parts and
                                                               equipment, analysis of alternatives
                                                               (mainly on technological options) and
                                                               clear safeguard implementation
                                                               arrangements.

    Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                   No         All activities in the Project will be done
                                                               within existing facilities of air
                                                               conditioner and refrigerator
                                                               manufacturers. No impact on natural
                                                               habitats is expected.
                                    -------.--

    Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                            No         All activities in the Project will be done
                                                               within existing facilities of air
                                                               conditioner and refrigerator
                                                               manufacturers. No impact on forests is
                                                               expected.

                                                              I No use or procurement
                                                         r~o
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                       No                                    of pesticides is
                                                               foreseen in the project.

I Physical Cultural   Resources (OPIBP 4.1 I)       No              impact of physical cultural resources
                                                               is foreseen. All the facilities within
                                                               which the replacement or conversion of
                                                               equipment will occur are in the
                                                               relati vely new facilities.
I
I   Indigenous Peoples (OP/EP 4.10)                 No         The targeted industries are located in
                                                               urban areas where it is unlikely to have
                                                               any presence of indigenous people.

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)           No         All activities in relation to conversion to
                                                               new refrigerants will be done within the
                                                               existing facilities of air-conditioner and
                                                               refrigeration equipment manufacturers.
                                                               Experience in the phase-out of CFC
                                                               refrigerants shows that there will be no
                                                               land acquisition or displacement of
                                                               persons in these activities.

    Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                     No         Not applicable
                           --
    Projects on International Waterways             No         Not applicable
    (OPIBP 7.50)

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)         No         Not applicable
Safeguard Policies Triggered      (please          Triggered?                Explanation
explain   why)


Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to                No       Not applicable
Address Environmental and Social
Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported
Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
                                                                                           I
                                                                                           I,
                                                                                           I




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION                  PLAN

A. Appraisal stage ISDS Required": Yes
    i.    Explanation. An Appraisal Stage ISDS will be prepared together with an ESMP.

   11.    Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage lSDS: July 15, 20 l6

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
   needed. August 2015 - July 2016. The specific studies and their timing should be
   specified in the Appraisal Stage {SDS.

IV. APPROVALS
