Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2005 
Report No.:  AC1400
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P079661 
Project Name:  Manila Third Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
64.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.13
20.13 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the Manila Third Sewerage Project are to: (a) increase the 
coverage and effectiveness of sewerage service delivery in participating areas of Metro 
Manila through an integrated approach involving septage management, sewage 
management, and heightened consumer awareness of water pollution problems and their 
solutions; and, (b) establish the financial and technical viability of new approaches for 
sewage management in MM.   
 
3. Project Description 
The lending instrument is Specific Investment Loan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The MTSP covers the Eastern Concession zone of Metro Manila, covering primarily the 
7
cities of Mandaluyong, Makati (Partly), Quezon (Partly), Pasign, San Juan, Pateros and 
Taguig.  The population within the MECI concession area (East zone) is predicted to 
increase from 5.3 million persons in 2004 to 8.2 million in 2021.  There are no 
indications that the population growth will subside even after this period of sustained 
growth.  
Page  2
Land use vary in areas where the Project components are to be situated.  Facilities for 
the Riverbanks Sewerage Systems, the Quezon City-Marikina Sewerage System, the 
Quezon City Sanitation Upgrading and Sanitation of Low Income Communities are 
situated within low-income residential areas.  The South (Taguig) Septage Treatment 
Facility is located in a predominantly rural town where a wide area is still used for 
farming, poultry, piggery and quarrying.  At the Taguig Sewerage System subcomponent, 
land use is predominantly agricultural and shoreland.  The lahar disposal sites situated 
north of Metro Manila are in sugarcane farms and idle agricultural lands.  
 
The Project Region lies onthe southern portion of the Luzon Central Plain.  The regional 
landscape exhibits contrasting relief from the gently sloping to rugged terrain of the 
uplands to a central valley plain.  The valley is drained by the Marikina River, which 
flows southwards to join the Pasig River.  The Pasig River empties into Manila Bay and 
drains the Laguna Lake.  
 
The Pasig River System is a complex network of waterways that includes Marikina, San 
Juan, Esteros, and canals, which have the following characteristics.  
 
-
It is the main outlet of the Laguna Lake with a total surface area of 850 km2 and a 
drainage area of 2,750 km2.  Waters coming from the Laguna Lake meanders through 27 
kilometers of relatively flat coastal and highly urbanized plains of Metro Manila, 
Populations of around 10 million discharge their wastes into the Pasig River.  
 
-
There are over 300 industrial firms along the banks of the Pasig River system, about 
one-half have been found to be polluting the water in varying degrees.River pollution is 
further aggravated by oil spills, from about 300 gasoline stations, several oil depots, and 
barges, tanks and boats docking inthe area.  
 
-
Markina River, with its headwaters inthe Sierra Madre mountains, joins the Pasig 
River 19 Kilometers upstream of Manila Bay, with an estimated catchments at the 
junction of 515 km2.  
 
-
San Juan River, which drains most parts of Quezon City and San Juan, unites with the 
Pasig River about 9 kilometers upstream and has a catchmnents area of about 86 km2.  
The San Juan River is the most polluted major water body in the Pasig River system.  
 
-
The Pasig River is tidal, and the freshwater base flow varies substantially according to 
season.  High flows of as much as 275 m3/sec ususlaly occur between the rainy season of 
June to October, while low flows of about 12 m3/s occur between April and May. Even 
smaller base flows are possible during which periods the water quality deteriorates even 
further.  Also during the low flow eason, the Pasig River reverses its flow direction due to 
the high tides at Manila Bay, and polluted waters can return into Laguna Lake.  
 
Recent statistics show domestic wastewater as the main contributor (70%) to the 
pollution loading into the Pasig and Marikina Rivers, the two main rivers in the 
metropolis, and the Laguna Lake. Due to this pollution, there is insufficient oxygen 
withinthe waterways to support aquatic life.  Fecal coliform levels exceed the standards 
of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) by several orders of 
magnitude most of the year.  In terms of health impact, the 2003 Philippine Environment 
Monitor states that 31% of all illness in 2003 is water related, accounting for nearly 5 
Page  3
million of the reported illnesses. Moreover, it is estimated that 17 billion pesos is lost 
annually inthe Philippine economy due to degradation of the marine environment.   
 
5. Environment & Social Specialist's Team 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares (EASUR) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Mr Teck Ghee Lim (EASSD) 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASEN) 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The MTSP will bring overall positive environmental impacts which include reduction of 
health risks from exposure to wastewater and polluted surface waters as elaborated in the 
EIA and the SEA.  Moreover, the further implementation of wastewater charges will 
strengthen the basis for a sustainable framework for the funding of the long-term 
environmetnal protection in the area.  
 
All adverse environmental and social impacts during construction and operation can be 
mitigated and risks are within acceptable limits.  Most of the adverse environmental 
impacts are construction impacts that will be mitigated.  Furthermore, an Environmental 
and Social Framework (ESAP) for the project provides for future guidance on unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
To complement the EIA with a more strategic assessment of wastewater management in 
Metro Manila, a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) was done to study the 
cumulative immpacts of development iptions for sewerage and septage menagement.  
The REA focused on wastewater management, sludge and septage management and 
regional planning integration.  
Page  4
The REA supports the decentralized MTSP approach, considering the given existing 
constraings (e.g. concession agreements, land availability and social acceptablity).  Its 
findings also show that the existing wastewater, environment and health management 
legislation is too comple, oveerlapping, and unclear - not just in terms of basic laws, but 
also in terms of the devolution status. A number of obligations have been devolved from 
one agency to another, and in some case, to the LGU, but without a clear mandate or 
operational guidelines.  As a result, the government's capacity and institutional 
framework to manage and improve sanitation and sewerage in the region is very weak.  
This is aggravated by a lack of public awareness on health and socio-economic impacts 
of poor sewage and sludge management.  
 
The REA recommends, among others, a Regional Management System aimed to 
strengthen the institutional and management capability of the government and its 
concessionaires in implementing the sanitation and sewerage strategy for Metro Manila.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The strategy to address sanitation and sewerage in Metro Manila was generally defined in 
a
2000
master plan that laid out the original sewerage targets in the 1997 Concession 
Agreemenbts and envisaged a highly centralized sewerage system and the phasing out of 
septic tanks and sanitation services throughout Metro Manila. However, after 
privatization, it became clear that public willingness to pay for such a large and 
expensive separate sewerage system did not exist.  Major barriers to the successful 
implementation of the master plan included the lack of land availability for the proposed 
treatment facilities, and the little tolerance by the public and local governments of the 
immense disruption that would be caused during the implementation of the systems.  
 
To manage these setbacks, an updated 2003 master plan was used to draw up the 2003 
rate rebasing and it was agreed upon by the government and the concessionaires.  This 
ushered in a decentralized approach using combined sewerage that led to the dowscaling 
of the sewerage targets while increasing the targets for the provision of sanitation 
services.  
 
However, these same targets did not take into consideration how the maximum 
environmental benefit would be achieved from the limited available investment.  While 
not ideal from the environmetnal perspective, there is merit, at least in the initial stages, 
of implementing projects throughout the city to raise awareness and build a constituency 
for the sector.  Thus there is a need inthe 2008 rate rebasing to closely align the 
concession targets with the environmental goals.  
 
In light of this, the compnents of the MTSP were identified by MWCI with regard to the 
environmetnal and socio-economic impacts, technical constraints, and limits set by the 
Concession Agreement between MWSS and MWCI.  Upon identification of the 
individual sub-project location by MWCI in coordination with the MWSS, a Feasibility 
Page  5
Study (FS) was conducted to determine the viability and to optimize the efficiency of the 
MTSP components in terms of costs, coverage and beneficial impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Through Administrative Order No. 2003-30(DAO 2003-30)of the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR, the Philippine national regulatory 
framework requires the MWCI to obtain an Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) 
prior to the commencement of construction acitivites.  Philippines reporting rquirements 
(the 'Environmental Impact Statement') are, to a large extent, compatible with the World 
Bank Safeguards.  The Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC), to be issued by the 
DENR, is under the name of MWCI.  As such, the MWCI is primarily responsible for 
securing proper implementation of the EEC, EMP and RAPs (if applicable).  All reports 
to be submitted to the DENR, which are related to MTSP, shall be prepared and directly 
forwarded by MCWI to DENR, and a copy furnished to LBP.  
 
Local capacity for safeguard compliance was strengthened and a firm commitment and 
ownership by MWCI has been built during the project preparation.  MWCI will further 
obtain all necessary clearances fromthe regional DENR regarding the lahar disposal.  As 
stated as a condition in the (draft) ECC: "sludge generated by the project will be disposed 
of properly in identified lahar laden areas of Central Luzon as mentioned in the 
Environmental Impact Statement.  A detailed disposal plan shall be submitted to EMB 
Central or Region 3 Office for approval, prior to any disposal activities."  
 
The Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), as thye borrower of the loan from the World 
Bank, shall be responsible for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of all MTSP 
environmental reports to be submitted to the World Bank.  The LBP, through its 
environmental/social unit, will perform an oversight function to ensure that 
environmental loan covenants are complied with, and that the EMP is properly 
incorporated into the contracts used by the MWCI to implement the project.  
 
MWCI and facilitators responsible for the supervision will provide supervision reports 
for the identified indicators for monitoring as required by regulatory bodies.  
Additionally, the proponents will provide supervision for projects with major 
environmental and social issues or for those projects where unanticipated issues arise.  
MWCI/LBP will provide project-affected groups and the general public with a means of 
filing complaints on environmental issues (including noise oand other nuisances).  The 
project proponent should respond to the complaint and provide records of complaints and 
responses to the fund manager as part of the supervision reports.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key main stakeholders for the MTSP are an estimated 3.3 million service population 
to be covered by the different MTSP Components.  Key stakeholders from this overall 
group are the homeowners' groups, barangay leaders/councils, local government units 
and NGOs inthese areas.  The 14 rent-free/squatter households who stand to lose their 
houses as a result of the project, as well as, the volunteer farmers and adjacent farm 
Page  6
oveners/communities inthe lahar septage disposal sites also have a stake to the project.  
Efforts were made during the project preparation to consult these stakeholders either as 
part of the EIA process, RAP prparation, or firming up of usufruct agreements for project 
sites.  
 
All environmental documents prepared by MWCI were publicly disclosed on February 
11, 2005 at the InfoShop in Washington and at the Project Information Center (PIC) of 
the World Bank Philippine Office.  At that time, two sets of reports wer also sent to every 
City in the Concession zone; Metro Manila and concerned municipalities inthe Lahar 
areas, with a request to make one set available tothe public in the public library, and with 
notices posted in prominent places.  These documents have likewise been submitted to 
and reviewed by the Regional Sageguards Committee.  
 
The documents were posted in LBP and MWCI public library, and advertisment inthe 
newspapers was posted on February 16, 2005, informing of the availability of the 
documents for public consultation.,  LBP also put a copy of the newspaper advertisement 
on the public board of its branches in the project area, to increase th coverage of the 
disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/11/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  7
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
03/18/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah 
03/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
03/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Teck Ghee Lim 
03/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
03/21/2005 
Comments:   
