Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC875 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/09/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P084967 
Project Name: National Program Support for the Second Mindanao Rural Development 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero 
GEF Focal Area:  
Global Supplemental ID: P096836 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 28, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Roads and highways 
(30%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Water supply (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Rural policies and 
institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
60.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The second phase of the program will aim to improve productivity, household incomes, food 
security, conservation of marine resources and access to viable livelihood opportunities in 
targeted communities.  This will be done through institutionalizing re-structured systems for 
agriculture and fisheries services delivery in targeted LGUs and communities, and in improving 
public participation, transparency and accountability in the design and implementation of 
program interventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
MRDP 2 will replicate MRDP 1 successes across the majority of the 25 provinces of Mindanao, 
where established eligibility criteria are met .The program will deepen the institutional reform 
agenda of the DA on decentralization, including the devolution of financial resources for 
devolved activities; while also increasing the engagement and participation of LGUs and 
communities in planning and prioritizing local investments, local resource mobilization, and 
Page  2
promotion of micro-enterprise development.  The purposive targeting of vulnerable groups will 
be continued and systematic mainstreaming of program lessons into DA-wide & LGU operations 
will be built-in into the design. At both the national and local levels, MRDP 2 will support the 
institutionalization of governance and transparency mechanisms which were initiated during 
MRDP 1.  Technical assistance will be provided to DA to facilitate its phasing out from 
devolved activities in the favor of the LGUs. National policies on the NG-LGU financing 
framework have yet to be institutionalized, but it is envisaged that MRDP2  will build on an 
emerging concept of sector-based performance grants to LGUs by introducing stronger sector-
related performance criteria to strengthen LGU incentives to improve sector performance and 
contribute to national sectoral objectives.  
 
Based on lessons learned in MRDP 1 and other related development lessons, the following are 
the proposed main components, to be structured in an integrated manner to enable the program to 
more effectively support the DA and the LGUs to efficiently perform their respective roles under 
a
decentralized system of governance:  
 
(1) Institutional Support for Improving DA's Service Delivery Systems: This will aim to  
strengthen the DA's RFU capacities to carry out core functions of planning and budgeting, 
market development, regulatory support, and technology development and dissemination, as 
these relate to production, marketing and management technologies to LGUs, localization of 
MFO-based planning and budgeting, micro enterprise development and support for community-
based natural resource management (NRM) subprojects (to be funded by a GEF grant).  
 
(2) Support for Critical Local Investments and Improving LGU Resource Mobilization: This 
aims to help LGUs attain competencies in carrying out devolved functions and to assist them in 
increasingly financing priority local investments and services through own-resource generation 
and fiscally-prudent resource management.  Financing under the program will be provided for (a) 
LGU capacity building on local resource generation and management; (b) sub grants for priority 
local rural infrastructure; and (c) community block grants for community priorities.  
 
(3) Enhancement of Governance and Transparency Systems and Mechanisms: This will 
reinforce the first two components by financing cross-cutting interventions to strengthen 
governance at the national, regional, local and community levels such as (a) setting-up of 
information systems on production technologies, markets, sources and uses of public funds, and 
other areas that promote efficiency, accountability and professionalism in public service; (b) 
assessment and capacity building for improving LGU financial management and audit systems to 
ensure more effective use and control of funds, as well as on improving capacities for 
procurement, contracting and contracts management.  
 
(4) Overall Program Coordination and Support: This will be done by organic/regular DA and 
LGU staff, in order to support participating LGUs in aspects related to environmental and social 
safeguards, financial management, disbursements, procurement, and auditing.  More importantly, 
it will include the building of a strong system for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to enhance 
the capacities of the DA, the LGUs and the communities for putting in place an effective 
mechanism for assessing efficiency in the delivery of interventions and effectiveness in realizing 
the program's development objective.  Development and institutionalization of M&E systems 
Page  3
and capacities at various levels will be made stronger under this phase, including the more 
organized collection of baseline data and conduct of periodic external evaluations with more 
adequate funding.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Majority of 25 provinces in Mindanao   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project is a second phase of the MRDP, which closed December 31, 2004 and 
covered five provinces in Mindanao. MRDP 1 has put in place adequate safeguard frameworks, 
guidelines and procedures that are strictly adhered to by subproject proponents and properly 
monitored by the Program Coordinating Office (PCO). Safeguard compliance has been rated 
satisfactory by the Bank. As a standard operating procedure, environmental and social clearances 
are required by the PCO as basic requirements for subproject approval, and compliance during 
implementation is being monitored by the provincial and PCO staff on a regular basis. The 
program has invested a lot on building the safeguards capacity of staff from the PCO and the 
participating LGUs (provinces and municipalities) under MRDP 1.  
 
While safeguards capacity may be weak in some of the new LGUs to be covered under MRDP 
2, they will be strengthened as part of project implementation. The capacity building approach  
drawn from MRDP 1 experience will be adopted to build the capacity of the new LGUs. The 
Department of Agriculture  Regional Field Units (DA-RFUs) and the PCO, in partnership with 
the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), will build the safeguards 
capacity of the  participating LGUs and provide technical assistance to ensure that they comply 
with the relevant safeguard policies of the Bank and the government. The DENR, which is 
mandated to screen and approve subprojects in terms of environmental and social impacts, has 
enough experience on the types of subprojects that the project will support and an agreement will 
be forged by DA for a joint/coordinated subproject screening, review and monitoring of 
environmental measures.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will support rehabilitation and, to a limited extent, construction of demand-driven 
rural infrastructure such as farm-to-market roads, bridges, communal irrigation systems and 
water supply systems. It will also support community-based natural resource management 
(coastal resource management and agro-forestry),  taking off from MRDP1 biodiversity 
conservation activities. This will complement other MRDP2 initiatives to ensure that 
productivity increases will not result in the degradation of the natural resource base, and 
therefore, lead to unsustainable increases in farmers/fishers' incomes.  
 
Experience and lessons learned from MRDP 1 indicated that environmental and social 
impacts of these interventions, particularly rural infrastructure, are short
-
term and revers
ible if 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
managed properly. MRDP 1 environmental guidelines and procedures have adequately ensured 
that impacts are addressed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
NRM interventions and community subprojects may support agricultural and/or 
technological demonstration farms that may entail limited or prudent use of chemical pesticides. 
The extent of pesticide usage, if any, shall be determined during the project identification and the 
preparation will ensure that relevant framework on the use of chemical pesticides that will be 
consistent with the OP will be developed as part of the EA guidelines.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Some of the participating provinces and municipalities are known to have indigenous 
communities. In cases where they are present, the project will ensure that they are participating 
and consulted with in the planning and implementation process and a purposive targeting of the 
IPs will be done in the CFAD interventions. The IP framework for MRDP 1, which was rated 
satisfactory by the Bank, will be adopted for the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary resettlement is not expected given the rehabilitation nature of most of the rural 
infrastructure subprojects to be supported by MRDP 2. However, there may be limited/minimal 
acquisition of lands resulting from the rehabilitation and widening of rural infrastructure. The 
MRDP 1 LARR framework, which was rated satisfactory by the Bank, will adopted for the 
project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
This will be determined during identification/preparation whether sub-projects can include 
dams (e.g., for local irrigation or recharge of acquifers) and if so, the dimensions these would 
have.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/01/2006 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carolina V. Figueroa-Geron 
06/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
