Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1482
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Poland 
Project ID:  P086768 
Project Name:  ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROTECTION 
Task Team Leader:  Masood Ahmad 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 13, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (80%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(20%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Social risk mitigation (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
130.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED)
 110.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
100.00
370.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development objective is to protect the population in the Odra River Basin against 
loss of life and damage to property caused by severe flooding.  This would be achieved 
by: (i) reducing the extreme flood peaks through storage in a dry polder on the Odra 
River just upstream of Raciborz town, enabling a reduction of the flood peak downstream 
of the reservoir and allowing better control of the operation of the river system; and (ii) 
by increasing the flood carrying capacity of the Odra river channels through and around 
Wroclaw.  The Project would protect more than 2.5 million people against flooding in 
several towns such as Raciborz, Kedzierzyn, Kozle, Krapkowice, Opole, Brzeg, Olawa 
and Wroclaw, and settlements in the three voivodships of Slaskie, Opolskie and 
Dolnoslaskie.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is located in lower Silesia in Southwestern Poland; an area with a population 
of about 4 million people of which nearly 2.5 million were directly or indirectly affected 
Page  2
by extreme flooding of the Odra river and tributaries.  The urgency of proper flood 
protection was underlined during the summer of 1997 when flooding of the Odra River 
damaged 37,000 buildings, 866 bridges and over 2000 KM of roads; causing an estimated 
loss of 8,480 million Pld z? (approx USD 2.2 billion).  The Project intends to improve 
flood control and river management in the Odra valley between the Czech border and 
Brzeg Dolny in the Slaskie, Opolskie, Donoslaskie voivoide.  The main components of 
the Project include:  
 
Component A: Construction of Racib?rz Dry Polder.  A dry polder would be created on 
the Odra River not far from the border with the Czech Republic near the town of 
Raciborz to store flood water.  Total capacity of the dry polder would be about 185 Mm3.  
Main benefits from this polder will be: (i) a reduction in the Odra peak flows downstream 
of the reservoir so that the effectiveness of the existing flood defense system will be 
greatly improved; and (ii) a delay in the timing of the flood peaks at the confluence of the 
Odra with the Nysa Klodzka, so that the adverse combination of the two floods that was 
so damaging in 1997 will become unlikely in the future.  These two phenomena, in 
combination, will result in a considerable reduction in the frequency and severity of 
future floods.  The works comprise a 4.0 km embankment across the Odra valley with a 
maximum height of 10.5 m above the Odra River bed. Right and left bank dikes will be 
constructed from the main embankment along the valley upstream for lengths of 9.15 km 
and 9. 5 km, respectively. The total reservoir area would be about 26.3 km?.  A spillway 
structure will be provided and a fish ladder would be provided to minimize the 
discontinuity in the river regime.  
 
Component B.  Modernization of Wroclaw Floodway System (WFS).  Currently, 
Wroclaw is subject to inundation with floods greater than 2,200 m?/s.  The maximum 
flow during the 1997 flood was estimated at 3,640 m?/s at Trestno (upstream of 
Wroclaw).  The Raciborz dry polder would offer partial but not complete flood 
protection.  The flood protection for Wroclaw city is provided, in conjunction with the 
Raciborz polder, by modernizing and upgrading the flood protection system along the 
Odra channels passing through and around Wroclaw city, as well as increasing their 
hydraulic capacity.  The necessary works for WFS comprise of: (i) improvements to Odra 
dikes and embankments; (ii) improvements to the Odra Channels, involving increasing 
the hydraulic capacity of the Odra River by widening and/or deepening of the channels 
and works for related hydraulic structures; and (iii) flood relief through the Widawa 
Transfer, involving increase in the design capacity of the existing Odra-Widawa 
diversion to about 185 m?/s of flow in times of flood danger.  
 
Component C:  Improving Flood Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and 
Supervision of the Environmental Management and Resettlement Action Plans.  The 
Component would consist of the following sub-components:  (i) improving flood 
management in the Odra River Basin; (ii) continued support to improve the flood 
forecasting system, to ensure that the system of hydro-meteorological forecasting, 
currently being installed would remain operational; (iii) continued improvements in the 
flood protection and management plans and assistance in development of projects in the 
flood sector; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the Project?s impact, including the 
Page  3
implementation and monitoring of the environmental management plan (EMP), and the 
resettlement action plan (RAP); and (v) EMP works such as ecological enhancement 
works in developing an ecological corridor along the Odra River, or other such works 
which are not included in the other components or in the Odra 2006 program.  
 
Component D: Project Management, Technical Assistance and Training.  This 
Component would support the Government in implementing the Project and prepare a 
follow-on project.  It would include: (a) support for the operation of the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) and implementing agencies, and financing of overall project 
management, as well as technical assistance in such areas as detailed design, contract 
administration and construction supervision, procurement, and financial management; (b) 
a
modest institutional strengthening program, including technical assistance and training.  
This would involve the financing of consulting services, and foreign visits, equipment 
and software for project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Odra River with a total length of 866 km is one of the two main rivers of Poland.  
The River flows out of the Oderskie mountains of Central Europe located in the Czech 
Republic.  The mountains have elevation of up to 1400 m.  The steep relief combined 
with high annual rainfall mainly concentrated in the summer results in rapid runoff and 
frequent flooding in the basin. Moreover, the excessive drainage is aggravated by 
urbanization, large scale deforestation and drainage of agricultural lands in the hilly 
areas.  After crossing the border at Chalukpi, the Odra River changes from a mountain 
stream into a mature river system meandering into its flood plain because of low gradient.  
However, since the start of industrialization, large parts of the River have been heavily 
modified, and as a result the width of the active flood plain has been reduced by about 
50%.  There are still a number of important places belonging to the natural river system 
such as alluvial forests, wet and flooded meadows, oxbow lakes and various other types 
of wetlands.  Thus, the river landscape still contains sizeable important flood plane 
habitats in Central Europe.  The project area is the flood plain of the Odra River between 
Chaluki and the Czech border up to Brzeg Dolny, downstream of the city of Wroclaw.  
The length of the River in this stretch is 280 km.The flood plains are rather densely 
populated, and a number of major towns are situated within the river valley.  It is 
estimated that about 2.5 million people would be affected by floods such as the one that 
occurred in 1997.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
Mr Tjaart W. Schillhorn-Van Veen (EASRD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
With accession to the EU, Poland has harmonized all environment assessment (EA) and 
safeguard requirements with the EU directives. The Polish laws also require preparation 
of a detailed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for issuing a construction permit. 
Thus specific EIAs are required for Raciborz, Polder, and hydraulic structures and 
various dikes proposed to be strengthened or constructed in the WFS individually 
according to the Polish regulations.  Therefore, EA procedure for development, operation 
and monitoring of this Project are in line with, perhaps much more comprehensive, than 
the World Bank safeguard requirements.  However, in line with the Bank guidelines an 
environmental assessment of the Project was carried out as part of the Project feasibility 
study (in 2003) and that was reviewed by a team of international and national EA 
consultants.  The EA and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were finalized in 
March 2005 and consultations were held with the stakeholders.  
 
Environmental Assessment.  Based on the World Bank guidelines, the Project is rated as 
an EA Category ?A? project because it triggers several safeguard policies.  The EA 
concluded that the Project would have significant positive impact by increasing 
protection level against extreme floods for large population, property, and industrial areas 
and thus implementation of the Project is strongly recommended despite some negative 
impact which can largely be mitigated and/or compensated.  The EA evaluated the impact 
of the major components of the Project, that is construction of Raciborz dry polder 
upstream, and improvements in the Odra channels near Wroclaw (WFS) including 
increasing the capacity of a bypass channel namely the Widawa transfer.  EA also 
evaluated the impact related to project design, construction and operation.  Based on this 
evaluation an EMP is proposed for the Project that is designed to mitigate, minimize, and 
compensate any negative affects and in fact to enhance the ecological benefits of the 
Project.  A summary of EA and EMP is provided in Annex 10.1 of the PAD.  
 
The social impact of the Project is discussed below.  This section primarily deals with 
the physical environment, natural environment, and ecological conditions in the project 
Page  5
area.  The main reason that the Project would have insignificant impact on environment 
during operation is that floods with return period less than 10 years would be passed 
undisturbed and only the extreme floods would be mitigated and their peaks reduced 
using the Raciborz dry polder.  The ecological conditions in the river channel are 
determined by recurrent floods and therefore they would generally remain undisturbed.  
Within the Raciborz bowl the impact on ecological conditions due to flood storage would 
be minimized by retaining flood peaks above 10 year return period for a minimum 
duration.  During floods like 1997 (with 1,000 years return period) storage could last 
several  days with some negative consequences to the ecological conditions within the 
Raciborz bowl ?for this reason compensation measures are included in Component C5 of 
the Project in line with the EU guidelines for alternatives and compensation for Natura 
2000 sites.  It should be noted that a 1000 year return flood would have many of the same 
impacts on the small reservoir area even without the project in addition to preventable 
consequences downstream. The operation regime of the Raciborz is important to 
maximize the protection against floods as well as ecological benefits and to minimize any 
negative ecological affects.  In fact, the Raciborz polder can be operated to enhance the 
intensity of ?ecologically beneficial? floods by holding water for a short period and then 
releasing with the desired peak flow.  These aspects would be studied further during 
under Components C1 and C4.  
 
Natural Habitats.  As there are some critical natural habitats of national significance that 
have potential to become Natura 2000 sites in the project area, OP 4.04 applies.  The 
Racib?rz polder area as well as some of the downstream floodplains include natural 
habitats that appear to be impacted by the proposed project.  To address these issues an 
ecological enhancement or compensation project is proposed according to the EU 
guidelines for compensation measures for Natura 2000.  The activities proposed, included 
in Component C5 of the Project, are described below:  
 
Measures to strengthen ecological corridor upstream of the Reservoir, as compensation 
for possible damages to the Tworkowski forest (170ha) in accordance with guidelines for 
compensation measures for Natura 2000 sites.  This component could include the 
following activities: (a) strengthening of the Border Meander Conservation and 
Renaturalization Project implemented by WWF-Poland, by increasing the area of this 
original meander by about 50 ha; (b) creating an ecological belt in the vicinity of the 
Raciborz reservoir, outside the reservoir boundaries, using the new Psina river channel 
and connecting remnants of former wet meadows and tree belt in the Psina valley with 
other natural elements in the Odra flood plain; and (c) strengthening of Wielikat ponds 
and Brzezie ponds/wetland complexes by protective measures and improving water 
management, re-naturalization of surrounding areas and by creating buffer zones.  
 
Measures to strengthen the ecological corridor between Raciborz and the mouth of Nysa 
Klodzka, as compensation for the loss of habitat and species in the areas downstream of 
the reservoir.  This Component would include: (i) improvement of conditions of remnants 
of wet meadows/wetlands downstream of Raciborz; (ii) creating new or enlarged 
habitats; (iii) opening up of remnants of oxbow lakes for inflow of Odra water during 
floods; (iv) removal of summer embankments on stretches where new embankments are 
Page  6
planned; (v) improvement and extension of gallery forests along the Odra between 
Raciborz and Opole; (vi) creating an ecological belt through land acquisition, 
conservation measures and improvements; (vii) creating artificial islands at suitable 
places in the River and in gravel pits for nesting of river birds; and (viii) 
strengthening/improving habitats in protected sites and other conservation measures (e.g. 
buffer zones).  
 
Cultural Property.  The Project aims to protect the City of Wroclaw from flooding. This 
is an area of very old settlements. Archeological remnants have been found from all ages 
from Paleolithic Age till the Middle Ages.  The Project does not expect to construct in 
any undisturbed areas of the city and surrounding areas.  A single significant historical 
rampart in the WFS is the only site close to the construction works that have been 
identified but the relevant embankment has already been diverted around this site.  
However, in case of any ?chance find? during the construction activities, this will be dealt 
with in accordance with the procedures stipulated in Polish law, which are acceptable to 
the Bank.  The ?chance find? procedures would be included in the tender documentation 
for the construction contracts.  
 
Dam Safety. Since the Project involves construction of a dam and a number of dikes, 
dam and dike safety issues may arise.  Any damage or break of the dike could 
immediately affect nearby villages, as well as Racib?rz city.  Hence, it has been agreed 
that an independent Panel of Experts (POE) will be constituted to oversee the preparation 
and implementation of the dam safety aspect in such a way that its recommendations will 
be incorporated into the EA Report.  The emergency preparedness plans would be 
prepared under Component C for improving flood management in the Odra valley.  Dam 
safety management plan is given in Annex 10.3 of the PAD.   
 
Project on International Waterways.  The Odra River is an international waterway 
shared by the Czech Republic, Poland and Germany. Therefore, any works in the basin 
would trigger the Bank?s policy of notifying the other riparian states.  The Polish 
Government, through its regular meetings of the Odra Commission, involving the above 
mentioned countries, has already notified the Czech Republic and Germany about the 
Project.  The Odra Commission has also considered and approved the Odra 2006 
Program, which includes the details of the flood protection measures to be constructed 
under the Project.   The Project has also been discussed bilaterally with the Czech 
Republic and Germany.  Nevertheless, it was agreed that Poland would send notification 
letters to the riparian states and the Odra Commission, advising them about the project 
scope, design detail and schedule of implementation.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement.  A Social Assessment (SA) for the Project was carried out as 
part of the project feasibility study and a RAP was prepared.  The Racib?rz dry polder 
with a total area of about 2,626 ha will affect two villages containing about 161 
households (260 families) with a total population of 689, Nieboczowy with a population 
of 564 (210 families) and Ligota Tworkowska 125 (50 families).  Even though the polder 
would only be flooded during extreme floods (with return periods of at least 10 years), 
Polish regulations require the land/properties within the polder to be acquired by the State 
Page  7
and allocated to the concerned RZGW (in this case RZGW Gliwice) responsible for 
operation of the polder for flood management.  Therefore, all land and buildings within 
the polder would have to be purchased/acquired by Government.  The RAP has been 
prepared for the Racib?rz Component of the Project that is consistent with the provisions 
of OP 4.12.  The land acquisition procedures described in the RAP for the Racib?rz area 
will be applied to all other project interventions in the Wroclaw Floodway System (where 
resettlement is likely to be very limited to land acquisition) once the Project is under 
implementation and details on the design and exact locations of the reconstruction works 
are known.  The Government will then prepare the details of the land acquisition 
procedures for these locations, and submit them to the Bank for review prior to awarding 
any contracts for construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The most important impact of the Project is the very significant positive effect on the 
protection of major population centers, industrial areas and property in the flood plain of 
the Odra River between Racib?rz and Wroclaw.  The Project will considerably improve 
the safety of a large number of people living in this part of the flood plain, reduce the 
huge economic and financial risks of large flood events such as the 1997 flood, prevent 
large scale damage to cultural heritage and historic monuments and improve the feeling 
of safety and wellbeing of the people.  Due to the ecological components, overall 
conditions for natural habitat and ecology in the riverine areas would improve.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
(See section B5 of PAD for details)  
 
During preparation of project feasibility studies, various alternative options for both 
Component A, construction of the Racib?rz dry polder and Component B, Wroclaw 
Flood Way Systems were evaluated.  It was determined that a combination of 
Components A and B provided an optimal solution for providing protection against 
flooding in the project areas.  Under Component A, alternative alignment of the reservoir 
to minimize resettlement needs, and to protect the environment was evaluated, and the 
final choice was made based on the optimal socio-economic benefits that the Project 
could bring.  In addition, options for elevating one of the two villages to be resettled 
above the flood plain were evaluated.  Similarly, under Component B, construction of the 
Widawa Transfer is an alternative to creating another flood retention polder upstream of 
the city of Wroclaw.  Moreover, to minimize the potential negative impact on the 
environment, and to preserve and enhance the natural habitat and biodiversity in the 
project area, a number of alternations to the project design were introduced.  These 
measures are described in detail in the EA and its summary and in the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP).  The measures will be implemented through various 
components of the Project, by including some in the bidding documents for construction 
contracts.  Implementation of all these measures will be monitored under the Project 
Monitoring and Evaluation contract under Component C.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address safeguard issues a detailed RAP, EMP and dam safety plan has been prepared 
covering all safeguard issues.  The RAP is developed based on the principle that all losses 
should be assessed and adequately compensated and no individual, family or community 
should end up worse off than they were before their assets were acquired.  The 
agricultural land acquired would be leased back to the original owners with specific 
clauses recognizing the increase in intensity and frequency of flooding.  
 
Key features of the EMP are: (a) to improve the emergency preparedness, flood 
management plans and operational regime of Raciborz and all other hydraulic 
infrastructure on the Odra River, required investments and technical assistance and 
consulting services would be covered under Component C1 of the Project.  As indicated 
above these plans would be developed with the involvement of the local authorities, 
concerned agencies, and stakeholders; (b) cost of proposed mitigating measures are 
included in the relevant investment components of the Project and they would be 
incorporated into the main construction contracts for construction of such facilities.  
However, investments to enhance environmental benefits by developing a bio-corridor 
and compensation measures for natural habitat within the Raciborz footprint (with 
potential to become a Natura 2000 site) proposed under EMP are included in Component 
C5 of the Project.  This Component would also cover any other mitigating measures 
required that are not included in the Odra 2006 program or other components of the 
Project; (c) properly designed fish ladders would be provided in the hydraulic structures 
to minimize the discontinuity in the river regime and impact on the movement of fish; (d) 
designs of the embankments and other structures passing through environmentally 
sensitive areas have been modified (such as bed width is reduced) to minimize the 
damages to the environmentally important areas and tree cutting and disturbance to land 
surfaces and environment would be minimized during construction.  These requirements 
would be incorporated in the bidding documents for the construction contracts.  
Similarly, procedures to minimize the disturbance during construction in the Raciborz as 
well as in WFS would be incorporated in the detailed designs and bidding documents for 
the construction contracts; (e) procedures are also proposed to deal with any sites with a 
potential to be included in Natura 2000 ( and other natural habitat) ; and (e) to monitor 
the implementation of the EMP, independent M&E consultants would be recruited to 
ensure that all procedures are followed and actions taken as proposed in EMP, including 
any ?chance find? of archeological effects during construction (Component C4).  
 
The Borrower and the concerned implementing agencies have capacity to handle the 
RAP and EMP issues.  In addition, under Component C4 of the Project an independent 
team of M&E consultants would be responsible for monitoring and evaluation and 
supervision of RAP and EMP implementation.  
 
RAP, EA and the accompanying EMP and the summary of these documents were 
consulted and agreed with the proper authorities and the implementing agencies in the 
Government.  In addition,    implementation of the mitigating measures for protection of 
the environment, proper resettlement, and other applied safeguards along with 
Page  9
appropriate channels for their implementation in realm of the Project was agreed with the 
Government.  Important to note that the Government of Poland has appropriate laws, 
regulations, procedures and institutions to implement and oversee proper implementation 
of safeguards measures.  For example laws and procedures governing the RAP and EA 
are in line with the EU regulations and similar to those of the Bank, and the government-
designated institutions have the necessary capacity to implement them.  However, the EA 
in addition recognizes areas in which the capacity of the implementing agencies can be 
enhanced in order to ensure proper implementation of the mitigated measures.  Capacity 
building of institutions would also be strengthened under Components C and D of the 
Project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Preparation of RAP, EA from inception to finalization involved discussion, workshops 
and consultations with all project stakeholders, such as the affected population, civil 
society, institutions, local authorities and government agencies.In addition, the summary 
of RAP, EA, and the associated EMP was disclosed publicly to all stakeholders.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/04/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/13/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  10
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  11
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Masood Ahmad 
04/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tjaart W. Schillhorn-Van Veen 
04/08/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
04/08/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph R. Goldberg 
04/13/2005 
Comments:   
