Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  33095 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Poland 
Project ID: P083094 
Project Name: Poland: Hard Coal 
Task Team Leader: John E. Strongman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Small and medium 
enterprise support (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective will help support the completion of the Hard Coal 
Sector Reform by helping to (a) support any further restructuring needed for KW; (b) ensure that 
the coal companies are offered for privatization; and (b) address the legacy of coal sector mining 
damages (subsidence) liabilities at closed mines.  
 
The following performance indicators would be applied to assess the success of the project  
 
(i) 
each coal company continues to adhere to a hard budget constraint  
 
(ii) 
the restructuring of KW is completed such that KW can be offered for privatization  
 
(iii) 
each of the six major coal companies is (a) prepared for privatization (including 
appointment of privatization advisor, preparation of pre-privatization analysis, and selection of 
privatization method; and (b) offered for privatization (either through a trade sale or through a 
public offering of a majority of shares in the company)  
 
(iv) 
a satisfactory plan is prepared and is under implementation to address the legacy of 
subsidy at (a) closed and (b) operating mines  
 
Page  2
The development objectives will be achieved by supporting completion of the implementation 
of the Government's 2004-2006 Hard Coal Reform Program as well as implementation of the 
Strategy for 2007-2010.  The Government?s approach of preparing the Program and the Strategy, 
together with the recently approved Privatization Strategy are considered suitable. The key 
elements of the sector restructuring program are (i) closure of remaining excess capacity at KW 
in an environmentally responsible manner (which is being supported in by the HCMC loan 
which helps finance mine closure once the mines are transferred to SRK for closure); (ii) further 
employment downsizing (especially for surface workers at KW) in a socially sustainable manner 
-
which is being supported by the HCSM loan (which is due to close on December 31, 2005); 
(iii) privatization; and (iv) improvement of environmental performance in keeping with EU 
requirements, including land reclamation.  The proposed operation would support completion of 
the Program with regard to (ii), (iii) and (iv) above, since the companion HCMC operation which 
supports (i) is not expected to close until March 31, 2008.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have three components as follows, with Bank funding provided only for the 
second and third components:  
 
(i) 
Preparation and offering the industry for privatization including improving corporate 
governance as part of the preparation for privatization.  
 
(ii) 
Support for further employment downsizing in terms of (a) carryover payments for 
underground miners who have taken early retirement packages and (b) payments for surface 
workers taking severance packages.  
 
(iii) 
(a) Support for repair/mitigation of past mining damages (in particular subsidence) at 
mines that have been closed; and (b) establishment of measure to reduce/remediate subsistence 
liabilities at operating mines being privatized.  
 
An investment loan is proposed because it provides direct linkages to disbursement of funds for 
subsistence. For the simplification of the implementation process it is proposed that the project to 
be a SWAP type operation (like the HCMC operation), whereby the loan proceeds has been 
pooled with Government funds provided to SRK.  As noted below, the operation may also be 
suitable as a "Country Systems Pilot" with regard to environmental and social safeguard issues 
(as well as possibly procurement and financial management systems).  This will be addressed at 
QER as well as subsequent the ISDS Reviews. The main alternative considered was policy 
development lending through an additional SECAL.  Development Policy lending is considered 
less suitable because there is not a significant budget gap to be closed and Poland is a middle 
income country.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project is located in the Silesia region of Southern Poland. Silesia is highly industrialized 
with coal fired power generation, steel and other industry in the region. Total population of the 
region is about 2 million, with the majority living in urban, suburban and semi-rural settings. The 
region does not have any unusual or unique environmental features.  The coal mines are not 
located near any protected areas or sites, critical natural habitats, or any culturally or socially 
sensitive areas.   There are 3 coal holding companies in the region (operating 37 mines) plus 3 
independent mines (for a total of 40 operating mines).  Total industry employment is currently 
Page  3
about 140,000 people. There are 22 mines where closure and rehabilitation have been completed 
and another 3 mines where it is undergoing. Over 100,000 workers have already left the coal 
sector in the last 4 years.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has a very good track record for carrying out environmental and social safeguards. 
A
Sector Environmental Assessment (SEA) was conducted under SECAL1 and mining 
companies are implementing environmental improvements.  The Environmental Framework 
prepared under HCMC Project has been an effective compliment to borrower procedures and 
will applicable for any additional mines subject to closure and (b) the Involuntarily Resettlement 
may be also be triggered in the event that repair of subsidence may require temporary relocation 
of occupants of residential and commercial buildings while the buildings are repaired.  The 
Borrower's institutions - Voivod Department of Environment, Higher Mining Authority (which 
are responsible for overseeing environmental performance) and SRK, BSRK and the mining 
companies (which undertake the environmental work) - have all demonstrated acceptable 
institution capabilities under previous operations. There have been no issues of safeguard 
violations in the previous four loans and suitable steps will be taken during project preparation to 
ensure that this remains the case.  
 
This is one of several operations being considered within the pilot program for the "Use of 
Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues" under OP 4.00 
(March 2005) and specifically under the "EU pilot" provision approved by the World Bank 
Board.  Pilot project approval will be done in parallel with the overall project approval, and will 
hinge on the determination of the "equivalence and acceptability" of comparable Polish 
environmental and social protection policies (taking into account needed "gap-filling"), as well 
as continued Bank supervision during implementation.  Field work to prepare a draft 
"Equivalence and Acceptability Assessment", a condition of Board review of pilots, is planned to 
begin in mid-October, 2005.  The review will examine both the legal basis for due diligence, as 
well as the past practice of Polish mining and environmental authorities under Bank-supported 
and non-Bank-supported projects.  
 
Should any or all key components of the Polish system not be found "equivalent" and 
"acceptable" to the Bank under OP 4.00 (despite feasible "gap-filling"), the Bank's particular 
safeguard policy or policies will apply.  For environment, as an expected Category B project this 
would then be captured in an Environmental Management Plan, revised as needed from previous 
EMPs. Due diligence documentation as a country-system pilot (i.e the "equivalence and 
acceptability framework") or a conventional operation (i.e the EMP) would be disclosed by 
appraisal  
 
Since OP 4.12 may be triggered as a result of subsidence remediation, borrower systems for 
meeting the objectives of OP 4.12 will be reviewed as well. If these are found "equivalent" and 
"acceptable", Polish procedures may be followed and no specific policy framework will be 
required.  If Polish systems are not judged as acceptable (despite "gap-filling"), then a 
conventional policy framework for meeting OP 4.12 will be prepared.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (QAG) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project supports remediation and repair of subsidence in the mining areas and this 
safeguard policy is applicable. Subsidence impacts in the region are relatively modest, generally 
being limited to minor damage, such as cracks in walls of apartment buildings and are easily 
mitigated. They are repaired by the coal company responsible for the damage.  A survey of any 
subsidence damage associated with the mines or parts of mines already closed or under closure 
will be undertaken during project preparation as well as a plan developed to repair any damage. 
In addition, to improve overall sector performance, a survey will be undertaken of subsidence at 
all existing mining operations to examine whether any serious problems exist and to ensure that 
repairs are being made in a timely manner.  The Government will commit to ensuring that the 
work to repair subsidence is undertaken by the companies in a timely manner.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This is not anticipated but will be checked in advance of appraisal and due diligence suitably 
included as needed.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
This safeguard may be triggered in the event that repair of mining damages will be required 
for cultural property buildings.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
This safeguard may be triggered in the event that repair of mining damages may require 
temporary relocation of occupants of residential and commercial buildings while the buildings 
are repaired. An Involuntarily Resettlement Policy will be prepared and disclosed before 
appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Field work to prepare a draft "Equivalence and Acceptability Assessment", a condition of 
Board review of pilots, is planned to begin in mid-October, 2005.  Otherwise (and/or in 
addition to) the framework, and EMP or resettlement instrument would be prepared 
(including consultations) and disclosed by appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John E. Strongman 
07/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/21/2005 
Comments:  This PCN-stage ISDS is cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter A. van der Veen 
07/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
