                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC19621

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Mozambique                      Project ID:      P161241
                            Project Name:        Grant Mechanism for Local Communities
                            Team Leader(s):      Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
                            Estimated Date       10-Oct-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEN01                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.50                           Total Bank Financing: 0.00
                            Financing Gap:      0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                 4.50
                              Total                                                                                        4.50
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of local communities, community-
                           based and civil society organizations to participate in sustainable forest and land management and
                           REDD+ processes at the local, national and global levels.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is part of a global program - the Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
                           Peoples and Local Communities (DGM) under the Forest Investment Program, one of the Climate
                           Investment Funds - which has allocated $4.5 million in grant resources to Mozambique. The
                           MozDGM is based on (a) the Design Proposal for the global DGM, which was developed by the
                           Global IPLC Working Group and (b) Mozambique's Forest Investment Plan, submitted by the
                           Government of Mozambique to the Forest Investment Program. It follows the framework guidelines
                           and set of activities covered under the components designed for the global DGM.

                           MozDGM will be prepared as a stand-alone project that complements the MozFIP project (P160033).
                           MozDGM was designed to promote the participation and inclusion of local communities in processes
                           and activities that seek to reduce deforestation and forest degradation. The project will build the
                           capacity of targeted local communities, thereby enabling their inclusive and effective participation in
                         sustainable forest and land management and REDD+ processes at the local, national and global
                         levels. This will contribute to the goals of MozFIP, which is to improve forest and land management
                         by local communities, the government, and the private sector in selected landscapes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Similar to MozFIP, MozDGM will operate a two levels: (i) the national level focusing on capacity
                         building and institutional strengthening; and (ii) the landscape level focusing on the implementation
                         of activities in the two selected landscapes, Zambezia and Cabo Delgado. Activities on-the-ground
                         will aim to address the drivers of deforestation, while prioritizing livelihoods improvements for
                         communities who live in and around the forests. MozDGM will be differentiated from MozFIP
                         through its community-centered approach in design and implementation, and the emphasis on
                         community organization, knowledge and capacity strengthening as the foundation for sustainable
                         resource management. MozDGM will complement MozFIP and other natural resource management
                         initiatives in the landscapes from the bottom-up perspective.

                         The MozDGM, like DGM activities in other countries will establish a small grants program.
                         Organizations will apply for and implement grants under the supervision of the National Executing
                         Agency. Specific grantee selection and eligibility criteria are still being developed. It is expected that
                         DGM activities and grants in Mozambique will: (a) promote a strong sense of ownership and social
                         accountability among the grant beneficiaries and key stakeholders; (b) strengthen the institutional
                         capacity of communities, community-based and civil society organizations by means of in situ
                         training events on managerial issues for grant beneficiaries and by encouraging a diversity of
                         partnerships with governmental and civil society organizations; and (c) provide culturally adequate
                         technical assistance to design, develop and implement on-the-ground activities. The NSC and NEA
                         are also expected to design adequate, flexible, and efficient administrative and financial
                         arrangements that will enable easy, streamlined and fast-track access to grants by local communities
                         and their representatives, and facilitating adequate financial flows and management of project
                         resources to diverse communities. The NSC and NEA will also carry out preliminary assessments of
                         the economic, environmental and social feasibility of community proposals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has been informed by the national REDD+ Readiness process, the FIP preparation
                         process and analytical work on the state of forests and the role of communities. This includes studies
                         on deforestation drivers, a social and environmental assessment, and studies specific to Zambezia
                         and Cabo Delgado on proposed interventions to address deforestation drivers and socioeconomic
                         needs. Two critical analytical NLTAs that provided a rigorous, analytical basis for project design
                         addressed the issues of land rights delimitation and community-based natural resource management
                         in Mozambique, with case studies conducted in the project area.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         MozDGM will operate at two levels: (i) the national level focusing on capacity building and
                         institutional strengthening; and (ii) the landscape level focusing on the implementation of activities
                         in the two selected landscapes, Zambezia and Cabo Delgado.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The National Executing Agency (NEA) is not yet defined and is expected to be selected by
                         December 2016. At this stage the institutional capacity for safeguards policies implementation is not
                         known. However, application of safeguards requirements particularly in subprojects is expected to be
                         a challenge for a number of organizations accessing DGM funds. To mitigate this risk, the Project
                         will ensure that the experience and performance of the NEA against environmental and social
                           safeguards, both from the perspective of WB policies as the laws of the GOM, are assessed during
                           recruitment and adequately monitored during Project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The NEA will be required to hire an Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists (ESSS) to
                           oversee DGM activities. This specialist will be under overall guidance from the World Bank
                           Safeguards Specialists. He will provide day-to-day supervision of the ESMF and PF implementation
                           and ensure that subsequent ESMPs are fully addressed. Training workshops will be required to local
                           communities, community-based organizations and other actors engaged in project interventions.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alfredo Ricardo Zunguze (GEN01)
                           Bruno Alcantara Cardoso (GSU07)
                           Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Mozambique Dedicated Grant Mechanism
                           BP 4.01                                            for Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
                                                                              (DGM) is a Category B project owing to the fact
                                                                              that potential adverse environmental impacts on
                                                                              human populations or environmentally
                                                                              important areas will be site-specific and few if
                                                                              any of them are irreversible; and in most cases
                                                                              mitigation measures can be designed. The
                                                                              activities to be financed under MozDGM, in
                                                                              particular under Component 2, will include
                                                                              production and commercialization of artisanal
                                                                              and non-timber forest products; community
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              woodlots for biomass energy production;
                                                                              community land delimitation; micro-zoning for
                                                                              territorial management plans; restoration of
                                                                              degraded areas; developing fire management
                                                                              plans; sustainable agro-ecological production;
                                                                              and ecotourism. These activities are anticipated
                                                                              to have positive social and environmental
                                                                              impacts, as these activities will seeks to promote
                                                                              sustainable management of natural resources in
                                                                              the community lands whose livelihoods depend
                                                                              on these resources. Although the nature and
                                                                              scale of the proposed activities are not expected
                                                                              to have significant adverse impacts, as project
                                                                              activities are likely to take place in or around
                                                                              forest lands or its vicinity and/or protected areas
                                                                              or natural habitats, adverse impacts may occur
                                                                              that would require due safeguards attention. As
                                                                              consequently of the aforementioned the OP/BP
                                                                              4.01 is triggered and basic principles and
                                                             prerogatives need to be established and
                                                             followed to comply with safeguards
                                                             requirements. As mitigation strategy for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             anticipated impacts, safeguards instruments
                                                             already developed under the FCPF support to
                                                             the REDD+ Readiness Process are being
                                                             harmonized to be applied to MozFIP as well as
                                                             MozDGM Projects. The ESMF and PF under
                                                             harmonization for MozFIP and MozDGM will
                                                             include specific considerations for the two
                                                             project activities especially on the sub-projects
                                                             screening process. The ESMF will include
                                                             procedures along with appropriate institutional
                                                             arrangements for preparing, screening,
                                                             reviewing, implementing and monitoring site
                                                             specific ESMPs for subprojects to prevent
                                                             adverse impacts as well as cumulative impacts.
                                                             The ESMF will also include provisions for
                                                             mitigation of impacts on forest and natural
                                                             habitats, thus providing general guidance
                                                             procedures to address basic principles of OP/BP
                                                             4.36 on Forests and OP/BP 4.04 on Natural
                                                             Habitats. Both the ESMF and PF under
                                                             preparation will be consulted upon and will be
                                                             disclosed both in-country and at Bank's
                                                             InfoShop prior to appraisal. For each subproject,
                                                             specific ESMPs may be prepared, consulted
                                                             upon, and disclosed both in country and in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Bank's InfoShop (this will be agreed by
                                                             appraisal). The ESMF will include procedures
                                                             along with appropriate institutional
                                                             arrangements for preparing, screening,
                                                             reviewing, implementing and monitoring
                                                             specific ESMPs to prevent adverse impacts as
                                                             well as cumulative impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                                             that all activities to be financed under MozDGM
                                                             take into account the conservation of
                                                             biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                                             environmental services and products that natural
                                                             habitats provide to human society. Activities
                                                             under MozDGM should lead to positive
                                                             impacts on natural habitats, such as their
                                                             conservation and sustainable land
                                                             management. Overall, MozDGM activities are
                                                             expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                                             natural habitats, as the project under Component
                                                         1 aim to strengthen communities knowledge and
                                                         technical capacity on matters related to climate
                                                         change and forest and land management, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         under Component 2 will support subprojects
                                                         contributing directly or indirectly to reduce
                                                         deforestation while enhancing local livelihoods.
                                                         However, as project activities are likely to be
                                                         undertaken in the vicinity of forests and/or
                                                         protected areas or natural habitats this policy is
                                                         triggered. The ESMF being prepared will
                                                         include a detailed screening procedures to
                                                         ensure that any endangered species or associated
                                                         ecosystem won➢❨ t be affected by the project
                                                         activities. Hence, site specifc to ESMPs will
                                                         include provisions for mitigation of impacts on
                                                         natural habitats (forest) and provide general
                                                         guidance procedures to address OP/BP 4.04.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes   MozDGM activities are expected to have a
                                                         positive impact on forest ecosystems through
                                                         numerous activities such as avoiding
                                                         deforestation, fire management, restoration of
                                                         degraded areas, protecting and enhancing
                                                         ecosystem services and biodiversity. As
                                                         project activities are likely to take place in or
                                                         around forest lands this policy is triggered. The
                                                         ESMF under preparation and subsequent site
                                                         specific ESMPs will include detailed screening
                                                         procedures and specific guidance to address OP/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         BP 4.36 requirements for MozDGM activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   TBD   In general terms, MozDGM activities will have
                                                         no association with pesticides. Nevertheless,
                                                         some amounts of pesticides might be used in the
                                                         short term for those activities associated with
                                                         sustainable agro-ecological production under
                                                         Component 2. Triggering this policy will be
                                                         clear at appraisal stage once precise details of
                                                         the nature and scale of the proposed agro-
                                                         activities are known. Nonetheless, the ESMF
                                                         under preparation will include pest management
                                                         approaches, thus providing analysis of potential
                                                         negative impacts resulting from the use of
                                                         pesticides and the risks associated with the
                                                         inappropriate handling or storing of their
                                                         containers, as well as providing general
                                                         guidance procedures to address OP/BP 4.09. As
                                                         stipulated in the policy, the ESMF will
                                                         refer to the World Health Organization
                                                                 Recommended Classification of Pesticides by
                                                                 Hazard and Guidelines to Classification, as well
                                                                 as Mozambique legislation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy could be triggered if MozDGM
                         BP 4.11                                 activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                 sites deemed physical cultural resources by
                                                                 communities living there (e.g. holy sites such as
                                                                 sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Mozambique
                                                                 has several sites that are important to local
                                                                 communities, including sacred forests.
                                                                 Nevertheless it is not expected that community
                                                                 under MozDGM perform activities in such
                                                                 areas. However, during project preparation will
                                                                 be determined whether the policy requirements
                                                                 apply in that particular projects context.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The policy is not triggered simply because it
                                                                 does not apply to Mozambique, as there are no
                                                                 such populations/communities that correspond
                                                                 to the definition of Indigenous Peoples as
                                                                 described per the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is
                         4.12                                    triggered because project activities may involve
                                                                 community land delimitation and micro-zoning
                                                                 for territorial management plans leading to
                                                                 restrictions of access to livelihoods and
                                                                 resources. Consequently a Process Framework
                                                                 (PF) will be prepared To address OP 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 requirements. The PF will be consulted and
                                                                 disclosed in country and in the Bank InfoShop
                                                                 prior to appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    MozDGM is not expected to support
                                                                 construction nor rehabilitation of dams nor
                                                                 support other investments related with
                                                                 services of existing dams, therefore, this policy
                                                                 is not triggered.
                         Projects on International         No    Project proposed interventions are not expected
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    to involve large scale irrigation activities that
                                                                 would adversely affect the quality or quantity of
                                                                 water flow within shared waterways. The
                                                                 project will promote sustainable agro-ecological
                                                                 production under Component 2 to address the
                                                                 main drivers of deforestation and degradation
                                                                 which comes from unsustainable agriculture.
                                                                 However, the location, scale and complexity of
                                                                 agricultural intervention are not well known at
                                                                 this stage of project preparation phase.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered. The area in which
                           7.60                                                              the MozDGM will be implemented is not
                                                                                             known to include any disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  Further details about project activities, implementation arrangements and geographic areas will
                                  be known by appraisal. Hence, an updated appraisal-stage ISDS will be needed.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  31-May-2017
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              December 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 14-Nov-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                           Date: 15-Nov-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
Public Disclosure Copy




                           affected persons.
