Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/22/2005 
Report No.:  
34893
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P089259 
Project Name:  Yemen Rainfed Agriculture and Livestock 
Task Team Leader:  Marie-Helene Collion 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 13, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 14, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (30%);Animal production (30%);Agricultural extension and research 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Land administration and management (S);Water 
resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
14.00
16.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The three-pronged Project Development Objective contributes to the higher development 
objectives of reducing poverty in rural areas and improving natural resources 
management.  The Project would enable rural producers to:  
 
(a) intensify their traditional  production, processing and marketing systems in rainfed 
areas;  
 
(b) protect their assets: soil, water, seeds and animals; and  
 
(c) get organized to the purpose of (a) and (b) above.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would have three components, plus the financing of a Project Support Unit 
and overhead management costs.  
 
Component 1: Farmer- based system of seed improvement and  
 
management  
Page  2
Component 2: Livestock husbandry and health services  
 
Component 3: Productive rural development  
 
Component 4: Project support   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Benefits and target population:  
 
The target population is rural producers operating under rainfed conditions (including 
small spate irrigation systems) in five governorates: Al-Mahweet, Hajjah, Al-Hodeidha, 
Lahej and Sana'a.  They are expected to benefit by:  
 
(a) 
Adopting appropriate crop varieties (local and from other regions of Yemen) and 
improving seed technology practices;  
 
(b) 
Utilizing more livestock services and inputs and adopting improved animal health 
and husbandry techniques;  
 
(c) 
Enlarging the cultivable area protected against soil erosion and improving the 
water being harvested through terrace rehabilitation;  
 
(d) 
Getting organized to access services and input/output markets;  
 
(e) 
Diversifying their production systems; and  
 
(f) 
Increasing their market transactions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The EA concluded that the project is a major advance in Yemen in supporting rainfed 
agricultural systems (as opposed to groundwater withdrawal systems) and improved 
animal husbandry in the five governorates. The environmental benefits of the project (in 
Page  3
terms of improved water and soil conservation and management) outweigh any potential 
adverse environmental or social impacts.  
 
The EA confirmed the "Category B" classification of the project under World Bank 
safeguard policies, finding no significant, cumulative or irreversible environmental 
impacts from the project. Furthermore, no other safeguard policies apply.  However, 
capacity building of farmers and MAI staff in integrated pest management is 
recommended to address any pest management concerns, as well as management and 
conservation of natural areas to address natural habitat considerations.  
 
Any potential adverse impact can be prevented or minimized by the preventive actions 
and mitigation measures recommended in the EMP.    
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EMP addresses potential adverse environmental and social impacts, particularly 
those raised by the rehabilitation of the veterinary laboratories, the construction of the 
quarantine facility at Al Mokha and the small-scale infrastructure projects for markets.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EMP proposes a process and criteria for screening the small-scale infrastructure 
projects, as well as a monitoring and evaluation program for tracking project 
environmental impacts and an environmental training/capacity building/awareness 
program for the range of public/private sector institutions and local populations involved 
in the project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Support Unit and the Social Fund for Development will ensure that all sub-
projects have been properly reviewed using the screening criteria before approving 
execution of a sub-project.  
 
The PCU technical staff will monitor execution of all sub-projects to ensure that 
environmental considerations are incorporated, i. e., that good practice, preventive 
actions or mitigation measures are employed and that EPA-required mitigation measures 
are taken. Once a sub-project has been completed, PMU technical staff will certify that 
appropriate practices, actions or measures have been utilised or that any required 
mitigation measures have been completed. The PCUs monitoring unit also will monitor 
compliance with environmental requirements and include the results in regular project 
reports.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
While the EA found a reasonable level of public and official awareness of environmental 
concerns in the project areas visited, it also identified a fundamental need for basic 
Page  4
information on the best (and often simple) practices, methods and technologies for 
improving management of the limited natural resource base in the rainfed agricultural 
areas. The project will organize community outreach and public awareness campaigns on 
a
range of water and soil conservation, land degradation and environmental management 
issues. Among these are rational water use, conservation and protection of water 
resources, rangeland management, integrated pest management and simple sanitary-
hygienic practices. The Yemeni Environmental Agency should have experience with 
such public awareness campaigns and should use its local offices to support project 
initiatives in this regard. National and local environmental NGOs may also play a role in 
public awareness-raising and should be considered in the development of local programs   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/21/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  5
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Marie-Helene Collion 
12/22/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
12/22/2005 
Comments:  This project was transferred to the TTL on 12/15/2004.  Accordingly, no signature on 
this form is required from the concerned safeguards staff. 
