                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                Report No.: 100968
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         28-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Congo, Republic of Project ID:                P124292
 Project Name:                CG - FCPF REDD READINESS (P124292)
 Task Team Leader(s):         Julian Lee
 Estimated Board Date:        N/A
 Managing Unit:               GEN01
 Sector(s):                   Forestry (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%),
                              Land administration and management (20%), Biodiversity (5%), Rural
                              policies and institutions (5%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       8.60                    Total Bank Financing:      8.60
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                   0.00
     Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                   8.60
     Total                                                                                      8.60
 Environmental Category       B – Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The Project Development Objective is to reinforce the Republic of Congo’s capacities to design
 a socially and environmentally sound national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation
 and forest degradation (REDD+) and to inform the development of a national reference
 emissions level for REDD+.

 C. Project Description
The activities to be financed by the FCPF will allow the Republic of Congo to implement some
of the key elements of the REDD+ Readiness process identified in the Readiness Preparation
Proposal (R-PP) prepared by the country and approved by the FCPF Participants Committee, in
June 2010.

FCPF support will ensure the continuation of the Readiness process in the country, by financing
the management of the Readiness process and multi-stakeholders consultations. In addition,
FCPF financing will support the preparation of key analytical pieces such as the REDD+
strategy and its legal and institutional implementation framework, and the incorporation social
and environmental sustainability issues of importance to various stakeholders into the REDD+
Strategy through the strategic environmental and social assessment process. Finally, FCPF
support will allow the country to achieve some key methodological results for participating in a
REDD+ mechanism, informing the preparation of a national reference emission level for
REDD+ and of a benefit-sharing mechanism. The financing will ensure the effective
operationalization of institutional arrangements, in particular high-level multi-sectorial
coordination and decentralized entities, as well as coordination of the national REDD+ process
by (CN-REDD), stakeholder communications and capacity building.

The activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in the
Republic of Congo do not include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. The
FCPF support is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at
the national and sub-national levels.

The overall budget envelope for REDD+ Readiness in the Republic of Congo adds up to US$
13.2 million. In addition to the FCPF’s contribution of US$ 8.6 million, the country has
identified additional partners to finance other activities identified in R-PP, including the
UN-REDD Program (up to US$ 4 million, through the first half of 2016), and the Government
of the Republic of Congo (US$ 0.6 million). USAID, through the Central African Regional
Program for the Environment (CARPE) is also supporting the process. It should be noted that
the support from these organizations is not considered co-financing to the FCPF-financed
activities. They will rather finance a series of independent activities that directly contribute to
the overall goal of supporting the Republic of Congo in becoming ready for REDD+.

The table below summarizes the activities to be financed by the FCPF. These activities have
been selected in discussion with the government, taking into account: (i) comparative
advantage of the World Bank as delivery partner and coordination with other donors, (ii)
priority/urgency, and (iii) eligibility.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process do not
include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. FCPF support is limited to
analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national and sub-national
levels.
 E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

 National institutional capacity for the monitoring and implementation of safeguards is weak in
 the Republic of Congo. The Ministry of Environment and Tourism has overall responsibility for
 assessing and validating environmental impact assessments. However, their institutional and
 human capacity is still limited. The FCPF grant has financed the recruitment of an Expert on
 Social and Environmental Impact for the National REDD Coordination at the MEFDD.


 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Abdoulaye Gadiere, Sr. Environmental Specialist, GENDR
 Antoine Lema, Sr. Social Development Specialist, GSURR

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental        Yes          The readiness preparation phase is meant primarily for technical
 Assessment OP/BP                  assistance and capacity building activities. The grant will not
 4.01                              finance any implementation of REDD+ activities on the ground
                                   (investments, pilot activities). In order to identify risks and
                                   potential consequences (both negative and positive) from the
                                   implementation of the National REDD+ Strategy, the country is
                                   carrying out a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                   (SESA), which should ensure: i) the integration of social and
                                   environmental considerations into the final REDD+ Strategy; ii) a
                                   participatory process for the preparation of the national REDD+
                                   strategy; and iii) the preparation of an Environmental and Social
                                   Management Framework (ESMF) to support the country in
                                   managing and mitigating potential future negative consequences
                                   and enhancing opportunities from the implementation of the
                                   REDD+ strategy.
 Natural Habitats     Yes          The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options
 OP/BP 4.04                        proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy take into account the
                                   conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                   environmental services and products that natural habitats provide
                                   to human society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                   significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the country
                                   puts in place an effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests.
                                   The SESA will address issues related to natural habitats and
                                   potential impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will
                                   later be included in the ESMF
 Forests OP/BP 4.36   Yes          Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have significant
                                   positive impacts on forests, in that the main goal of the program is
                                   to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while contributing
                                   to the well-being of forest-dependent communities. Potential
                                   impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests will
                                   be assessed through the SESA and included in the ESMF. The
                           SESA and associated ESMF will reflect the requirements of the
                           Bank’s Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
                           particular as these relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP Yes     Agricultural intensification, such as the revival of cocoa
4.09                       production and reforestation activities, for instance, could require
                           pest management in the course of REDD investment project
                           implementation. The SESA will address critical issues related to
                           pest management, as necessary, and these will also be included in
                           the key elements for the ESMF, as well as in a specific plan
                           related to pests and pesticides management.
Physical Cultural    Yes   There is a possibility that future REDD+ activities could be
Resources OP/BP            implemented in areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
4.11                       resources by rural communities living there (e.g. holy/secret sites
                           such as sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is not
                           anticipated that the project will have negative impacts on any such
                           sites, the SESA will address issues related to physical cultural
                           resources and potential impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy,
                           which will later be included in the ESMF and a specific dedicated
                           framework if need be.
Indigenous Peoples   Yes   It is likely that some of the activities to be implemented as part of
OP/BP 4.10                 the National REDD+ Strategy would take place in areas inhabited
                           by Indigenous Peoples. This policy underscores the need for the
                           government of the Republic of Congo to identify Indigenous
                           Peoples, consult with them properly, and ensure that they
                           participate in, and benefit from, REDD+ activities. Adverse
                           impacts on Indigenous Peoples will be avoided. Drawing on the
                           SESA, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
                           prepared, and integrated into the ESMF.
Involuntary          Yes   REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary Resettlement in
Resettlement OP/BP         situations involving involuntary land acquisition and/or
4.12                       involuntary restriction of access to legally designated parks,
                           protected areas, or forest management / reforestation areas. The
                           policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent
                           feasible, or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and
                           economic impacts in cases where resettlement or other
                           involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA
                           process, any issues related to land acquisition or restriction of
                           access will be identified, and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                           will be prepared as part of the ESMF. To help identify and
                           mitigate restriction of access to natural resources in protected
                           areas, a Process Framework will be prepared as part of the ESMF.
Safety of Dams       No    The project will not finance any dam construction.
OP/BP 4.37
Projects on          No    The project will not finance any activities with impacts on
International              international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP
7.50
 Projects in Disputed        No                The project will not finance any activities in disputed areas.
 Areas OP/BP 7.60


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.       Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: N/A


B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
         The SESA process is ongoing and should be completed by December 31, 2016.

         The SESA exercise requires that the selection of REDD+ strategy options take into account
         the country’s institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social
         risks, and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy
         options. Any identified gaps for managing these risks and potential impacts in relation to
         relevant the World Bank’s safeguard policies should be identified along with the strategy
         options to feed into the preparation of the ESMF.

         The ESMF will provide a framework to manage and mitigate the potential environmental
         and social impacts related to specific projects and activities (including investments and
         carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future implementation of REDD+. The
         ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant
         requirements of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but
         not necessarily limited to, an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), a Physical Cultural
         Resources Management Framework (PCRMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
         Process Framework (PF) and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader(s):                  Name: Julian Lee
 Approved By:
 Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Hanneke van Tilburg                               Date: 11/05/2015
 Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Benoit Bosquet                                    Date: 11/06/2015



     1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
