                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 13, 2005

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Congo                      Project ID: P098576
                                                Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Republic of Congo Emergency Reintegration Program
Task Team Leader: Maria Correia
Estimated Appraisal Date: 20 October,           Estimated Board Date: Client Delivery
2005                                            Date 31 January, 2006
Managing Unit: AFTS3                            Lending Instrument: Grant from Multi
                                                Country Demobilization and Reintegration
                                                Program (MDRP)
Sector: Other social services (100%)
Theme: Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict Reconstruction (P), Social Safety nets (P),
HIV/AIDS (S), Other social protection and risk management (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source: 17 (MDRP) and 8 (co-financing)
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                  Simple [ ]              Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project          Yes [ ]                  No [X]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The project's development objectives are:
a) to provide options for the socio-economic reintegration of an estimated 30, 000 ex-combatants
and their families through job training, employment creation, social and medical support, and
reconciliation initiatives;
b) to rehabilitate physical and social infrastructure in communities where ex-combatants settle;
c) to support national capacity building and macroeconomic stability, including through the
reallocation of Government expenditure from military to social and economic sectors.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
The project is based on the "Programme National de Désarmement, Demobilisation, et de Ré-
insertion" (PNDDR), adopted by the Government on December 31, 2004. It should also be read

in conjunction with a "Lettre de Politique Générale de Désarmement , de Démobilisation et de
Réinsertion" that was submitted in November 2003. The "Programme National" provides a
broad strategy for the consolidation of stability with several components that will be funded
through parallel means. The program ensures a comprehensive approach that would take into
account both disarmament, certain vulnerable groups, demobilization and reintegration aspects as
well as security sector reform and the promotion of a culture of peace. The program approach
will be accompanied by a Joint Operations Plan (JOP) to reflect its multi-dimensional nature.
In particular, UNDP has received a EURO 2 million grant from the European Commission for a
disarmament and community reintegration program that will be implemented under the Program.

The proposed project would cover only those activities in the "Plan National" that fall within
MDRP and World Bank criteria, as follows:
                Demobilization and reintegration of 25,000 to 30,000 of mainly adult ex-
                combatants in three key groups (about 60% of overall funds):
                    i. Demobilization and reintegration of combatants in the Pool region
                       (5,000); this includes up to 1,500 child soldiers;
                   ii. Reintegration of ex-combatants who do no longer belong to any militia
                       and have "auto-demobilized", but have access to arms and remain
                       unemployed (19,000);
                  iii. Demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants who had been
                       temporarily incorporated into the army for reasons of stability and who
                       will shortly be demobilized as part of security reform efforts (6,000);
                Support to communities where ex-combatants are present (about 10% of overall
                funds).
                Activities, both local and national, aimed at facilitating the social reinsertion of
                ex-combatants through reconciliation events, the promotion of a culture of peace,
                and the strengthening of traditional and other conflict resolution mechanisms.
                (about 2% of overall funds).

Individual benefits are based on a menu of choices that include a wide variety of activities in
commerce, services and agriculture, for which micro-grants will be made available.                 Ex-
combatants will need to prepare a short proposal of how they intend to use their benefits, which
is designed to encourage individual responsibility. At the same time, beneficiaries will also
receive the appropriate guidance by agencies specifically recruited for that purpose. Expected
income generation activities include fishery, agriculture and livestock activities such as vegetable
gardens, chicken and goat breeding, and artisan fishing; small secondary sector activities such as
husking, shelling, mills, preparation and treatment of vegetables and fish products, production
and sale of dairy products; professions in skin and textiles, metal works; and service professions
such as repair of motorbikes and bikes, construction and maintenance, cafeterias, restaurants,
hairdressing, photolabs and kiosks.

Community projects will take the form of infrastructure repair, notably in the education and
health sectors. Projects include schools, health posts, sanitation and sewage facilities, stocking,
markets, small secondary roads, environmental protection projects such as anti-erosion projects,
terracing, and treeplanting.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):
Territory of the Republic of Congo. This is a national project whose activities will focus on small
scale infrastructure and employment generation

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The High Commissioner for the Reintegration of Ex-Combatants had been set up in connection
with the IDA-funded demobilization and reintegration program that closed in February 2005. In
this project, the HCREC managed social and environmental issues. Based on their previous
experience, the implementing agency has the capacity and instruments in place for safeguard
policies. The knowledge and capacities established during that program are of high quality and
can seamlessly be used to take charge of the future demobilization and reintegration project.

However, the office of the HCREC and, in particular, its departmental antennas will need to be
strengthened to deal with the increased caseload. The present project closely resembles
demobilization and reintegration projects in other central African countries, which generally
have been classified as an Environmental Classification B as they were not expected to have any
significant negative environmental or social impacts. Building on lessons from reintegration
programs for displaced persons and ex-combatants elsewhere, the Program will contain a number
of specific elements to identify social and environmental risks and devise appropriate mitigation
measures. These procedures and measures are specified in the MDRP Environmental and Social
Screening Procedures developed for the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration
Program (MDRP) by the Africa Region's Social and Environmental Safeguards unit (ASPEN) in
collaboration with the MDRP Secretariat. For example, some of the micro-projects to be
implemented by ex-combatants may include small-scale agricultural activities. Any safeguard
issues may possibly be addressed through the development and use of standards that would apply
in micro-project approval procedures.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Nina Chee and Yvette Djachechi

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                  Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                   X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                            X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       X

Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                   X

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                       Yes               No               TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                            X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                      X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                           X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                    X




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: QER, by way of an ad-hoc advisory committee meeting, was held on
    January 13, 2005.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
    The MDRP Social and Environmental Screening Procedures have been elaborated and
    incorporated into the Program Implementation Manual. The Procedures will be disclosed at
    effectiveness.

IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                              Maria Correia                                                  Date 12/05/05
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Thomas Walton                                                 Date 12/05/05
    Comments:
  Sector Manager:                                 Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                                            Date 12/05/05
    Comments:




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

