The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Oct-2017| Report No: ISDSR23581




                      Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                             Country Director:    Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Guang Zhe Chen
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Carmen Nonay
                           Task Team Leader:      Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.
.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P145529                                                     MA-Rural Water Supply
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw                                         Morocco
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    29-Apr-2014                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GWA05

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    223,600,000.00                                              223,600,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                               65,000,000.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                     158,600,000.00
    Total                                                                                            223,600,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective (PDO) is to provide access to safe and reliable drinking water supply for rural
    communities in targeted underserved areas in the Project area.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.

    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.


The project aims to:
a. extend access to drinking water to more than 1.994 new douars (villages) and more than 1.000.000
inhabitants (in the provinces of Rhamna, Sidi Bennour, Safi, El Jadida, Tiznit, Nador and Driouch).
b. increase the envelope and broaden access to the pre-financing mechanism for the deployment of individual
connections (ICs) across ONEE's entire service area;
c. to allow the reinforcement of the access network if necessary, in anticipation of the development of the IC;
d. support with technical assistance the implementation of these new activities.

Project Components:
Component (a) Extension of access to water supply through standpipes in targeted, underserved provinces

Component (b) Support the transition to water service delivery through ICs

Component (c) Implementation Support and Capacity Building
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Extension of access to water supply through standpipes under Project Component 1 will focus on three areas
    in the last most critically under-served regions of Morocco a. villages in the Northern provinces of Nador and
    Driouch b. villages in the Central provinces of Safi, Sidi Bennour, El-Jadida and Rehamna c. villages in the
    Southern provinces of Tiznit and Chtouka Ait Baha Component 2, aiming at supporting the shift towards
    water service delivery through house connections will focus on location which are not yet know, but will
    focus on the entire service area of ONEE where the Bank can provide support.
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Markus Friedrich Vorpahl, Social Safeguards Specialist
Taoufiq Bennouna, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Khalid Anouar, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered             Explanation
                                                                The project is classified as Category B, which is
                                                                consistent with previous experience with similar
                                                                projects. An environmental assessment (EA) has
                                                                been submitted to the Bank for review. It covers for
                                                                all activities planned under the proposed expanded
                                                                scope of the Project and includes an Environmental
                                                                and Social Management Plan (ESMP). Necessary
                                                                consultations were conducted in the additional
                                                                areas, namely in province of Tiznit. Potential need
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                for water supply production augmentation under
                                                                the project is being studied. If and when confirmed
                                                                by ONEE, a dedicated EIA and ESMP, consistent
                                                                with Bank requirements in terms of content and
                                                                consultation, Bank review and publication would be
                                                                carried out before any work can start.
                                                                The EIS was updated following the triggering of OP
                                                                4.37. The current version of the EIA has been
                                                                published on the ONEE website
                                                                According to the information available and by
                                                                reference to the protected areas master plan of
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          No
                                                                Morocco, the project's intervention zones do not
                                                                contain protected areas.
                                                                Morocco developed and adopted in 1999 the
                                                                National Forest Program (NFP) which defines the
                                                                priority functions of the Moroccan forest and the
                                                                actions to be undertaken to ensure them. The
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                   No                    intervention areas of this project in rural areas will
                                                                be in or around villages (douars) which are often
                                                                well developed. Project activities do not concern
                                                                forested areas or provincial woodlands of interest
                                                                to the NFP.
                                                                The Project will not fund the purchase or
                                                                application of chemical pesticides. Project activities
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                No
                                                                will therefore not lead to an increase in the use of
                                                                chemical pesticides in the project areas.
       The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



                                                In accordance with the Moroccan regulations (the
                                                law 22-80 on the cultural heritage and law n ° 11-
                                                03 relative to the protection and the development
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No   of the environment (article 8)), all the facilities and
                                                infrastructures to realize through this project will
                                                have to be located outside archaeological sites and
                                                away from classified sites and monuments.
                                                On the basis of available information and data,
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No    there are no indigenous groups in the project areas.
                                                As a result, this policy does not apply to this project.
                                                While no involuntary resettlement is expected
                                                under the Project, there will be permanent and
                                                temporary limited land acquisition. The
                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                prepared and submitted by ONEE. It was reviewed
                                                and cleared by the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF
                                                presents applicable rules and format for dedicated
                                                Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), which will be
                                                prepared on the basis of land surveys and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                information on affected people, once they are
                                                available. RAPs will be prepared in accordance with
                                                OP.4.12 policy requirements. RAPs will be
                                                submitted for safeguards review and will be
                                                disclosed as required by the Bank, before work can
                                                start. The submission of RAPs, acceptable to the
                                                Bank, for the two intervention areas where works
                                                are to start first are a conditions of effectiveness of
                                                the Loan.
                                                Since June 2016, when the IBRD II project closed,
                                                the Safi Water Treatment Plant has been
                                                transferred to the IBRD IV project. This plant is fed
                                                from the Massira dam whose waters are derived by
                                                the Imfout dam. In the framework of the BIRD IV
                                                project, the Tiznit treatment plant depends on the
                                                availability of water and the good functioning of the
                                                Youssef Ben Tachfine dam.
                                                In May 2015, a Bank team carried out a study on
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)             Yes   conformity of dam management in Morocco. The
                                                projects financed by the Bank in Morocco in the
                                                drinking water and irrigation sector were relying on
                                                the smooth running of fifteen dams (including
                                                Youssef Ben Tachefine, Massira and Imfout dams).
                                                The note produced by the Bank team was approved
                                                by the Bank's expert on dam safety issues, who
                                                acknowledged that the Moroccan government has
                                                established a framework for institutional security
                                                for dams under the supervision of the Ministry of
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



                                                                        Energy, Mines, Water and Environment, Watershed
                                                                        Agencies and ONEE-Electricity Branch.

                                                                        In view of these elements, no further action is
                                                                        recommended under the ESMP for this project.
                                                                        Indeed, the roles, actions, programming,
                                                                        monitoring and reporting have been implemented
                                                                        by the Department of Water for several decades,
                                                                        the new law on the safety of dams (Law 10-37 of
                                                                        2016) completes this approach.

                                                                        The initial EIA was updated accordingly to the
                                                                        triggering of this OP.
                                                                        This project will not affect international
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No                     watercourses. As a result, this policy does not apply
 (BP 7.50)
                                                                        to this project.
                                                                        The intervention areas of the project are not in
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     dispute; therefore, this policy does not apply to this
                                                                        Project.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Project environmental risks in these areas are deemed low and manageable for (i) construction nuisances, (ii) facility
      locations, (iii) availability and quality of water resources for potable water supply, (iv) treatment chemicals storage,
      and (v) residuals management.
      Potential need for water supply production augmentation under the project is being studied. If and when confirmed
      by ONEE, a dedicated EIA and EMP, consistent with Bank requirements in terms of content and consultation, Bank
      review and publication would be carried out before any work can start.

      In addition, no involuntary resettlement is expected to take place under the Project, but there is likely to be
      permanent and temporary limited land acquisition. These will be handled through a RPF, which was reviewed and
      cleared by the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF presents applicable rules and format for dedicated RAPs, which will
      be prepared on the basis of the progress of land surveys. RAPs will be submitted to the Bank for its review and will be
      disclosed in country and in the Infoshop, in compliance with Bank requirements, before works can start.

      ONEE had committed to provide by Appraisal RAPs for the two intervention areas where the works will first start.
      However, land survey progress did not make this possible. The Bank therefore recommended that the client (i)
      prepare an enhanced RPF document for each of these two areas (Beddouza and Skhour Rehamna); (ii) undertake a
      meaningful consultation with potentially affected people in the two first intervention areas to present the project
      and potential for physical or economic resettlement, and document consultations in minutes in the enhanced RPFs.
      These documents were reviewed and cleared by the RSA and should be disclosed in country and on the World Bank’s
      Infoshop before appraisal can start. In addition the submission of RAPs for the two intervention areas was made a
       The World Bank                                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



  condition of effectiveness of the Loan and an addendum to the Decision Review Meeting minutes was prepared to
  clarify Safeguards related aspects to be met prior to Appraisal.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  No long term negative impacts have been identified as part of the Project preparation. Risks associated to the
  construction and operations phases are limited and manageable.
  Although the project will not fund any service extension through house connection, the pre-financing mechanism
  funded under the Project (component 2) will allow low-income households to access service through house
  connection. Consequently, the project team assessed the issue of the additional greywater discharges these house
  connections will generate, and the associated need for appropriate sanitation solutions, be it piped or on-site. The
  project makes a strict eligibility criterion that households benefiting from the pre-financing of HC service extension
  have a satisfactory sanitation solution, consistent with the Moroccan regulation and ONEE's proposed technical
  options, which were reviewed and deemed acceptable to the Bank. A description of the acceptable on-site sanitation
  options have been attached as an Annex to the Project EA. It will also be annexed to the Project Implementation
  Manual (PIM), which will also clarify the modalities for households and communes to implement, monitor and
  document that the improved sanitation solutions proposed are consistent with one of the satisfactory on-site
  sanitation solutions.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  Not relevant.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  ONEE is considered as a strong capacity borrower with a long experience of Bank-financed projects. ONEE's past
  performance managing these risks is generally satisfactory. It has developed and successfully applied project ESMPs
  and LAFs, with the support of the Technical Assistance (TA) to carry out these tasks, i.e. monitor the implementation
  of the environment and social action plans and land acquisition, consistent with the provisions of the LAFs.

  With regard to greywater management, before engaging into HC-service extension in an area requesting HC-service
  extension, ONEE, with support of its implementation TA consultant, will carry out a comprehensive review of the level
  of satisfaction of the proper sanitation eligibility criteria, as defined in its existing technical guidance. This review will
  also encompass an environmental screening of the proposed area, to assess whether existing sanitation solutions are
  acceptable and whether local environmental and technical conditions allow satisfactory sanitation through on-site
  sanitation systems or require a piped network solution. This review will also raise awareness of the CRs of the need
  to actively support, in accordance with the CRs mandate, the development of acceptable sanitation solutions, and of
  the fact that it will be made explicit in the delegated management agreements signed between ONEE and the CRs for
  the deployment of household connection service that “a suitable household sanitation system should be in place, be
  it collective or individual, before a HC could be installed?.

  In addition, ONEE also has strict requirements in terms of the quality of the water supplied, at their production sites
  and through the network. As any major operator, it has labs to perform random quality measurements in accordance
  with regulations.
                         The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



                    Construction work has begun mid 2017. Training of companies on EMP implementation has started and a training
                    program covering the entire duration of the project is under development with the help of the technical assistance.
                    The monitoring of the implementation of the EMP is based on the monitoring sheets filled by the construction
                    companies with the support of Technical Assistance (TA) technicians. The ONEE environmental focal point (EFP)
                    analyzes and summarizes the data sheets collected in the half-yearly monitoring report. The EFP also conduct
                    unannounced visits to construction sites in view to verify the veracity of the information contained in the monitoring
                    sheets.

                    Environmental Safeguard Rating is Moderately satisfactory because the monitoring of activities transferred from BIRD
                    II to BIRD IV is not integrated with the actual monitoring of BIRD IV. It is expected that next half-yearly monitoring
                    report will present a synthesis of all these works.


                  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                    Public consultations were organized in order to inform the beneficiary population and the different stakeholders
                    concerned by the project's activities, to associate them to the assessment of the potential impacts of the project on
                    environment and to allow them formulating comments and proposals.
                    Public consultations took place in the provinces of El Jadida, Safi and Nador in 2009. Additional public consultations
                    were organized in Skhour Rhamna on July 3, 2013 and February 21, 2014, and in Beddouza on February 14 and 20,
                    2014. Consultations in the remaining province of Tiznit was conducted on April 2016. .

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                           Date of submission for disclosure
        15-Nov-2013                                                           23-Jan-2014
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            Morocco                                                              23-Jan-2014
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)




Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
26-Nov-2013                                                     28-Jan-2014
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Morocco                                                         28-Jan-2014
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                   Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                   Yes
 review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
 to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



 SD_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                              Yes

 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                                   Yes
 been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)



    Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                       Yes
    been made for public awareness and training?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
