The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
(P148560)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


            Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Updated: 1-Jun-2018| Report No: ISDSR24055




                      Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                             Country Director:    Michel Kerf
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Jie Tang
                           Task Team Leader:      Leopold Sedogo, Takayuki Doi
            The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              (P148560)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                       Project Name
    P148560                                                          Energy Sector Development Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                              Country
    Leopold Sedogo                                                   Micronesia, Federated States of
    Approval Date                                                    Environmental Category
    29-May-2014                                                      Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                    Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE09

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                               Total Financing
    14,400,000.00                                                    14,400,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                               Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                              14,400,000.00
    Total                                                                                                    14,400,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The PDO is to increase the available generation capacity and efficiency of electricity supply in the state power utilities, and
    to strengthen the planning and technical capacities of the National Government and the state power utilities in the energy
    sector.



.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        (P148560)




3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

  Summary of Project Status and Proposed Changes. Project performance is rated “Satisfactory? for “progress towards
  achievement of the PDO? and “Moderately Satisfactory? for “overall implementation progress? in the most recent
  Implementation Status and Results Report. Disbursements have reached 46 percent; commitments have reached 60
  percent; and procurement has been launched for an additional 12 percent of funds. The first part of the PDO has been
  achieved, with the generation capacity constructed under the project reaching 119 percent of the target. The second
  part of the PDO has also been achieved, with commissioning of efficient streetlights reaching 150 percent of the
  original target in November 2017. There is some delay in the progress towards achieving the third part of the PDO,
  which is supported by the preparation of the Energy Master Plan, a contract for which was signed in June 2017. In
  addition, some new activities that are aligned with the PDO and can be accommodated under the project were
  recently identified. Thus, a 14 month extension is proposed. This would be the first restructuring of this project.

  Implementation Progress by Component.
  Component 1: Increasing available generation capacity and efficiency of electricity supply in the state power utilities
  (IDA US$9.27 million): this component consists mainly of: (a) the installation of additional generation capacity in three
  of the four FSM states: Pohnpei (PUC), Yap (YSPSC), and Kosrae (KUA); (b) efficient public lighting in Chuuk and Kosrae;
  and (c) a few other activities, including distribution equipment.

      a) Additional Generation Capacity for Pohnpei, Yap, and Kosrae
      Pohnpei: Works and commissioning of the new generator were satisfactorily completed in July 2016.
      Yap: The commissioning of the new generator in Yap was completed satisfactorily in May 2017.
      Kosrae: The contract for the generator was signed in October 2017 and the installation is expected to be
      completed in July 2018.

      b) Efficient Public Street Lighting and Grid-connected Solar PV in Chuuk and Kosrae
      Chuuk LED street lights: Installation was completed in September 2016.
      Chuuk grid-connected solar PV: The inception report produced by the consultant hired to design the installation
      is currently being discussed. Following the conclusions, an Engineering Procurement and Construction (EPC)
      contractor is to be hired and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) aims to finalize the short list, invite for
      tendering, receive tenders in March 2018, and complete the works by July 2018.
      Kosrae LED street lights: The contract was signed in March 2017 and the lights were delivered in Kosrae in
      November 2017.

      c) Distribution Equipment in Yap and Kosrae and Other Activities
               Distribution equipment: The contract for upgrading Yap’s distribution substation was signed on October
      3, 2017. The associated transformer for the Yap substation was tendered separately, with contract signing
      expected by the end of February 2018. The procurement process for a new 500kVA pad-mounted distribution
      transformer in Kosrae was finalized and is currently under construction with completion expected by August 2018.
      Other activities: Following the first unsuccessful tender, a contract for bucket trucks for Pohnpei and Kosrae was
      awarded in February 2018, with delivery of the trucks expected in August 2018.

  Component 2: National and state energy planning (IDA US$3.40 million): this component includes (a) preparation of
  energy master plans for each of the FSM States, including identifying and prioritizing infrastructure investments in the
            The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            (P148560)



      energy sector and undertaking feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessments for the priority
      investments; and (b) development of a national Energy Master Plan, which will build on the State energy master plans.

      The preparation of the Energy Master Plan for the four states is progressing. A draft inception report has been
      produced and was recently updated to the interim report, which summarizes utility service standards, load forecasts
      and potential implementation plans in the four states. The next step includes the production of the selected
      prefeasibility studies and the delivery of the Energy Master Plan final report, which is expected in March 2018. More
      time will be needed to allow for implementation of the Energy Master Plan as there was a change in scope of work to
      avoid duplication of prefeasibility studies being undertaken by the Asian Development Bank (ADB). In addition, the
      contract amount for the Energy Master Plan and other contracted activities was US$2 million lower than anticipated,
      resulting in cost savings that the Government intends to use for new activities that are aligned with the PDO. These
      activities, which are detailed in the Annex table below, include additional energy efficient street lighting and additional
      distribution activities in Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei, and Yap.

      Component 3: Technical assistance and project management (IDA US$1.50 million): this component supports
      activities designed to build the capacity of the Energy Division and the Association of Micronesian Utilities (AMU),
      including developing a program to reform the utilities to improve sustainability of their operations. In addition, a
      Procurement Advisor, an Energy Advisor, a Safeguards Advisor, and a Project Implementation Officer have been hired
      for the PIU until July 31, 2018. With the proposed project extension, these contracts will be adjusted to reflect the
      needs to complete the remaining activities.


.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The investment typologies under Component 1 are broadly similar to the original project. They are based on
    an assessment of priority investments identified in State Action Plans, the National Energy Policy and the
    draft Master Plan being prepared under the Project (Component 2). All activities will be undertaken within
    power station footprints in each of the four States in FSM except for solar projects which may be located on
    Government property, and street light upgrades which will be undertaken on Government road reserve.
    Under Component 2, the Master Planning process will identify energy investments and policies that will be
    undertaken across the four States. The specific locations are not yet known.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Wolfhart Pohl, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Penelope Ruth Ferguson, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Ross James Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                           Triggered               Explanation
       The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       (P148560)



                                                 Component 1 will involve new and replacement
                                                 equipment and upgrades within power station
                                                 footprints or on Government land/buildings.
                                                 Impacts will be manageable using routine
                                                 mitigation measures common to the industry. The
                                                 original Environmental and Social Management
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes      Plan has been updated as part of the restructuring
                                                 process. The Master Planning process will lead to
                                                 downstream investments. The location, nature and
                                                 scale of investments are yet to be known. The
                                                 Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                 (ESMF) has been prepared to inform the studies to
                                                 comply with the Safeguard Policies.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                 No natural habitats will be significantly degraded or
                                                 converted for this project, however there is a
                                                 possibility that they could be at risk from
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes   downstream investments identified under the
                                                 Master Plans. The ESMF has provision for screening
                                                 the investments for impacts on natural habitats and
                                                 measures to mitigate these impacts.
                                                 The project is not envisaged to affect forests but
                                                 the downstream investments emerging from the
                                                 master plan may have impacts once implemented.
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes
                                                 The ESMF has provision for screening impacts of
                                                 downstream investments on forests, including
                                                 mitigating measures.
                                                 There will be no pest management or procurement
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No    of pesticides for agricultural or public health
                                                 purposes.
                                                 No physical cultural resources will be impacted
                                                 during Component 1 activities, as the physical
                                                 works are within existing power station footprints
                                                 or government buildings. However there is a
                                                 possibility that they could be at risk from
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes   downstream investments. The ESMF provides
                                                 guidance on identification and protection of
                                                 physical cultural resources for downstream
                                                 investments in the Master Plan, consistent with this
                                                 policy within existing power station footprints or
                                                 government buildings / land….
                                                 The population of the FSM is predominantly
                                                 Micronesian (99.9%) and does not conform to the
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No    World Bank definition of Indigenous Peoples. The
                                                 policy is therefore not triggered. However, a
                                                 Country-level social assessment is included in the
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           (P148560)



                                                                        ESMF and identifies areas for State-level social
                                                                        assessment to guide State energy sector Master
                                                                        Planning. This assessment will identify any pockets
                                                                        of Indigenous Peoples or other sources of
                                                                        vulnerability that will inform downstream project
                                                                        design.
                                                                        Though the present project will have no currently
                                                                        known land acquisition and resettlement impacts,
                                                                        downstream projects to be identified and
                                                                        prioritized under the Master Plans that are one of
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         Yes                    the outputs of the project may have resettlement
                                                                        implications. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                        (RPF) has been prepared to guide development of
                                                                        resettlement instruments for land acquisition as a
                                                                        result of future investments in the energy sector.
                                                                        Dams are not part of the proposed physical works
                                                                        in Component 1. Renovation of the existing
                                                                        hydropower scheme is a potential downstream
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   Yes
                                                                        project. The ESMF provides guidance on the
                                                                        requirements of this policy for downstream
                                                                        investments under the Master Plan.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                               There are no international waterways within the
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)                                                              area of influence of the project.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     There are no disputed areas in FSM.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Safeguards implementation to date has been satisfactory. A part time safeguards advisor has been assisting with the
      implementation of the ESMP for physical investments, and review of technical advisory work such as feasibility studies
      and energy master planning. The environmental and social risks are low to moderate, and no significant impacts have
      been reported during the upgrading of equipment and installation of solar and diesel generation and the replacement
      of street light bulbs. The challenge is to improve the capacity of each of the four State Utilities and embed some good
      practice into the institutions, and this will require ongoing effort by the safeguards advisor. Another challenge is the
      logistics of supervising works in four States, and using an overseas-based safeguards advisor, which adds costs and
      complexity to in-country supervision.

      The reason for ESMP updating is to include the new physical investments funded by the project. The ESMF and RPF
      did not require updating as they still serve the original purpose.
      The issues associated with the power station and network upgrades in Component 1 are routine and can be mitigated
      using standard practices as documented in the EMP.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        (P148560)



  The future investments planned in Component 2 are currently unknown, and therefore the safeguards issues are
  undefined. It is foreseeable that, without mitigation, there could be large scale or significant impacts from potential
  investments such as wave energy, waste to energy projects, and the renovation of the Nanpil hydropower scheme.

  The benefits from the Energy Master Plans include a focus energy efficiency improvements on the supply and demand
  side of the grid, education and awareness of energy efficiency, and a focus on increasing the percentage of renewable
  energy generation across the FSM.

  A key consideration is ensuring that the screening and impact assessment in the Master Planning is consistent with
  the safeguard policies and that the safeguards documents prepared for priority projects meet Bank requirements.
  The procurement of a safeguards advisor, the procurement of social and environmental specialists as part of the
  Master Planning team, integrating the principles and guidelines of the safeguard policies into the Master Plan, and
  the close supervision by the task team will ensure that the Bank requirements are met throughout this process.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Component 2 will not fund any investments, but will prepare Master Plans that will detail a future investment
  program. Priority investments will have feasibility studies and safeguard documents prepared during project
  implementation in order to be ‘investment ready’. Therefore there is potential for the Master Plans to have long term
  or indirect impacts through the implementation of future investments. These may or may not be funded by the Bank.

  Indirect and long term issues are not yet defined, and will depend on the screening and prioritization processes, and
  the final list of investments, however, they may include land acquisition and resettlement, land clearance, the use of
  the coastal and marine area (wave energy), use of water (hydro) and discharges to air (waste to energy plants, biogas,
  diesel gensets).

  The long term benefits of the project will be improved efficiency and reliability of electricity supply and in some areas
  will mean electrification. This directly benefits all consumers (commercial, government and residential) and will mean
  less interruptions/black outs, and could lead to more affordable and sustainable tariffs.

  Integrating the principles and guidelines of the safeguard policies into the Master Plan will help to guide the
  identification and management of impacts in downstream projects in a manner consistent with World Bank policies.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The activities for Component 1 were selected on the basis that the impacts were low and/or easily mitigated. The
  assessment of alternatives for future investments will be integrated into the Master Planning process, with the aim
  to ensure that projects with significant, unmitigated impacts are not considered viable alternatives.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Implementing Agency has a part time safeguards advisor who screens subprojects for risks and works alongside
  the State Utility Companies to ensure the ESMP is followed and consultations are carried out. The advisor is involved
  in reviewing the Master Plan process and outputs. The consultant’s capacity is satisfactory and this role will continue
  under the restructured project.
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            (P148560)




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The Energy Master Plans have a wide range of stakeholders because of the impact energy has on commerce and
       livelihood. A consultation plan is provided in the ESMF. The plan has identified the following stakeholders:

       • National Energy Workgroup, comprising key national government departments; State Energy Workgroups;
       departments responsible for women’s and youth development; Division of Environment and Sustainable
       Development; Office of Environment and Emergency Management, Health and Social Affairs, and Education at
       national level; commercial operational arms of Departments such as the FSM Telecommunications Corporation, and
       the equivalent agencies at State level (including the four State EPA);
       • Local/municipal governments, tribal councils and traditional village leaders;
       • Civil society and non-governmental organizations (organized under the umbrella Federated States of Micronesia
       Alliance of Non-Governmental Organizations (FANGO));
       • Residential and commercial electricity users; and
       • Neighborhoods surrounding project investments in Component 1, and priority investments prepared under
       Component 2.

       Consultation has been planned across the four year project time frame, but will be most intense during the Master
       Plan preparation phase. The information from consultation will be used to inform the content of the Master Plans,
       the priority projects and the key mitigation methods in the safeguard documents.

       The revised ESMP has been disclosed on the Energy Division website and discussed with each of the State Utilities

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
03-May-2018                                                     07-Jun-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
 Micronesia, Federated States of                                   01-Jun-2018
 Comments
                         The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                          (P148560)




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
21-Feb-2014                                                               20-Mar-2014
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
          Micronesia, Federated States of                                   10-Mar-2014
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                            Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                              Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                Yes

            Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                              NA
            impacts on cultural property?



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                              Yes
            (as appropriate) been prepared?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                              Yes
            review the plan?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        (P148560)



Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    No
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                No

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                    NA
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                    NA
been made for public awareness and training?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?
            The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            (P148560)



    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                            Leopold Sedogo
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Takayuki Doi

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
