The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
(P147212)




                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                 Restructuring Stage


      Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2019| Report No: ISDSR27506




                     Regional Vice President:    Axel van Trotsenburg
                           Country Director:     Pablo Saavedra
                           Regional Director:    Luis Benveniste
                 Practice Manager/Manager:       Pablo Gottret
                          Task Team Leader:      Aylin Isik-Dikmelik
               The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                     (P147212)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.
.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P147212
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Aylin Isik-Dikmelik                                         Mexico
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    24-Oct-2014                                                 Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    HLCSP


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             350.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                350.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS   -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 350.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
             (P147212)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The proposed Project Development Objectives are to support the Government’s effort to: (i) increase access of PROSPERA
    beneficiaries to social and productive programs, and (ii) develop instruments for an integrated social protection system.




.

 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The Project will maintain the original PDO and its two components: (1) Support to the PROSPERA Program and its linkage
with social and productive programs (amount revised to US$305.49; completed implementation); and (2) Strengthening
the social protection system (amount revised to US$43.64 million). The proposed restructuring of the Project will support
Government´s new policy priorities and is aligned with the Bank’s strategy in Mexico. The proposed modifications of the
Project will assist the Government of Mexico through: (i) support to the financial inclusion strategy, and the Integrative
Centers of Development to enhance payment mechanisms, to increase financial literacy of the beneficiaries of the
Programs for Development, to increase social participation and social cohesion, and to move towards the delivery of social
protection benefits in an integrated manner with a beneficiary-focused approach; and (ii) support for the planning, and
monitoring and evaluation of the social policies and programs, to enhance operational efficiency of such policies and
programs with potential positive impacts on the beneficiaries. The proposed modifications to the subcomponents and
activities of the Project will contribute to an integrated social protection system, as established in the PDO. A detailed
description of these changes is included in the restructuring paper.

Implementation arrangements. Considering the recent sectorial and institutional changes, the Secretariat of Welfare will
be the only actual implementing agency for this Project. The Secretariat of Welfare has been a co-implementing agency
of the project from its inception, and its strong institutional capacity has allowed to adequately comply with Bank
policies and processes. The Secretariat of Welfare will manage the overall fiduciary responsibilities for the Project,
including financial management and disbursement functions, and the National Financing Agency (NAFIN) will continue
with its current role in the project as financial agency of the Government of Mexico.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Nationwide. Because of the nationwide scope and the focus on poor population, the Project targets
    indigenous peoples, generally located at the poorest marginalized localities in the country.


    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM
    Dorothee Georg, Social Specialist
        The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        (P147212)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered   Explanation
                                                         This policy is not triggered as Project’s activities are
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No
                                                         not expected to cause any environmental impacts.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                             No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                         This policy is not triggered as Project’s activities are
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             No
                                                         not expected to cause any impact on natural habits.
                                                         This policy is not triggered given that Project’s
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      No          activities will not impact the welfare of forests nor
                                                         impact forest dependent communities.
                                                         This policy is not triggered since the Project will not
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No          finance the purchase or significant use of
                                                         pesticides.
                                                         This policy is not triggered given that Project’s
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No           activities are not expected to impact physical
                                                         cultural resources.
                                                         This policy is triggered given that the Project is
                                                         implemented in states where indigenous peoples
                                                         are present. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was
                                                         prepared prior appraisal of the parent Project and
                                                         has been successfully implemented. Performance
                                                         Ratings for OP 4.10 of the Parent Project and the AF
                                                         have been Satisfactory during implementation. For
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes
                                                         the restructuring, the client prepared an annex to
                                                         the existing IPP to reflect the new Subcomponent
                                                         2.d: Supporting the strategies of financial inclusion
                                                         and the Integrative Centers of Development. The
                                                         IPP, complemented by the annex, will remain valid
                                                         and its implementation will continue as long as the
                                                         Project is active.
                                                         This policy is not triggered as the Project is not
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No          expected to cause any impacts covered under the
                                                         involuntary resettlement policy.
                                                         This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No          will not finance the construction of dams nor will
                                                         rely on the operations of existing dams.
                                                         This policy is not triggered since the Project does
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No          not affect international waterways as defined by
 (BP 7.50)
                                                         the policy.
                                                         This policy is not triggered as the Project will not
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No          finance activities in disputed areas as defined by
                                                         the policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          (P147212)



II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
  The restructured project will not have large scale, significant, and or irreversible negative impacts given that it will
  only involve technical assistance.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Because the restructured project involves technical assistance only, there are no potential indirect or long term
  negative impacts due to anticipated future activities.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Because the restructured project involves technical assistance only, it was not necessary to consider other Project
  alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The IPP, which remains valid for the restructuring, was complemented with an annex to reflect the new
  subcomponent 2d which will include TA for financial inclusion in areas with presence of indigenous peoples and
  afrodescendents.

  The annex, as well as the existing IPP, include specific initiatives to foster inclusion and introduce culturally adequate
  measures to reach indigenous beneficiaries. No negative impacts are expected. To further improve inclusion and
  reach the IP beneficiaries, the follwing actions are laid out in IPP and annex:

      •     Indigenous Communication Strategy, which is prepared by BIENESTAR in collaboration with INPI.
      •     Support financial education and foster financial inclusion of IP groups, through culturally adequate measures
            and bilingual promoters (in collaboration with INPI).

  The management information and monitoring systems are strong and continue to be strengthened. The client has
  sufficient institutional capacity for the application of the indigenous safeguards policy, and will also closely collaborate
  with INPI to foster interinstitutional collaboration. During the implementation of the World Bank’s Parent Project, the
  Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was successfully implemented and a number of key actions were undertaken to benefit
  inclusion and better quality support for indigenous people in the Program. The institutional assessment carried out
  during preparation of the restructuring corroborated actual capacity.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The IPP was discussed prior appraisal of the parent Project with the Secretariat of the Consultative Board of the
  Indigenous Peoples National Commission (CDI) and duly published in the PROSPERA and SEDESOL webpages on
                            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            (P147212)



                      August                               2014                               (PROSPERA's                           link:
                      https://evaluacion.prospera.gob.mx/es/wersd53465sdg1/inicio/CNPDHO_Estrategia_Indigena_2014-2018.pdf;
                      SEDESOL's                                                                                                     link:
                      https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/430/Plan_Indigena_2014_2018_SEDESO_Oportunidades.pdf),
                      as       well      as       the       World        Bank       Website       on      September      2014      (link:
                      https://hubs.worldbank.org/docs/ImageBank/Pages/DocProfile.aspx?nodeid=20183878). CDI confirmed that the
                      Project and its IPP are aligned with the consultations held on Indigenous People, Indigenous communities and afro-
                      descendent made in the context of the preparation of the National Development Plan and the Special Program for
                      Indigenous Population for 2014-2018 and fully consistent with the Commission protocol for nationwide coverage of
                      interventions. The IPP will remain valid for the Additional Financing and wil be complemented through an annex.
                      The     Annex      of    the    IPP     was     published      in   August     2019    at  BIENESTAR’s     website
                      (https://www.gob.mx/bienestar/es/articulos/anexo-al-plan-de-pueblos-indigenas-del-proyecto-sistema-de-
                      proteccion-social-215542?idiom=es)               and            the          World         Bank’s          website
                      (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/824611567145472084/pdf/Anexo.pdf).

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
INDIG ENOUS_TAB LE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure
29-Jul-2014                                                                      12-Aug-2014
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            Mexico                                                               30-Jul-2014
            Comments




       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                     Yes
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                                     Yes
            review the plan?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            (P147212)



    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                       NA
    approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Aylin Isik-Dikmelik


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
