The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2017| Report No: ISDSR23884




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                              Country Director:    Alberto Rodriguez
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Ming Zhang
                            Task Team Leader:      Diana Marcela Rubiano Vargas
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P157324                                                     Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Diana Marcela Rubiano Vargas                                Ecuador
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    15-Mar-2016                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU10


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             150.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                150.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 150.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to reduce the potential effects of the El Ni&ntilde;o phenomenon and the Cotopaxi
    volcano, and support the recovery of basic and production services in affected areas in case of an Eligible Disaster, in
    selected sectors.




    Proposed New PDO
    To reduce the potential effects of the El Niño phenomenon, support the recovery of basic and productive services in
    selected sectors in affected areas in case of an Eligible Disaster, and strengthen resilience to natural disasters and
    macroeconomic shocks.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION



The project is being restructured to reflect the new context and investment priorities of the Government of Ecuador (GoE)
considered for Bank financing in light of the GoE’s formal request to cancel US$58.21m of the original US$150m in project
funds in a letter dated September 26, 2018 and the subsequent communication updating the list of priority activities to
be financed by the project received on Dec. 17, 2018. This document (“restructuring ISDS?) is part of the restructuring
package and updates the safeguard information disclosed on June 15, 2016 through the combined PID-ISDS document
(Dated June 1, 2016).

Preparatory activities under Component 1 were guided by the Alert Declarations in effect related to the Cotopaxi volcano
and the El Niño phenomenon, and the emergency preparedness action plan prepared by the GoE. Component 2 was
designed to respond to any natural disaster meeting certain trigger criteria, described in the Project’s Operations Manual
(POM). The main trigger was set to be the SGR’s issuance of an Orange Alert Declaration for the El Niño phenomenon, or
Red for the Cotopaxi volcano or any other Eligible Disaster. While the official declarations may be in effect for a defined
period of months, implementation of Component 2, once triggered, shall occur over a period of years.

Project Components

Component 1: Disaster Preparedness and Risk Mitigation (US$4.23 million total; US$3.78million IBRD)

This Component aimed to reduce the potential impacts of the hazards expected from El Niño and the Cotopaxi volcano,
according to the emergency preparedness action plan prepared by the GoE (jointly by the SGR, MICS and the MEF).
Initially divided into four subcomponents corresponding to activities implemented by the original co-executing agencies
(Public Water Company (EPA), Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), Ministry of Transportation and Public Works
(MTOP) and Ministry of Public Health (MSP)), Component 1 intended to finance a selection of emergency activities
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



included in the GoE action plan, inter alia: river dredging, clearing of waterways, road rehabilitation, preventative
stabilization works, building of livestock shelters, and procurement of medicines, supplies and components necessary to
protect public health. By the time the earthquake occurred on April 16, 2016, only EPA and MSP had completed some of
the activities that were planned. The remaining activities were re-evaluated because the GoE priorities shifted towards
recovery and reconstruction after the earthquake (Component 2).

In terms of climate change co-benefits, 100 percent of IBRD investments under Component 1 are expected to contribute
(US$ 3.8 million).

Component 2: Post-Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction (US$92.10million total; US$82.24million IBRD)

This Component aims to provide support for the recovery and reconstruction of selected sectors, should an Eligible
Disaster occur. The Component follows a framework approach based on a list of eligible activities that contribute to the
rehabilitation or reconstruction of select transport/road, water/sanitation/flood protection infrastructure, crop and
livestock production or any other sector agreed between the GoE and the World Bank (WB) as described in the POM.
(Under the project restructuring, eligible activities will be limited to the transport, education and health sectors.)

The criteria for activity selection under Component 2 included: (i) being within the geographical area impacted by the
disaster noted in the applicable Alert Declaration issued by the SGR; (ii) being classified as a Category B or C sub-project
in terms of the WB OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, (iii) not being an activity that would affect international
waterways, (iv) to the extent possible focusing interventions on specific geographic areas to maximize the impacts of the
investments; (v) recovering vital infrastructure to restore critical basic and productive services; (vi) ensuring access and
connectivity; (vii) prioritizing sub-projects that have an advanced level of preparedness and can ensure rapid response and
recovery.

Component 2 was triggered following the orange alert declaration of April 2, 2016 associated with the intensification of
the El Niño phenomenon that caused heavy rains, floods and landslides, and the red alert declaration associated with the
April 16, 2016 earthquake. Most of the project funds are redirected to Component 2, and the GoE confirmed the following
list of investments under the ERL: i) the construction of four new fully-equipped educational units and the rehabilitation
of two others, including equipment (to be executed by MINEDUC and the Works Contracting Service (SECOB), the national
construction agency); ii) the purchase of 40 ambulances and medical equipment and supplies (to be executed by MSP);
and iii) the rehabilitation of one road, as well as the reconstruction of the Manta fishing port managed by the Port
Authority of Manta (APM; to be executed by MTOP).

In terms of climate change co-benefits: 13.32 percent of IBRD investments under Component 2 (US$10.96 million) are
expected to bring such co-benefits by addressing El Niño and other hydro-meteorological hazards.

Component 3: Technical Assistance to MEF and Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6.46 million
total; US$ 5.77million IBRD)

Component 3 provides support to the MEF, EPA, MTOP, MSP, MINEDUC, SECOB and other selected sectors, for the
administrative management of the project, including: (i) the hiring of a Project Coordinator, specialists in financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation for the PCU (Project Coordination Unit); (ii) the hiring of other
technical temporary staff (including, but not limited to, environmental and social specialists) needed during project
implementation; (iii) the carrying out of project audits; and (iv) the financing of the necessary goods and equipment. This
component also includes technical assistance to MEF to strengthen the country’s resilience to macroeconomic shocks.
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




Status of new project activities (Components 2 and 3) to date



The GoE has defined the activities to be financed under Components 2 and 3 in a formal letter on Dec. 17, 2018. Sub-
projects under Component 2 are located in the areas most affected by the earthquake and the El Niño phenomenon, like
the provinces of Manabí and Esmeraldas. The GoE has proposed an overall implementation schedule that would allow
completion of all the planned activities by the project’s closing date.




The 6 schools to be constructed under the project are located in the province of Manabí . Of the six schools, four of them
will imply construction of new buildings to replace those damaged/destroyed in the earthquake. The rest of the works will
reinforce/restore partially damaged schools that after technical studies were determined to remain structurally sound. In
the case of 4 schools, MINEDUC is finalizing structural designs with its own resources, and new structural designs required
by the other 2 schools are being contracted using project financing. All schools have the social and environmental
management process in an advanced stage in accordance with the provisions established in Annex 14 of the ESSAF, the
part specific to the investments by MINEDUC.



The Port of Manta (Terminal Pesquero de Manta), located in the canton of Manta, Manabí province, was amongst the
infrastructure that suffered the greatest damages to infrastructure. Specifically, a large part of the fishing dock was
damaged, generating a significant decline in the respective operational capacity. The project will finance construction of
two fishing docks, potable water supply for the fishing and cabotage terminal and reconstruction of the port’s perim eter
wall that was damaged from severe ground liquefaction during the earthquake. The designs and studies for the works
have been completed by APM through a consultancy company with fiscal resources. The planned investment has an ESIA
and ESMP, including management and final marine of deposit of the dredged sediments, that was cleared by the RSA on
Nov. 20, 2018.



The project will also finance the rehabilitation of a national road—the Abdon Calderon-El Quingue road—that was affected
by the El Niño phenomenon and the 2016 earthquake. The works will focus on stabilizing critical road sites that are
affecting vehicular mobility. The works will require an update of existing designs to include additional critical points and
rehabilitation works.

If the designs for the schools and the road show the need for resettlement or compensation for lost livelihood (whether
temporary or permanent) under OP 4.12, an abbreviated RAP will be prepared.

The bulk of activities under Component 3 will focus on building the country’s resilience to macroeconomic shocks. This
will include reforms to strengthen the GoE’s fiscal position and sustainability, allow for a more efficient allocation and
mobilization of government resources, and encourage private investment.
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The potential project intervention area initially covered the whole of the country, since Component 2 was
    open to address any eligible natural disaster. After the activation of Component 2, most of the project funds
    were concentrated around the most affected areas by El Niño and the 2016 earthquake. To address the El
    Niño episode, flood control and risk mitigation activities focused on the Guayas and Azuay provinces that are
    part of the Guayas flood plain, identified as the area with the strongest expected impact from flooding and
    landslides caused by the El Niño. The activities addressed river dredging on the Balao and Jubones rivers, as
    well as construction of flood protection and gabion walls in specific spots of the Guayas, Buenavista, and
    Gala rivers. The earthquake impacted the provinces of Manabí, Esmeraldas, Santa Elena, Santo Domingo de
    los Tsáchilas, Los Rios and Guayas. Of these, the province of Manabí experienced the highest loss of life and
    overall infrastructure damage, especially in the cantons of Manta, Pedernales and Portoviejo. MINEDUC will
    construct or rehabilitate 6 educational units in the province of Manabí. MTOP will rehabilitate a damaged
    road in the province of Esmeraldas. The reconstruction works on the damaged fishing port of Manta are
    located in the province of Manabí. Specific investments in mobile health services and goods for health supply
    will be provided in 84 percent of the country’s health districts. None of the planned investments present
    particular safeguards concerns in terms of negative impacts on natural habitats, physical cultural resources
    or forests. No cases of involuntary resettlement have thus far been identified related with the investments,
    as neither presence of indigenous peoples that would be affected by project activities. Overall, less than
    2.5% of the population of the emergency declaration provinces self-identifies as indigenous; a smaller
    proportion than the national average of 7 percent. The province of Manabí, which will take on the largest
    amount of the project funds, has 0.3 percent of its population self-identifying as indigenous.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Mariana T. Felicio, Social Specialist
    Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      After the restructuring, potential social and
                                                                      environmental impacts are related to the post-
                                                                      disaster recovery and reconstruction investments.
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                      The Environmental and Social Screening and
                                                                      Assessment Framework (ESSAF) the GoE prepared,
                                                                      consulted and disclosed during project
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



                                                              preparation/effectiveness to guide the project’s
                                                              social and environmental management has been
                                                              updated to reflect the adjustments needed
                                                              particularly to address the school investments by
                                                              MINEDUC. The ESSAF remains the project’s
                                                              overarching safeguards instrument that guides
                                                              elaboration of investment specific assessments and
                                                              management plans. See further details under
                                                              Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              Given the rich biodiversity and the number of
                                                              different types of protected areas in Ecuador, the
                                                              project applied a precautionary principle to trigger
                                                              OP/BP 4.04 particularly as the scale and location of
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes                the potential natural disaster impacts and the
                                                              related response investments were unknown
                                                              during project preparation. The ESSAF includes
                                                              guidance to screen for potential natural habitat
                                                              impacts and address them appropriately.
                                                              Given the forest coverage at the national level, the
                                                              project applied a precautionary principle to trigger
                                                              OP/BP 4.36 particularly as the scale and location of
                                                              the potential natural disaster impacts and the
                                                              related response investments were unknown
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes                during project preparation. The ESSAF includes
                                                              guidance to screen for potential forest-related
                                                              impacts and address them appropriately. No
                                                              reforestation activities to prevent landslides or
                                                              other type of disasters are projected under the
                                                              restructured project.
                                                              Component 1 was to finance personal protection
                                                              equipment for safe handling of chemical larvicides
                                                              to control mosquitoes as vectors for several
                                                              diseases that are prone to spread due to the El Niño
                                                              effects that can increase the use of chemicals. The
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  Yes                assessment of MSP’s capacity and adequacy of its
                                                              system for managing chemicals was conducted
                                                              before project effectiveness. Annex 13 of the
                                                              ESSAF, Emergency Plan for Vector Control, includes
                                                              a detailed description of the related socio-
                                                              environmental management by MSP
                                                              Given the rich physical cultural resources (PCR) of
                                                              Ecuador, the project applied a precautionary
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                principle to trigger OP/BP 4.11, particularly as the
                                                              scale and location of the potential natural disaster
                                                              impacts and the related response investments
      The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



                                                             were unknown during project preparation. Chance
                                                             finds of cultural artefacts have not occurred in the
                                                             context of the thus far executed minor works, yet
                                                             they cannot be ruled out during the remaining
                                                             project implementation period. The ESSAF specifies
                                                             appropriate requirements for screening of
                                                             investments, and sub-projects’ Environmental
                                                             Management Plans (EMPs) will include appropriate
                                                             management measures in case any known cultural
                                                             resources might be affected.
                                                             Given presence of Indigenous Peoples in Ecuador,
                                                             the project triggered OP/BP 4.11 particularly as the
                                                             scale and location of the potential natural disaster
                                                             impacts and the related response investments
                                                             were unknown during project preparation. The
                                                             majority of the disaster mitigation activities initially
                                                             planned under Component 1 focused on existing
                                                             infrastructure works that were not expected to
                                                             have effects on indigenous populations. A
                                                             screening of the zone of influence of the shelters
                                                             for cattle to be constructed under Component 1
                                                             revealed that close to 90% of the population was
                                                             Mestizo, while the indigenous populations were
                                                             scattered throughout the zone and not
                                                             concentrated in communities. The referred
                                                             indigenous population did not meet the
                                                             characteristics set out in OP 4.10.
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)       Yes
                                                             Particularly for Component 2, yet applicable to the
                                                             whole project, the ESSAF includes an Indigenous
                                                             Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) as Annex 9. The
                                                             IPPF provides specific guidance on how to
                                                             effectively engage indigenous communities as well
                                                             as procedures to be used for screening all activities
                                                             to be financed under the project, ensuring that they
                                                             maximize social benefits and avoid or mitigate
                                                             adverse impacts on indigenous peoples. No
                                                             feedback was received on the IPPF when it was
                                                             consulted.

                                                             When the ESSAF was developed, the possibility of
                                                             developing PPIs as established in OP 4.10 was left
                                                             open to the extent that the actions or sub-projects
                                                             would      affect    or     influence   indigenous
                                                             territories/peoples. As sub-projects have been
                                                             identified and are currently under development, no
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



                                                               applicable presence of Indigenous Peoples has
                                                               been confirmed and no PPI has been formulated.

                                                               Project activities may result in limited temporary or
                                                               permanent involuntary resettlement or land
                                                               acquisition. Investments initially identified under
                                                               Component 1—including maintenance of existing
                                                               infrastructure such as roads, canals, and irrigation
                                                               systems, dredging of rivers, and construction of
                                                               cattle shelters in public land—were screened and
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes
                                                               found to trigger minimal disruption and not to
                                                               require land acquisition. The ESSAF includes a
                                                               Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as Annex 10
                                                               to ensure full application of the safeguard. Project
                                                               funds will not be used for any resettlement-related
                                                               compensation cost. No feedback was received on
                                                               the RFP when it was consulted.
                                                               The project will not finance construction of major
                                                               dams. However, as there are major dams in the
                                                               area susceptible to El Niño effects, the project
                                                               applied a precautionary principle to trigger OP/BP
                                                               4.37, in case EPA, the responsible GoE agency,
                                                               would have needed to incur to any dam related
                                                               rehabilitation works with project financing under
                                                               Component 2 on Post-Disaster Recovery and
                                                               Reconstruction. The ESSAF describes the basic
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               Yes
                                                               OP/BP 4.37 requirements that any work on
                                                               rehabilitating a major dam will need to satisfy
                                                               under a WB financed project. Overall, the project is
                                                               set to comply with the related procedures as
                                                               applicable to any activity related with a major dam
                                                               that the project might finance. However,
                                                               considering the list of the confirmed investments,
                                                               the safeguard is not relevant after the
                                                               restructuring.
                                                               Project activities have not been and will not be
                                                               conducted in or influence international waterways.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No                It was agreed with the GoE that any activity that
 (BP 7.50)
                                                               would need to trigger this Policy would be excluded
                                                               from project financing.
                                                               Project activities have not been and will not be
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                               conducted in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
  The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. It is classified as an "Environmental and Social
  Category B" operation under the same. The project has been implemented in areas that were expected to be (in case
  of Component 1) and have effectively been (in case of Component 2) hit severely by the El Niño phenomenon and/or
  the April 2016 earthquake. Given the magnitude of expected damage caused by the El Niño and by a potential
  eruption of the Cotopaxi volcano, the project was designed to provide rehabilitation and recovery support to affected
  areas in which public infrastructure and services delivery were severely impacted. The civil works financed for
  preventive action under Component 1 consisted finally in six site-specific rehabilitative works of minor scale. These
  works were financed retroactively after the Bank confirmed their compliance with the applicable World Bank fiduciary
  norms and safeguards policies. Under Component 2, dedicated to recovery and reconstruction, the final list of
  investments, re-confirmed in a letter from MEF received December 17, 2018, focuses on reconstructing and/or
  rehabilitating road, port and educational infrastructure, the purchase of medical supplies and ambulances and
  technical assistance to strengthen the country’s resilience to macroeconomic shocks. The ESSAF includes a negative
  list that has excluded any potential “Category A? investment from project funding, and the screening design ensures
  there have been no and will not be any significant or irreversible environmental impacts anticipated from project-
  financed activities. None of the planned civil works takes place in an environmentally or socially sensitive area nor is
  expected to cause cumulative or indirect/induced impacts on such areas.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  Not applicable.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Not applicable to the main bulk of the planned preventive and emergency response works. The Environmental and
  Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the rehabilitation/reconstruction/ improvement of the Manta fishing port
  administered by the Port Authority of Manta (APM), cleared by RSA in November, 2018, includes consideration of
  two alternatives in terms of the design of the fishing port rehabilitation: 1) construction of two docks and dredging,
  and 2) rehabilitation of accesses and marginal wharves and demolition and construction of enclosure. The first
  alternative was chosen, as it expands the port’s operational capacity and improves its operational efficiency and that
  of environmental controls, and thus contributes to a greater socio-economic impact. Four alternatives were analyzed
  for the final marine disposal site for the sediments dredged from the port area: 1) within the dock of the fishing
  terminal and cabotage (2 miles north-east of the Port); 2) in front of the El Murciélago beach (expansion site); 3) in
  front of the minor Jaramijo port (4 miles from the Port of Manta and 1 mile from the Jaramijo port); and 4) on land.
  The first alternative was chosen for its least impacts, taken the sediment drag would not affect neighboring beaches,
  affect artisanal fishing activity nor generate impacts on economic activities. Alternatives 2 and 3 could have had an
  impact both on the quality of the beaches affecting tourism and a possible accumulation of sediments in the port of
  Jaramijo.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



The project was prepared and the investments under Component 1 were implemented according to Paragraph 12 of
the World Bank’s Operational Policy 10.00, which allows for certain exceptions to the investment project financing
policy requirements, including deferral of safeguards requirements. The deferral was requested for postponing the
disclosure of safeguards instruments to after Appraisal that took place on December 17, 2015. Site-specific safeguards
instruments and environmental authorizations by the Ministry of Environment (MAE), as required per the national
legislation, have been required for all investments planned or financed under the project, including those subject to
retroactive financing under Component 1. The scope and depth of the EMPs vary based on each sub-project’s
environmental impact and sensibility of the area of influence. The safeguards instruments must be ready and
acceptable to the WB and the environmental authorizations processed prior to bidding the works, and in every case
before works start on the ground. Exceptions to processing the environmental authorizations as per the national
legislation have been warranted in the ESSAF if properly justified based on an emergency, always subject to a written
agreement by the MAE. There has been no such case thus far during project implementation, and none is expected
during the remaining implementation period. MEF and the responsible co-executing agency will disclose the project-
related environmental authorizations and the EMPs that go beyond application of environmental and social good
practices and require consultation with potentially affected people. The WB will also disclose the latter through the
WB external website.

The co-executing agencies prepared with MEF and WB support an Environmental and Social Screening and
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) for the project to ensure identification and adequate management of social and
environmental issues and risks relating to project implementation, including a section on environmental good
practices focused on civil works. The ESSAF includes an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) that covers
specific guidance on how to effectively and pro-actively engage indigenous communities as well as procedures to be
used for screening all activities identified post-appraisal to ensure they maximize social benefits and avoid causing
any potential adverse impacts. The presence of IPs in the areas that were declared in emergency during project
preparation was analyzed in the ESSAF. The ESSAF includes a format to use for assessing if Indigenous Peoples, Afro-
Ecuadorian and/o Montubio people are present in any particular sub-project location. Application of the tools
included in the IPPF have thus far concluded that no subproject requires preparation of an IPP.

The ESSAF also includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared in accordance with OP 4.12, providing
guidance for land acquisition if any sub-project requires preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The RPF
reflects the two following principles: 1) prior to the approval of sub-projects, the responsible agency needs to ensure
that the sites, boundaries and ownership of the related land plots are clearly identified and confirmed by presenting
a legal title; and 2) for all activities, the responsible agency is obliged to develop and implement a RAP in case of
involuntary resettlement, including agreement and payment of compensation measures with fiscal/other than
project funds prior to the commencement of works for that particular sub-project. Implementation support has been
made available by the WB to screen and consider the need to prepare any RAP. Guidance has also been provided on
conducting rapid social assessments, and simplified templates would be made available for the completion of site-
specific RAPs if required. No sub-project has thus far required preparation of a RAP. During the remaining project
implementation period, the planned road rehabilitation works will be assessed in detail to see if any RAP will be
needed.

Beyond the IPPF and RPF, the ESSAF consists of:

i. Screening methodology for all types of potential civil works related with rehabilitation of water, road, health and
school infrastructure to identify relevant environmental and social issues and risks, as well as environmental
enhancement opportunities. The screening facilitates determining the relevant national requirements related to
environmental, health and safety management and the applicability of the WB’s Operational Policies on
     The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



environmental and social safeguards. Said methodology includes a negative list to exclude any potential “Category A?
investment from project funding, or investments that would result, e.g., in negative impacts on any type of forest,
protected area/buffer zone and/or physical cultural resources. The screening methodology has proved functional
during project implementation.
ii. Description of potential negative environmental and social impacts of the expected types of project
activities/investments, as well as applicable prevention/mitigation measures and good practices.
iii. Description of the basic content required for site specific EMPs to be completed and customized for each sub-
project based on the results of site screening to specify the siting, design, demolition/land clearing, and construction
management requirements for physical activities.
iv. Procedures, roles and responsibilities for carrying out and approving site screening templates and site specific
EMPs, ensuring that sub-project siting, designs, plans, specifications and implementation plans reflect the
environmental screening outcomes and the EMP requirements are compliant with the applicable WB safeguards and
meet the relevant policies/acts, strategies/rules and regulations of the GoE.
 v. Description of the applicable public communication tools and procedures and a multi-tiered Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM) to receive and handle complaints relating to exclusion and inclusion errors during beneficiary
targeting, those adversely affected by the project, and delivery of project benefits. Such mechanisms rely on existing
community institutions, the co-executive agencies, and the overall project coordination by the MEF, as applicable.
vi. Generic sub-project safeguards supervision/monitoring template for rehabilitation works to record compliance
with the sub-project specific safeguards instruments (EMP, IPP, RAP). These are administered by the responsible co-
executing agency that mobilizes the personnel needed to provide close technical support and supervision at the local
level. EMPs are under preparation for the six schools (four new and two rehabilitated) and the selected road
rehabilitation sub-projects by MTOP.

As stated above, each civil work is required to comply with the environmental permitting requirements by national
legislation. Each will also have an applicable EMP, whose level of detail and scope depends on the type of activity, as
acceptable to the WB. EMPs that go beyond application of good environmental and social practices and require
consultations will be disclosed in-country and on the WB external website. The six maintenance or
rehabilitation/reconstruction works conducted by EPA for flood prevention under Component 1 relied on
environmental and social good practices specified for the type of works and natural and human environment in
question. These were minor civil works that were presented to the Bank for retroactive financing. The request was
approved after the Bank confirmed the GoE and project-financed contractors and supervisors complied with sound
environmental and social practices.

Monitoring, evaluation and reporting on environmental and social management is part of the project’s
implementation process, including local authorities’ reporting systems. During construction, contractors will keep
records of all activities carried out on each sub-project site, and these records will be submitted to the responsible
co-executing agency. Departmental environmental officials are expected to be responsible for monitoring at the local
level. The PCU at the MEF is overall in charge of securing that the co-executing agencies carry out adequate level of
sub-project supervision. Once the larger construction works start, compliance with adequate environmental and
social management will be monitored based on evaluation and progress reports and supported through feedback
meetings, possible training as needed and implementation support missions.

Awareness on environmental and social mitigation measures: The ESSAF outlines provisions applicable in
awareness/orientation sessions for environmental and social training aimed at contractors of civil works. Appropriate
training will cover areas such as: managing key impacts, policy and legal framework on environment and construction,
disposal of solid and liquid waste, and code of conduct to secure sound coexistence between workers and adjacent
communities, including prevention of spread and contraction of HIV/AIDS. Environmental and social rules and
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



  procedures for contractors will be incorporated within construction bids and contracts to enhance obligations on
  contractors.

  In the section on good practices contained in the ESSAF, it is established that the infrastructure design should include,
  among other aspects, due consideration to ventilation, natural and artificial energy efficiency, access to water and
  sanitation supply, universal access for people with disabilities and security of vulnerable groups, as well as to historical
  and cultural considerations. Safety of the infrastructure will be particularly addressed in construction of the
  educational facilities.

  Capacity of the borrower to implement safeguards: Regarding the participating agencies’ capacity to plan and
  implement pertinent social and environmental management, each has at least a minimum environmental and social
  staff and technical capacity with support by the PCU/MEF and WB as needed. Each agency has named responsible
  staff to contribute to preparation and implementation of the project's safeguards instruments. Thus far, EPA and
  MINEDUC have demonstrated the strong capacity to comply with WB safeguards, whereas APM has capable
  environmental personal and it further contracts technical specialists in environmental management within marine
  context. However, APM has no prior experience on complying with WB requirements, a gap that has been addressed
  through close collaboration with the responsible WB specialists. Thus far safeguards work by MTOP has suffered of
  various changes in the planned investments, which have changed before any EA/ESIA/EMP was completed. In mid-
  December 2018, MTOP is preparing the design and preparation of the safeguards instruments for the Abdon
  Calderon-El Quingue road. The PCU at the MEF has gained a basic understanding of the WB safeguards requirements
  and serves to coordinate the respective work between the co-executing agencies and the WB. Over the past decades,
  the GoE has implemented important pro-poor policies and taken steps to include indigenous peoples and other
  minorities, and all the co-executing agencies have experience in consultation and dialogue with indigenous
  communities. For example, the MSP includes a Division for Intercultural Health. In case of absence of a staff member
  dedicated to social issues in the co-executing agencies, the project team will be complemented by a consultant
  specializing in social safeguards, as MINEDUC is currently doing.

  Overall, the project contributes to enhancing GoE capacity in social and environmental management in disaster
  prevention and response. During thus far project implementation, the WB team has facilitated the co-executing
  agencies’ safeguards-related work on an as-needed basis, and the same approach will be followed during the
  remaining implementation period. Particularly, the WB team will assess the participating agencies’ need for
  safeguards training towards the end of 2018 focused on supporting, monitoring, supervising and reporting safeguards
  implementation during the forthcoming construction phase of the planned investments.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key project stakeholders are the public institutions in charge of disaster prevention and response. The potentially
  affected people are determined mainly based on their geographic location and socio-economic factors that contribute
  to their vulnerability.

  Regarding the initially planned canal clean-up works, EPA disseminated to near-by landowners the message on the
  availability of sediment for potential and strictly voluntary material disposal in private lands. The project applied a
  protocol to verify the voluntary disposal of dredged materials as part of the social and environmental management
  of each investment, as applicable.

  Regarding gender, it is well documented in the literature that gender and equality have a strong link to disaster
  vulnerability and resilience. However, the planned project investments will be mostly gender neutral, as they focus
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



     on maintenance and rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing infrastructure. The activities in need of strong gender
     mainstreaming will be covered by other sources of funding. As applicable, project indicators are disaggregated by
     men and women.

     Regarding citizen engagement, the project has a grievance redress indicator at the intermediate level. The co-
     executing agencies have the responsibility to document and resolve grievances. Each co-executing agency follows up
     on grievances and reports them to the PCU. The agreed upon arrangements for public disclosure and stakeholder
     participation are detailed in Section 6.3 of the ESSAF.

     Regarding the disclosure of the ESSAF, an advanced draft was published in-country on February 4, 2016 and on the
     Bank external website on February 8, 2016. Subsequently, the GoE organized consultations on the draft ESSAF in
     Quito, Guayaquil, Montecristi and Santo Domingo, with participation by a total of 115 people, representatives of
     relevant GoE agencies, provincial and local authorities, construction and engineering professionals and civil society
     to collect feedback and contributions to the final document. Participants in the consultations were overall interested
     in the project and its scope, as well as in the ESSAF, acknowledging they present an adequate project design and
     management of related environmental aspects and any potential impact on human settlements. Questions related
     to project coverage and the institutional and operational arrangements in terms of inter-institutional collaboration
     between the MEF, MAE, and the co-executing agencies. More specifically, in the consultation events organized by
     EPA, community and political leaders and other social actors expressed their satisfaction on the planned and on-going
     flood protection works, and additional sub-project needs were presented. In the consultation events organized by
     MTOP, questions were raised on the road sections selected for preventive maintenance, including the scope,
     beneficiaries, timing and required environmental authorizations of said works. The conducted consultations are
     presented in detail in Section 7 and Annex 8 of the ESSAF. The final ESSAF was disclosed in-country and on the Bank
     external website on April 22, 2016 before project effectiveness.

     The ESSAF has remained object of continued update and improvement during project implementation, including
     inclusion of Annex 14 that details the applicable environmental and social management practices related to the
     educational infrastructure managed by MINEDUC and SECOB.
     .

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
06-Jan-2016                                                    31-Jan-2016
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
                      The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



            Ecuador                                                      31-Jan-2016
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
06-Jan-2016                                                             31-Jan-2016
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
          Ecuador                                                        31-Jan-2016
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
06-Jan-2016                                                              31-Jan-2016
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            Ecuador                                                      31-Jan-2016
            Comments




PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
         The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)




“In country? Disclosure

COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      NA
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                           Yes

 Is a separate PMP required?                                                          NA

 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
 PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project        NA
 team include a Pest Management Specialist?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                  Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                      Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                      Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      No
 review the plan?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    No
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                NA

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                    NA
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                    NA
been made for public awareness and training?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    No
disclosure?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ecuador Risk Mitigation and Emergency Recovery Project (P157324)



    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     No
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Diana Marcela Rubiano Vargas
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Alexander Agosti

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
