The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Electric Power Project (P143988)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


             Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Updated: 07-Dec-2017| Report No: ISDSR22910




                        Regional Vice President:      Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:      Ellen A. Goldstein
                 Senior Global Practice Director:     Riccardo Puliti
                    Practice Manager/Manager:         Julia M. Fraser
                             Task Team Leader:        Sunil Kumar Khosla




                                                    -1-
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electric Power Project (P143988)



.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                      Project Name
P143988                                                         Electric Power Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                             Country
Sunil Kumar Khosla                                              Myanmar
Approval Date                                                   Environmental Category
24-Sep-2013                                                     Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                   Is this a Repeater project?
GEE02

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                              Total Financing
140,000,000.00                                                  140,000,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
International Development Association (IDA)                                                         140,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               140,000,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    Increase the capacity and efficiency of gas-fired power generation in Myanmar and strengthen the institutional capacity
    of relevant agencies.



.




                                                            -2-
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electric Power Project (P143988)



3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Project comprises financing for (a) construction of a combined-cycle gas-fired power plant (CCGT) at Thaton, Mon
State; and (b) technical assistance and capacity building activities to support construction of the plant and broader
energy sector analysis and planning. Power plant construction activities are described further in Section II.A.1.

The project is being restructured due to the need to trigger OP 4.12, which was not triggered at the time of appraisal. At
appraisal, it was assessed that all investments and other project interventions would occur at the existing site within its
perimeter, with no associated investments such as transmission and distribution network, water supply, or road works.
However, during finalization of the contract in 2015, it became apparent that the new plant would require construction
of a pipeline of about five kilometers in length to supply water from Donthami river to the plant. The need for this water
supply results from the winning bidder’s design, which requires more water than would otherwise be available at the
site. As such, the need for this pipeline was not foreseen in the ESIA/ESMP prepared for the project in 2013. Additional
facilities associated with the pipeline include a new floating water pump in the river, a new pump house next to the
river, and new aboveground electricity distribution lines to follow the route of the pipe from the pump house to the
plant.

4. PROJECT COMPONENTS

Component 1: CCGT Power Plant (US$ 130 million).
The main component of the proposed project is the design, supply and installation of a combined the Thaton gas turbine
(GT) station capacity into a new CCGT power plant. The selection of the plant is based on two main considerations: (a)
the severely constrained availability of gas supply allocation in the domestic gas market; and (b) the age and condition of
existing GT stations. The existing Thaton GT station is located near the country’s main gas-pipeline, which runs through
the Mon State, and the reliability record of gas supply in Thaton is significantly better than in other GT stations
considered as alternative project locations. Also, the existing GTs in Thaton are among the oldest in the country,
experiencing increased number of forced outages and very low thermal efficiency (on average below 20 percent).
Furthermore, the Thaton station has a relatively strong connection to the 230 kV power transmission network and it
provides electricity to both the national grid and local communities in Mon State.

Component 2: Technical Assistance and Advisory Services (US$10 million). This component will provide technical
assistance (TA) and advisory services in two main areas. The first area of support is related to the capacity building for
policy making and regulation in the power sector including, but not limited to: (a) development of National
Electrification Program; (b) financial analysis and forecasting for power enterprises; and (c) economic valuation of
natural gas in the domestic market. The second area of support is related to the capacity building for project
implementation including: (a) owners engineer for the implementation of CCGT plant; (b) strengthening of procurement
capacity and training on international procurement practices; and (c) improvement of financial management (FM)
capacity and training in international FM standards and procedures; (d) environmental and social safeguards; and (e)
implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) at the project site.
.

5. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The Thaton power plant site is located in a rural area approximately 5 km northeast of Thaton town, Thaton
District, Mon State. The land is a relatively flat coastal plain. Flooding of the site is not reported; open drains

                                                           -3-
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electric Power Project (P143988)



carry away excess water to the surrounding terrain with a seasonal water creek in the rainy season. The site
water discharges (run-off water as well as domestic wastewater and water used for site cleaning) should not
be a significant source of pollution, potential contamination should be prevented through the
implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) in place. Land use surrounding
the power station is primarily rubber tree plantations, with the exception of a tire factory adjacent to the
east side of the site. A national road runs along the Project site at a short distance (some 1,500m) and is an
important contributor to local noise levels. The current plant does not use water for cooling purposes,
however the new plant requires external water supply provided through a new pipeline from the Donthami
river, some 5 km from the plant. There are no perennial streams or rivers running through the site or close to
it. Apart from the water supply pipeline and associated infrastructure (power supply line, pump house,
floating pumps) all activities related to modernization and expansion are taking place within the existing
power station compound (‘brownfield development’) which is situated on government land used for power
generation since 1975 when the first two gas turbines were commissioned.



6. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
7. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered            Explanation
                                                                 The proposed project has been classified as
                                                                 category ‘B’ because the impacts that may occur
                                                                 during construction or operation of the project
                                                                 investment are limited, site-specific and mitigation
                                                                 measures can be readily designed. Most physical
                                                                 work is taking place within the existing brownfield
                                                                 location. During implementation the need was
                                                                 identified for two water supply pipelines (for
                                                                 cooling water and for worker housing water
                                                                 supply, 4.3 km and one 1.6 km respectively)
                                                                 drawing water from the Donthami river),
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                 associated electricity distribution line, pumphouse
                                                                 and floating pumps.

                                                                 The project will increase existing power
                                                                 generation capacity, and will have positive impacts
                                                                 by substantially increasing generation efficiency
                                                                 and by substantially reducing emissions and noise
                                                                 levels, while improving reliability and quality of
                                                                 electricity supply in Thaton. The project will have
                                                                 limited negative impacts on the environment.
                                                                 Many of the impacts are related to operation of
                                                           -4-
       The World Bank                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electric Power Project (P143988)



                                                     the existing facilities which will reduce after
                                                     commissioning of the new facilities. An
                                                     Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) has
                                                     been prepared including an Environment and
                                                     Social Management Plan (ESMP) to mitigate any
                                                     potential impacts during construction and
                                                     operation. Lack of institutional capacity for
                                                     environmental and social protection is being
                                                     addressed through the technical assistance (TA)
                                                     component under the project. This TA includes
                                                     support to develop and implement an
                                                     Environment, Health & Safety Management
                                                     System under the Project for the existing and new
                                                     facilities of the power station, to address
                                                     environment, health and safety considerations of
                                                     future operations.

                                                     The task team conducted a labor influx risk review
                                                     (April 2017). An estimated 144 Chinese and 20-70
                                                     Myanmar nationals would be working on the plant
                                                     refurbishment for approximately 12 months. All
                                                     laborers are registered with names and passports
                                                     verified by government oversight, 8-9 local
                                                     community security guards have been assigned for
                                                     the workers camp, and camp management
                                                     protocol for HSE and security exist with a 9pm
                                                     curfew in place. The Grievance Redress
                                                     Mechanism provides means for the community to
                                                     raise and escalate concerns through alternative
                                                     means, and for their monitoring and reporting by
                                                     the Government.

                                                     Project does not affect natural habitats. Works are
                                                     concentrated at an industrial (brownfield) power
                                                     plant site with that land use for at least the last 30
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No
                                                     years. New water supply infrastructure follows
                                                     existing linear infrastructure corridors and does
                                                     not have appreciable impacts on natural habitats.
                                                     Project does not affect natural forests. Works are
                                                     concentrated at an industrial (brownfield) power
                                                     plant site with that land use for at least the last 30
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                     years. New water supply infrastructure follows
                                                     existing linear infrastructure corridors and does
                                                     not have appreciable impacts on forests.
                                                     There will be no procurement of pesticides or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No         fertilizers, or any works within the project which
                                                     would lead to the use or the increased use of
                                               -5-
       The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electric Power Project (P143988)



                                                        pesticides.

                                                        The project does not involving significant
                                                        excavations, demolition, movement of earth,
                                                        flooding, or other environmental changes; and is
                                                        not located in, nor in the vicinity of, a physical
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                        cultural resources site recognized by the
                                                        borrower; the cooling water pipeline is within the
                                                        previously excavated corridor of another (tire
                                                        factory) pipeline.
                                                        The policy is triggered because of the presence of
                                                        IPs within the project’s area of influence. Since IPs
                                                        represent the overwhelming majority of the
                                                        potential beneficiaries and affected population in
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes         the Project influence area, no separate Indigenous
                                                        People Plan was prepared. The relevant elements
                                                        of the policy have been directly integrated into
                                                        project design. See the Summary of Key
                                                        Safeguards Issues for further information.
                                                        At appraisal, it was considered that there would
                                                        be no physical resettlement, land acquisition or
                                                        loss of income associated with the project, and all
                                                        construction-related activities would take place
                                                        within the existing site. However, this policy is
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes         triggered given that the plant design agreed in
                                                        2015 requires external water supply with
                                                        construction of a pipeline and associated facilities
                                                        outside the boundary of the plant site. See the
                                                        Summary of Key Safeguards Issues for further
                                                        information.
                                                        The Project will not finance construction or
                                                        rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                        performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                        construction, as defined in this Policy.
                                                        The Project site does not involve the use of or
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                potential impact on any international waterway;
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                               Donthami river providing cooling water is not an
                                                        international waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No          The project is not in a disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES




                                                  -6-
     The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Electric Power Project (P143988)



1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
 potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 Environment: In accordance with the requirement of a Category B project, an Environmental and Social Assessment
 (ESA) was carried out for the proposed project components at appraisal. An environmental and social management
 plan (ESMP) was prepared to determine mitigation measures, monitoring program and necessary institutional
 arrangements as well as capacity development.

 The Project invests in construction of a new combined-cycle gas-fired power plant adjacent to an existing, old,
 simple-cycle gas-fired power plant dating from 1975, at a site in Thaton township, Mon State. The old plant's main
 facilities will not be dismantled under the Project. The old plant will be used up until operation of the new plant,
 and thereafter only in emergency situations or during periods of maintenance of the new plant. Typically, downtime
 of the new turbines for maintenance or disruptions, and hence the possibility that the old turbines will be used, is
 around two weeks per year. With the substantially higher efficiency and environmental performance standards of
 the new equipment (lower emissions to air, less waste consumption, much lower noise generation levels) and the
 introduction of an Environmental Health and Safety Management System, the investment will reduce
 environmental impacts and benefit the surrounding environment and local population. Natural gas fired power
 plants have low emissions of particulate matter and hydrocarbons, and sulfur dioxide (with the natural gas sulfur
 contents at 0.002%). The main air pollutant from natural gas is nitrous oxide (NOx), emission of which are expected
 to be around 70% less in the new than the old plant. Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions per unit of electricity produced
 will be substantially reduced, although total CO2 emissions will remain roughly at existing levels as the plant will
 continue to use the same amount of natural gas. Noise levels at the fence surrounding the site currently reach levels
 of 60-70 dB(A) and at places (main entrance) levels up to 80 dB(A). The noise levels from the new plant, in
 compliance with international standards, are expected to be reduced to between 50 (nighttime) and 55 dB(A)
 (daytime) at the fence of the site.

 The World Bank Group Environmental Health and Safety General Guidelines (WBG EHS Guidelines) and World Bank
 Group Guidelines for Thermal Power Generation will apply to the project, and, where applicable, other international
 good standards such as relevant EU Directives, or US-EPA standards. Since appraisal, Myanmar has adopted national
 environmental safeguards requirements that also apply to the project.

 Construction activities with the installation of the CCGT units cause emissions from construction equipment,
 airborne dust and noise, as well as small amounts of wastewater (washing water) and solid waste (inert
 construction waste). During the operational phase air emissions and noise levels will be determined by the
 specifications of the installed equipment, in compliance with WBG EHS Guidelines and international standards,
 which represent a substantial improvement in comparison to the current situation. Wastewater and waste
 generation are limited and largely unrelated to the core power generation process (cleaning and runoff water,
 wastewater, etc). Mitigation measures are included in the ESMP.

 The ESMP complies with applicable Bank Safeguard Policies requirements’ and applicable environmental, health,
 safety, and social standards. The ESMP includes mitigation measures, monitoring plans, institutional arrangements,
 capacity building and estimated costs for the mitigation measures and monitoring programs for both the
 construction and operation phases. The ESMP also specifies an Environment Health and Safety Management System
 to be developed during Project implementation.

 The due diligence review undertaken as part of the ESA showed a lack of safeguards and operation procedures for
 workers’ health and safety and environmental good practices. The Environment Health and Safety Management
 System will include health and safety measures that will substantially improve standards and practices to deal with

                                                       -7-
   The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
   Electric Power Project (P143988)



these issues for both the new and existing facilities in an adequate manner.

The ESMP implementation is progressing satisfactory, with moderate shortcomings regarding site organization
related to work site congestion due to large deliveries of materials and large equipment pending installation, site
hygiene maintenance, and worker safety practices. ESMP implementation is supervised regularly by the Client’s
international E&S consultancy as well as the Bank; in addition, Client’s Owner Engineer is providing in-depth
supervision and capacity building on workers’ occupational health and safety during construction as well as design
review from operational safety perspective, including Hazard and Operability Assessment (HAZOP). The capacity
building element of ESMP is likewise delivered as planned, although the effectiveness is somewhat affected by
limitations on number and qualifications of Client staff. The establishment of EHS-MS for Thaton plant is
commencing following the agreed work plan of the international E&S consultant, and will be informed by the
outputs of the in-depth safety work undertaken by Owner’s Engineer.

The Safeguard Policy on Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) has not been triggered because there wil be no
procurement of pesticides or fertilizers, or any works within the Project which would lead to the use or increased
use of pesticides. The power generation facilities will use air cooling, therefore there are no discharges of cooling
water (and therefore no possibility of cooling water discharge containing pesticides).

The Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered because the project will not finance
the construction or rehabilitation of any dam, nor will it rely on the performance of an existing dam or a dam under
construction, as defined in this Policy. The project site and its functional linkages (connection to the power grid,
water supply) as well as the investments under the Project do not include any dams or impoundments.

Social: Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out as part of the ESA process in 2013.
The closest habitation some 500 m from the site perimeter fence. Villages surrounding the proposed project site
include two located about 1.5 km from the project site: Than Ban, with 150 households (400 persons);and Kyar Pan
with 330 households (1,500 persons). A third village, Nyaun Wyne, is located 2 km from the project site, with 252
households. In addition 120 staff households are located next to the plant. The majority of the inhabitants in the
three villages are ethnic minorities. In Than Ban, the Keren represent 90% of the population, while there is almost
an even distribution among Keren (45%) and Pao (40%) in Kyar Pan. In Nyaun Wyne 80% belong to the Keren group.

The Indigenous Peoples policy is triggered because of the presence of Indigenous Peoples within the project’s area
of influence. The overwhelming majority (over 90 percent) of people in the Project's influence area are Indigenous
Peoples and, therefore, a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has not been prepared, but relevant elements of
the policy have been integrated into project design and summarized in the PAD. In line with OP 4.10 requirements,
this includes continued consultation to be carried out during the project implementation.

Broad community support (BCS) based on a process of free, prior and informed consultation has been documented
in the 2013 Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) during project preparation and public consultations. The
affected communities will benefit from significantly reduced noise and pollution in the project area. Also, communal
facilities, such as schools and hospitals which are connected to the grid, will be provided with more reliable power
supply. The improved power supply in the region should have indirect benefits including increased economic
activities and job creation. Access to electricity has been a key concern of households without a grid connection in
villages nearby the Thaton plant. Following the 2013 ESA, the Bank has provided technical assistance and support to
the government to prepare sustainable technical options and to determine the cost and implementation
arrangements, to prepare and accelerate rural electrification down to the village level, across the entire country,
including Thaton. As part of the ongoing project, the Government developed and adopted a National Electrification

                                                      -8-
    The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
    Electric Power Project (P143988)



Plan with an aim to provide electricity access to all by 2030. IDA funding (CR.57270) of $400 million was provided,
under the National Electrification Project (NEP), to support the goal of universal access. The national electrification
work is being implemented by the Government using several funding resources and different agencies. These come
from Union and Regional Governments' budgets and in some case other funding partners. The project is under
implementation and helping the Government's efforts to increase access through grid extension, off-grid solar
home systems and development of mini-grids. As of November 2017, over 147,000 solar home and public systems,
and eight solar mini-grids serving about 1,500 households, have been installed in States and Regions across
Myanmar.

Grid extension work will begin in early 2018, with recent finalization of major equipment contracts. The current
phase of NEP grid extension is financing medium voltage networks and transformers to villages that are close to the
existing grid. Low voltage connections are then achieved through pooling of resources by village electrification
organizations. The villages surrounding the Thaton power station have already received grid power. A
comprehensive social assessment report and stakeholder consultation in the four communities adjacent to the
Thaton plant, undertaken in September 2016, establishes current levels of electrification (a significant but uneven
increase from 15 percent at Project appraisal to approximately 60 percent of households as of the survey period).
As part of NEP’s multi-year, phased roll out, the Bank is also working with the Government on options to support
vulnerable households most at risk of being left out of the connection process. A Poverty and Social Impact
Assessment (PSIA) undertaken in 2015 by the Bank explored barriers to household electrification in Myanmar,
explained the current approach to village supported electrification, and identified those likely to be more vulnerable
to exclusion from the benefits. NEP followed this up with extensive fieldwork, two extensive consultant guidance
notes and a workshop in 2016 on inclusive electrification including recommendations for a ‘power to the poor’ style
support for targeted subsidies or financing for vulnerable households. These proposals are under discussion with
the Borrower. In this context, the communities near the Thaton plant will receive the same project benefits as all
others under the NEP grid roll out, and the Bank will encourage the Government to prioritize such support to these
communities.

OP 4.12 for Involuntary Resettlement, which was not triggered at appraisal, has been triggered by the need to
acquire land for additional works related to the power plant, which became apparent during project
implementation. At appraisal, it was assessed that all investments and other project interventions would occur at
the existing site within its perimeter, with no associated investments such as transmission and distribution network,
water supply, or road works. No other entity except the existing power plant is currently using the plant site land.
The existing plant has been in operation since 1975. The due diligence review during Project preparation did not
identify any legacy issues related to prior land use, and no issues were raised during the consultations. During
finalization of the contract in 2015, it became apparent that the new plant would require construction of a pipeline
of about five kilometers in length to supply water from Donthami river to the plant. The need for this water supply
results from the winning bidder’s design, which requires more water than would otherwise be available at the site.
As such, the need for this pipeline was not foreseen in the ESIA/ESMP prepared for the project in 2013. Additional
facilities associated with the pipeline include a new floating water pump in the river, a new pumphouse next to the
river, and new aboveground electricity distribution lines to follow the route of the pipe from the pumphouse to the
plant. While the pipeline route uses an existing transmission line right-of-way, it require use of land and remove of
or damage to farm trees. These activities are now covered by an abbreviated resettlement action plan (ARAP) and
supplemental environmental management plan (EMP), in accordance with World Bank Operational Policies 4.01
(Environmental Assessment) and 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The ARAP and EMP have been published by the
client in country, and by the Bank.

In total, 5 households (comprising 23 people), and 1 military establishment, are affected by the right of way for the

                                                       -9-
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Electric Power Project (P143988)



  water pipeline, with no structures affected and no physical displacement taking place. In total 70 betel leaf and
  rubber trees were affected. These have been compensated at replacement value as of March 2017 with a total
  value of 7,485,000 Myanmar Kyats (MMK) (equivalent to around $5,500 as of 2017).

  The affected households belong to the Keren and Bamar ethnicities. They were consulted individually and
  collectively during the preparation of the ARAP in a manner that satisfies OP 4.10's free, prior and informed
  consultation and this has been documented as part of the ARAP. The affected households have provided their
  support and ascent for the construction of the pipeline and the consultation and compensation processes. The EMP
  implementation is considered completed as there are no outstanding mitigation measures stemming from the
  pipeline works. Post construction monitoring, however, is expected to continue until commissioning.

  A culturally appropriate grievance redress mechanism (GRM) has been established in consultation with potentially
  affected persons to address grievances by the affected communities and to ensure that any project related
  complaints are promptly addressed, and which includes alternative means to escalate concerns that cannot be
  addressed at the primary, local level. Information about the GRM has been published by the client in country, and
  by the Bank.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  No irreversible and long term adverse indirect impacts are anticipated from the project activities. Control measures
  developed and implemented under the proposed Environmental, Health and Safety Management System will
  support proper management of waste and wastewater, as well as workers health and safety (including the
  introduction and routine application of safety working procedures; inspection; training; emergency plan; and
  personal protection equipment to prevent injuries, hearing damage, etc.).


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Different power plant sites were considered and reviewed during appraisal, and the Thaton site was chosen based
  on minimizing environmental and social impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environmental and social safeguards capacities and regulations in Myanmar are yet to meet international good
  practice. This applies to screening and reviewing of economic activities and new investments for potential
  environmental and social adverse impacts as well as regulating, monitoring and enforcing compliance to adequate
  standards. Technical assistance related to the capacity building for project implementation includes environmental
  and social safeguards and the implementation of the ESMP at the project site.

  International reputable consultants have supported the client with the preparation of the ESA and ESMP. The ESMP
  includes environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation phases.

  Implementation of mitigation measures, including environmental, health and safety obligations during construction,
  are monitored in accordance with the ESMP. Control and mitigating measures and monitoring tasks of the ESMP
  related to the new investments during construction are the responsibility of the contractor as part of the Design-
  Supply-Installation (DSI) contract for these services.

                                                         - 10 -
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electric Power Project (P143988)



    A substantial part of the operational measures in the ESMP is being incorporated into the Environmental, Health
    and Safety Management System and will be the responsibility of the plant management on commissioning of the
    new facilities. The DSI contractor and safeguards consulting firm will support the development of the
    Environmental, Health and Safety Management System, which is to be at international certification standard and
    cover both existing and new facilities. The Project TA Component will also support the development of
    environment, health and safety system at the site and at the implementing agency to build relevant capacities and
    support monitoring of ESMP implementation, including beyond project closing, as well as the development and
    functioning of the Environmental, Health and Safety Management System. Project progress reports furnished by the
    implementing agency and contractors cover ESMP implementation and related environmental monitoring reports.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
    with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key Project beneficiaries and potentially affected peoples include: the villages in the project influence area; and
    users of grid electricity as beneficiaries in Mon State and at the national level.

    Project preparation included public consultations, as detailed in the ESA (which includes the SA) along with
    concerns expressed by the affected people, and how they were taken into account during the project preparation.
    Following completion of the social assessment, about 50 representatives from government, civil society and local
    stakeholders participated in a stakeholder workshop in Thaton. For national stakeholders, an NGO meeting took
    place in Yangon in May 2013. Several government entities were also consulted throughout the project preparation.
    During the public hearing in Thaton and the NGO meeting in Yangon in May 2013 the Project interventions and the
    results of the impact analysis of the ESA were presented and discussed. The Executive Summary of the ESA was
    disclosed in local language to the NGOs and the local stakeholders including the local communities in the Project
    area in July 2013 and published on the client's website on July 9, 2013. The integrated ESA report was published by
    the Bank on July 10, 2013.

    During project implementation, public consultations were held in four communities in the vicinity of the power
    plant (Public Consultation Report May 2017) to raise awareness of the Project works, seek feedback on concerns,
    and disseminate a community grievance redress mechanism. The consultations identified concerns about potential
    health and environmental impacts, made recommendations for regular monitoring of relevant indicators, and for
    the maintenance of multiple communication channels with concerned stakeholders. The Public Consultation Report
    (along with documentation for the Grievance Redress Mechanism, Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan and
    supplement Environmental Management Plan) have been published by the client in country, and by the Bank.

 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Date of submission for disclosure
13-Jun-2013                                                  10-Jul-2013
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                          - 11 -
                      The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Electric Power Project (P143988)



         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
            Myanmar                                                           09-Jul-2013
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
11-Oct-2017                                                               24-Oct-2017
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
          Myanmar                                                             17-Oct-2017
           Comments
           http://www.moep.gov.mm/sites/default/files/ARAP%20and%20EMP%20%2811.10.2017%29.pdf
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Date of submission for disclosure
10-Jul-2013                                                                   10-Jul-2013
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
            Myanmar                                                           09-Jul-2013
            Comments
            The overwhelming majority (over 90 percent) of people in the Project's influence area are Indigenous Peoples and,
            therefore, a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has not been prepared, but relevant elements of the policy have
            been integrated into project design and summarized in the PAD. In line with OP 4.10 requirements, this includes
            continued consultation to be carried out during the project implementation.


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE

                                                                     - 12 -
         The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Electric Power Project (P143988)



  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                  Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                  Yes
 credit/loan?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                  No
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            framework/process
                                                                                  Yes
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                  Yes
 Manager review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                    No

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
                                                                                  Yes
 leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

 Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                               23



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                  Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups   Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies

                                                         - 13 -
          The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Electric Power Project (P143988)



Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Sunil Kumar Khosla


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.




                                                           - 14 -
