The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2018| Report No: ISDSR24598




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Binyam Reja
                            Task Team Leader:      Yang Chen
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P132775                                                      China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Yang Chen                                                    China
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    31-Mar-2015                                                  Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR10


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             227.49
    Total Financing                                                                                                227.49
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 150.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                           77.49
         Borrower                                                                                                   77.49


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to provide residents in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture with improved
    connectivity between rural and urban areas.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The US$150 million loan for the Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project was approved by the Board on March 31, 2015 and
was signed on May 25, 2015. The loan became effective on August 14, 2015 and has a closing date of June 30, 2021. The
Project development objective (PDO) is to provide residents in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia Prefecture with improved
connectivity between rural and urban areas. The project comprises three components: Wuwei Road Network
Improvement, Linxia Road Network Improvement, and Technical Assistance and Project Management. The main civil
works of the project includes new construction and rehabilitation of 15 rural or urban roads in Wuwei and Linxia of Gansu
Province.

During project implementation, 2 out of 15 project roads were moved out of the project and one road has a reduced scope
due to duplication with recent domestically-funded road construction works. Wuwei and Linxia proposed three new roads
as replacement. Therefore, at the restructuring stage, we focus on the three newly proposed roads: two in Gulang County
of Wuwei Municipality and one in Linxia County. In Gulang County of Wuwei, an existing 6m-wide urban road from the
Gulang Town to Shuangta Industrial Park will be rehabilitated to 26m-wide urban arterial road. The total length is 6.02
km. This rehabilitation work will be implemented within the existing right-of-way. A 17m-wide new urban road will be
built on the southern edge of Tenggeli Desert to improve access of resettled high-poverty population to two main roads.
Its total length is 6.424 km. In Linxia County, a new road will be built largely on an existing rural road in its southern
mountainous region connecting poor villages to industrial parks. The total length of this road is 13.61km with a width of
11 m to 12 m.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project sites are in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia County, Gansu Province. Wuwei Municipality, located
    at the eastern end of the Gansu Hexi Corridor, is a prefecture-level city in northwest central Gansu Province.
    Wuwei Municipality has one urban district and three counties with a land area of 33,000 square-km and a
    population of 1.9 million. The project area in Wuwei Municipality is in the alluvial and fluvial plain in front of
    the Qilian Mountain. The area belongs to arid zone of cold temperate zone, with precipitation of 60-610 mm
    and evaporation up to 3,000 mm. Linxia County is located in the middle of Gansu Province, the transition
    zone of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and Loess Plateau. Linxia County of the Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture,
    consists of 19 townships with a population of 389,000 and a land area of 1,212 square-km. It has a
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



mountainous climate with continental and monsoon features. Annual average temperature is -12.7oC –
26.0oC. Annual precipitation is 628.5 mm, and evaporation is 541.9mm. The rural roads to be upgraded in
Linxia are all existing roads along the flood plain and terrace of small valleys. Under the restructuring, two
roads are in the outskirt of Wuwei, and one road is in the rural area of Linxia County. In Wuwei, a new road
will be built on the southern edge of the Tenggeli Desert, the 4th largest desert of China, characterized by
torrential wind and dry weather with annual precipitation of 102.9 mm and evaporation of 2258.8 mm.
Another proposed road is the rehabilitation of an existing road which was altered from a railway to an
asphalt paved road several years ago, thus the road base is much higher than the roofs of the residential
houses along this road. Good engineering design has been adopted in the road works to collect the rainwater
on the road surface to protect the houses. In Linxia County, the proposed rural road is in its southern
mountainous area, along the middle-downstream Huaishuguan River which provides a relatively flat
topography. The catchment area of the Huaishuguan River is 238 km2 and the annual flow rate averages 1.49
m3/s with most occurring in summer. The catchment is narrow, consisting of landform made up of mixture
of stone and forests. To use its good potential for electricity generation due to the large drop of river level,
there are four small diversion conduit type hydropower stations on the river section within the project area.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Youxuan Zhu, Social Safeguards Specialist
Yongli Wang, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 The proposed project will improve local transport
                                                                 infrastructure, rural-urban connectivity and rural
                                                                 accessibility to urban public services in project area.
                                                                 In Wuwei, part of the existing road (A9 road;
                                                                 width:7.5 meters) to be rehabilitated is within the
                                                                 boundary of a Class II Zone (buffer zone) drinking
                                                                 water source protected area of the Dajingxia
                                                                 Reservoir and Liujiatan in Dajing Town. In Linxia
                                                                 County, partial alignment of the rural road (road
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     width: 7.5 meters) to be rehabilitated runs along
                                                                 the bank of the Liujiaxia Reservoir. These existing
                                                                 roads currently pose risks to the drinking water
                                                                 sources due to the deteriorated road conditions
                                                                 and inadequate safety facilities. Rehabilitation of
                                                                 these roads would significantly reduce risks to
                                                                 these water sources because of the improved road
                                                                 conditions and the provision of safety facilities. The
                                                                 EA proposes both engineering measures and
                                                                 specific mitigation measures, such as provision of
The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                         surface runoff and accident spill collection and
                                                         storage tanks along the sections close to water
                                                         source protection areas, drainage system, anti-
                                                         crash barriers, warning signs, and speed control
                                                         measures, etc.

                                                         Most of the adverse environmental impacts of the
                                                         project are related to construction activities, such
                                                         as nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater, borrow
                                                         and disposal sites, soil erosion, disturbance to local
                                                         traffic, communities and irrigation system. During
                                                         operations, adverse impacts include vehicle noise
                                                         and emission, road safety, and the potential
                                                         leakage of fuel and chemicals from vehicles, etc.
                                                         The EA concludes that these potential adverse
                                                         impacts and risks can be mitigated with the
                                                         engineering      design,       good      construction
                                                         management practice, and other proposed
                                                         mitigation measures.

                                                         With respect to the cumulative impacts, key Valued
                                                         Ecosystem        Components        (VECs)       under
                                                         consideration include soil, acoustic environment,
                                                         water quality and air quality. The EA shows that the
                                                         project will have very limited contribution to the
                                                         cumulative impacts given that (i) the project only
                                                         accounts for 0.06% (in terms of new road length) of
                                                         the total roads in Linxia; and 1.5% of the total roads
                                                         in Wuwei; and (ii) 57% of the road investments (in
                                                         terms of road length) of the project are for the
                                                         rehabilitation of existing roads. To minimize the
                                                         potential impacts such as soil erosion and traffic
                                                         noise, a specific water and social conservation plan
                                                         has been developed for Wuwei and Linxia
                                                         respectively. Noise monitoring and noise
                                                         abatement measures have been proposed in the
                                                         ESMP.

                                                         To the date of the restructuring, the EMP is being
                                                         satisfactorily implemented. Although at the
                                                         beginning of the implementation, there are some
                                                         drawbacks, i.e. inclusion of ECOP into contracts,
                                                         environmental monitoring quality, found in the
                                                         environmental performance in 2016 which result in
                                                         an MS rating, the PMOs of Wuwei and Linxia took
                                                         prompt correction and strengthened their capacity
                                                         by hiring qualified EA Consultant. In the following
The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                         supervision missions in 2017, the environmental
                                                         performance was found satisfactory.

                                                         Among the factors that contribute to achieving the
                                                         desirable outcome, the high willingness and
                                                         commitment to the EMP by the PMOs of Wuwei
                                                         and Linxia, is the most important factor. Adequate
                                                         resources have been allocated and put into practice
                                                         by the PMOs to the implementation of EMP, which
                                                         ensured the strong institutional setup for
                                                         coordination, training, monitoring, review and
                                                         implementation of the mitigation measures.

                                                         As required by the legal agreements of the project,
                                                         the PMOs prepared and submitted the bi-annual
                                                         EMP timely to the WBG, and these reports were
                                                         found comprehensively and satisfactorily reflect
                                                         the status of the implementation. The site visits by
                                                         the task team confirmed the above conclusions.

                                                         For the new proposed roads in the counties of
                                                         Gulang and Linxia, the PMOs will continue to keep
                                                         its strong commitment to the environmental
                                                         management.

                                                         The proposed three roads under the restructuring
                                                         stage are well aligned with the objective of the
                                                         project. The two proposed roads are in the outskirt
                                                         of Wuwei and the other is in the rural area of Linxia.
                                                         Most of the adverse environmental impacts of the
                                                         proposed three roads are related to construction
                                                         activities, such as nuisance of dust and noise,
                                                         wastewater, borrow and disposal sites, soil erosion,
                                                         disturbance to local traffic, communities and
                                                         irrigation system. During operations, adverse
                                                         impacts include vehicle noise and emission, road
                                                         safety, and the potential leakage of fuel and
                                                         chemicals from vehicles, etc. The three proposed
                                                         roads will not affect the Dajingxia Reservoir and
                                                         Liujiaxia Reservoir, nor the drinking water sources.
                                                         The EA concludes that these potential adverse
                                                         impacts and risks can be mitigated with the
                                                         engineering      design,      good      construction
                                                         management practice, and the proposed mitigation
                                                         measures.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                                EIA and EMP have been prepared which contain the
                                                                traffic management measures, borrow pits and
                                                                spoil disposal site management measures, labor
                                                                camp management plan, soil erosion management
                                                                plan, and noise monitoring plan, etc.

Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                The project is located in areas that have been
                                                                disturbed by intensive human activities. In Linxia,
                                                                approximately 89% of total land affected (158ha)
                                                                are farmland, existing roads, land for economic
                                                                trees (e.g., planted fruit or timber trees) and
                                                                residential land. The remaining 10.9% are grassland
                                                                and green belt along the existing roads. In Wuwei,
                                                                approximately 56.6% of the total land affected
                                                                (235ha) are farmland, residential land, and existing
                                                                roads; while the remaining 43% is wasteland in
                                                                desert area. Wuwei is facing desertification
                                                                problems, with 39% of its land being desert. The EA
                                                                confirms that there are no endangered species in
                                                                the project area that could be affected by project
                                                                interventions.

                                                                Road investments include 40 bridges (25 in Linxia
                                                                and 15 in Wuwei) with bridge length varying from
                                                                15-155m and width varying from 8-28m.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes                  Construction activities for 25 bridges in Linxia are
                                                                expected to affect river systems-seasonal streams
                                                                or perennial streams; i.e., Daxia River and its
                                                                branches. Soil erosion caused by the construction
                                                                activities may increase the sediment concentration
                                                                in Daxia River and cause deposits in the lower
                                                                stream of the river. If no mitigation measures are
                                                                taken, project construction may increase soil
                                                                erosion by 78,427 tons in Linxia and by 92,172 tons
                                                                in Wuwei during five year construction phase and
                                                                three years after the construction.

                                                                Daixa River and its small branches have been
                                                                influenced by human activities. Natural Habitats
                                                                policy (OP4.04) was triggered for precautionary
                                                                purpose. Mitigation measures for construction
                                                                have been proposed in the ESMP.

                                                                The project will affect 29,969 trees in Wuwei and
                                                                18,087 trees in Linxia. The affected trees are
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                                timber/fruit trees planted by farmers in the land
                                                                close to their villages or houses, or green belt along
                                                                the existing roads. Compensation for the trees has
                                                                been specified in the RAP. The project will not have
                                                                any impacts on the health and quality of forests,
                                                                nor affect the rights and welfare of people and their
                                                                level of dependence upon or interaction with
                                                                forests. Forests policy (OP4.36) is not deemed
                                                                triggered.

                                                                Under Linxia County, the proposed road will be
                                                                built along the Huaishuguan River, with two new
                                                                bridges to be built over this river. The water quality
                                                                in this river is fairly good as high as Grade II, but its
                                                                hydrology has already been altered by the tail
                                                                water discharged from some small hydropower
                                                                stations without dams. This river is not a critical
                                                                natural habitat, its ecology is simple and common,
                                                                dominated by common benthic species, such as
                                                                loach. There is neither rare/endangered species,
                                                                nor areas for breeding, overwintering and feeding.
                                                                In addition, drinking water intakes will not be
                                                                involved. This new road will involve construction of
                                                                two bridges on the Huaishuguan River, one is 126
                                                                m long and the other is 19 m long. Construction of
                                                                the bridges may cause water pollution by
                                                                wastewater and solid waste. With typical measures
                                                                used in bridge construction, such impact will be
                                                                adequately mitigated so that will not cause
                                                                significant conversion or degradation of this river.

                                                                The project will not have impacts on the health and
                                                                quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare
                                                                of people and their level of dependence upon or
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No                    interaction with forests, nor aim to bring about
                                                                changes in the management, protection, or
                                                                utilization of natural forest or plantations. This
                                                                policy is not triggered.
                                                                The project will not include any procurement of
                                                                pesticides or pesticide application equipment; nor
                                                                introduce any new pest management practices, or
                                                                expand/alter existing pest management practices;
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                                nor lead to substantially increased pesticide use
                                                                and subsequent environmental and health risks.
                                                                Road maintenance in the project area will not
                                                                involve the use of pesticides due to the elevation
      The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                               and climate conditions in Wuwei and Linxia. This
                                                               policy is not triggered.
                                                               Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): Ten mosques
                                                               and one Taosim temple are identified in the vicinity
                                                               of the alignments of four existing rural roads in
                                                               Linxia County. These mosques are recent buildings
                                                               built between 1982-2010 and serve religious
                                                               services for about 5,000 Muslim people. The
                                                               Taoism temple (Guodongshan Temple) was built
                                                               over 200 years ago and serves the Taoism
                                                               community of about 2,000 people in the area.
                                                               Neither the mosques nor temple are registered as
                                                               cultural relics. However, they are considered as
                                                               PCRs due to their religious and cultural significance
                                                               to local communities.

                                                               The completion of the road renovation will provide
                                                               better road condition and safety for the local
                                                               communities to access these religious services. All
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 the mosques and temple are outside the right-of-
                                                               way of the projects roads, with distance between
                                                               10-180m. The road construction will not directly
                                                               acquire the land nor encroach the property of these
                                                               mosques and the temple. However, construction
                                                               will likely cause short adverse impacts, including
                                                               noise impact on religious events, and disturbance
                                                               to accessibility to these places. Mitigation
                                                               measures have been specified in the ESMP. In
                                                               addition, total 345 household graves will be
                                                               relocated due to the project. Based on field survey
                                                               and public consultation, it is concluded that these
                                                               graves are with insignificant archaeological and
                                                               historical value.

                                                               The three newly proposed roads under this
                                                               restructuring will not involve any physical cultural
                                                               resources.
                                                               Linxia is a Hui autonomous county. In the project
                                                               sites, there are 23 project villages with
                                                               concentrations of Hui people and 6 villages with
                                                               concentrations of Dongxiang. They account for
                                                               49.6% and 56.3% of the total villagers in the project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes
                                                               sites, respectively. These ethnic people meet the
                                                               definition of the Bank IP term. On the other hand,
                                                               in Wuwei Municipality, there are only 196 ethnic
                                                               minority people (0.17 % of local total villagers)
                                                               living scattered throughout 41 villages, and in the
      The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                               project areas, they are well integrated with the
                                                               majority-Han People. They are very similar to Han
                                                               people in terms of social welfare, rights, social
                                                               security, language, cultural and living customs.
                                                               Thus OP4.10 is not applicable to these people in
                                                               Wuwei. Overall, the task team concludes that the
                                                               Bank’s OP4.10 policy on Indigenous People is
                                                               triggered. A Social Assessment as required by the
                                                               policy has been conducted with a report, and an
                                                               Ethnic Minority Development Plan has been
                                                               prepared by the client.

                                                               For three new roads under the Project
                                                               restructuring, one is located in Linxia County, which
                                                               involves acquisition of 542 mu farmland and
                                                               relocation of 13 households. A total of 420
                                                               households and 1758 persons would be affected,
                                                               with one third being Hui people. Following the
                                                               practice of project preparation, a social assessment
                                                               and an EMDP has been prepared along with a
                                                               supplement RAP for the new road in Linxia County.

                                                               Land acquisition caused by project construction is
                                                               unavoidable in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia
                                                               County. The main involuntary resettlement impacts
                                                               will include ground structure demolition,
                                                               temporary and permanent land acquisition. Two
                                                               Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been
                                                               prepared in both English and Chinese for Wuwei
                                                               and Linxia. In the project preparation phase,
                                                               locations of some subcomponents might not be
                                                               determined or might change during project
                                                               implementation; therefore both Wuwei and Linxia
                                                               have prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                  (RPF) as an annex in their RAPs.

                                                               Linkage projects: The Golden Avenue (Jinse Dadao
                                                               Road) in Wuwei is identified as the only linkage
                                                               project as defined by the OP4.12. Given that
                                                               resettlement of the road has been completed, a
                                                               due diligence study on its resettlement was done
                                                               and included in the Wuwei RAP. There is no legacy
                                                               issue about this project land acquisition.

                                                               To the date of the restructuring, the RAP is being
                                                               satisfactorily implemented in general. One issue is
                                                               that the compensation rates implemented for
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                                                                        acquiring farmland are lower than those in the
                                                                        original RAPs. County governments adopted
                                                                        compensation rates based on Gansu Provincial
                                                                        Government approved compensation rates to
                                                                        avoid different rates being applied in local areas.
                                                                        The implemented compensation rates were either
                                                                        the same or higher than the approved provincial
                                                                        compensation rates, and the monitoring reports
                                                                        confirmed that affected people were pleased with
                                                                        the compensation received. The project team
                                                                        considered they are acceptable by the Bank, while
                                                                        additional assessment is ongoing to make sure this
                                                                        standard can fully restore income and livelihood for
                                                                        the affected people.

                                                                        For the three new roads proposed under the
                                                                        Project restructuring, two of them involve
                                                                        additional land acquisition. One is located in Gulang
                                                                        County in Wuwei Municipality and one is located in
                                                                        Linxia County. For the one in Gulang County, a total
                                                                        of 62 mu of farmland will be acquired affecting 56
                                                                        households. For the one in Linxia County, a total of
                                                                        542 mu farmland will be acquired, affecting 420
                                                                        households and 1758 persons, including 13
                                                                        households and 85 persons to be relocated. For
                                                                        such impacts, two separate additional RAPs have
                                                                        been prepared.
                                                                        The project will not finance construction or
                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No                     policy.

                                                                        Not applicable
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No                     Not applicable
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     Not applicable
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Environmental
      Environmental Impacts (OP4.01): The project will improve local transport infrastructure, rural-urban connectivity and
      rural accessibility to urban public services in project area. For the three replacement roads added at the restructuring
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



  stage, the impacts in construction stage will include the dust, noise, wastewater, solid waste, soil erosion, labor
  camps, borrow and disposal sites, traffic disturbance and road safety; impacts in operation stage include the noise
  and vehicular emission, road safety and accident of water pollution. The EA concludes that the potential adverse
  impacts are moderate and have been minimized and can be adequately mitigated with good engineering design,
  management practice and mitigation measures.

  With respect to the cumulative impacts, key Valued Ecosystem Components (VECs) under consideration include soil,
  acoustic environment, water quality and air quality. The EA shows that the project will have very limited contribution
  to the cumulative impacts given that (i) the project only accounts for 0.06% (in terms of new road length) of the total
  roads in Linxia; and 1.5% of the total roads in Wuwei; and (ii) 57% of the road investments (in terms of road length)
  of the project are for the rehabilitation of existing roads. To minimize the potential impacts such as soil erosion and
  traffic noise, a specific water and social conservation plan has been developed for Wuwei and Linxia respectively.
  Noise monitoring and noise abatement measures have been proposed in the ESMP.

  Natural Habitats (OP4.04): The project is located in areas that have been disturbed by intensive human activities. The
  replacement road proposed in Linxia will potentially affect the Huaishuguan River by wastewater and solid waste
  discharge, particularly during the construction of two bridges on it. Although the Huaishuguan River has fairly good
  water quality, its hydrology has been largely influenced by tail water discharged from small hydropower stations
  without dams. The Huaishuguan River is not a critical natural habitat. Mitigation measures have been carefully
  designed, including construction in low flow season, and incorporated into the ESMP.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): The three proposed replacement roads at the restructuring stage will not
  involve any physical cultural resources.

  Social
  The project will have social impacts related to the need for land acquisition and demolition of a number of structures.
  For the three replacement roads proposed under the project restructuring, two of them involve additional land
  acquisition: one in Gulang County of Wuwei and one in Linxia County of Linxia Prefecture. For the road in Gulang
  County, a total of 62 mu of farmland will be acquired affecting 56 households. For one road in Linxia County, a total
  of 542 mu farmland will be acquired, affecting 420 households and 1758 persons, including 13 households and 85
  persons to be relocated. For such impacts, two separate new RAPs have been prepared. For the new road in Linxia
  County, since one third of the people affected by land acquisition and all people to be physically displaced are Hui
  ethnic minorities, one supplement EMDP is prepared.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The drainage and sewer pipelines constructed as part the project roads will improve wastewater collection efficiency
  of the urban areas of the project cities, thus contribute to the improvement of water environment. With the
  improvement of transport infrastructure, future investment will likely be increased in the project area, providing local
  residents with employment opportunities.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The EA includes a review of the alternatives for the road alignments and a “with vs without project? analysis. Proposals
  that may cause significant adverse impacts on PCRs or natural habitats were dropped as a result of the EA and the
      The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



 feasibility study. Some engineering designs that do not have significant environmental and social impacts are not
 discussed in the EA, but covered in the detailed feasibility study. Efforts also were made to minimize resettlement
 impact and negative impact to Hui communities as much as possible.

 The EAs for the three proposed roads undertake a comprehensive analysis of the alternatives to avoid , minimize and
 mitigate the potential adverse impacts, including the “ with and without project? , road alignment, location of borrow
 and spoil sites, location of labor camps, noise mitigation techniques, etc. for the road proposed under Linxia County,
 the number of bridges to be built on the Huaishuguan River has been reduced from three to two with the cooperation
 of EA team and the feasibility study team, so as to minimize the impact on the water quality in Huaishuguan River.
 For the roads under Wuwei, no alternative alignment is developed given that a straight line road on the edge of the
 Lenggeli Desert is obviously the best without involving sensitive receptors and thus at the lowest cost and the least
 environmental and social impacts, while the other is the solely rehabilitation work on the existing road within its
 rights-of-road without involving land occupation and resettlement, thus obviously the best alignment at
 environmental, social, technical and financial aspects.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Environmental (OP/BP4.01): A stand-alone Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared
 for Linxia and Wuwei, based on the above environmental assessment. For the three proposed replacement roads,
 stand-alone supplemental ESMP also have been prepared. The ESMP includes, but is not limited to:
 a) Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for inclusion in the bidding documents and civil work
 contracts;
 b) Specific mitigation measures during design and construction phases, such as (i) road drainage system and road
 safety design, and provision of road safety facilities; (ii) balance of cut and fill for construction activities; (iii)
 management of borrow and disposal sites, camps, nuisance of dust, noise, waste, and wastewater; (iv) specific soil
 erosion management plan; (iv) mitigation measures to avoid or mitigate disturbance to local communities, traffic,
 religious activities, utilities and irrigation system;
 c) Specific measures proposed for the operation phase including (i) road maintenance (e.g. road safety, drainage
 system); (ii) noise monitoring and noise mitigation measures; (iii) measures to protect water sources/streams; and
 (iv) emergency measures for the potential leakage of chemicals and fuel;
 d) Water sources protection measures including: (i) provision of surface runoff and accident spill collection and
 storage tanks along the sections close to water source protection areas; (ii) drainage system; (iii) anti-crash barriers;
 and warning signs, and speed control measures etc.; and
 e) A social management plan based on the major findings and recommendations from the Social Assessment.

 Natural Habitats (OP4.04): Mitigation measures for the bridge construction have been proposed in the ESMP. A Soil
 and Water Conservation Plan, as part of the ESMP, has been developed for Linxia and Wuwei respectively including
 mitigation measures, monitoring plan and the budget. With these mitigation measures, soil erosion caused by
 construction activities can be substantially reduced.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): To protect PCRs, consultation with local communities (especially Muslim
 communities) has been conducted and necessary mitigation measures incorporated into the ESMPs, which include
 (but not limited to): training of construction workers to respect local culture; provision of temporary access to ensure
 accessibility; prior notice of construction activities and schedule; use of low noise equipment in the vicinity of the
 mosques and temple; and optimizing construction time and activities to avoid disturbance to religious events. For the
 relocation of household graves, compensation measures have been included in the RAPs. Chance Find Procedures for
 PCRs are included in the ESMP.
     The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)




The ESMP specifies environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangement, capacity building activities, and the
budget for the ESMP implementation.

Gansu Province has worked with the Bank since 1980s. At present, it has four ongoing projects financed by the Bank.
The province is familiar with the Bank’s procedures and requirements. Under the provincial level, project
implementation and coordination will be carried out by Wuwei Municipality and Linxia County. Wuwei and Linxia
have established their Project Leading Group (PLG) with a vice mayor or a county governor as the head of the PMOs,
assisted by a number of government agencies. PMOs have been established under the guidance of the PLGs. The
PMOs consist of departments responsible for financial, engineering, procurement, social and environmental
management. ESMP implementation will be managed by Wuwei PMO and Linxia PMO. An environmental
management unit will be established in the PMOs respectively with designated environmental staff. The contractors
and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective
implementation of the ESMPs. As per the ESMP, PMO will receive more training during project implementation.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) In accordance with local laws and Bank requirements, Resettlement Action Plans
(RAP) and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) for the two project sites of Wuwei and Linxia were prepared in
Chinese and English by the Wuwei and Linxia PMOs, with assistance from house demolition offices, local land bureaus,
affected villages and communities, potentially displaced persons, and a consultative team from Hehai University.

RAPs were prepared in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement. Key principles, compensation standards and salient activities in project design and RAP preparation
included:
•    Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized as much as possible.
•    A socio-economic survey will be conducted to determine baseline conditions, especially of project affected
persons.
•    Compensation for houses or other properties will be determined at full replacement value.
•    Compensation will be provided to all project affected persons, including those who lack house registration or
other documents, such as legal documents.
•    Basic infrastructure and service facilities will be provided in areas where project affected persons will be
resettled.
•    Affected persons will be consulted during planning for acquisition of land and other assets, and provision of
rehabilitation.
•    Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made available when required.
•    Special consideration will be given to vulnerable groups.
•    Institutional arrangements will be established to ensure effective and timely design, planning, consultation and
implementation of the RAP.
•    Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation will be executed.

Two RPFs for Wuwei and Linxia were developed as Annexes in the RAPs according to relevant local laws and
regulations as well as World Bank’s OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement for components that might change their
location during project implementation. The RPF describes the overall legal framework, planning principles,
procedures, compensation and rehabilitation approach, consultation and participation requirements, grievance
redress mechanisms, organization and monitoring arrangements.

A Due Diligence Review had been conducted for involuntary resettlement practices for Linkage project identified. The
Report showed that there is no legacy issue in terms of involuntary resettlement.
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)




  Indigenous People (OP4.10): A social assessment (SA) has been carried out during project preparation, with a focus
  on positive impacts, negative impacts, and actions for project design and construction. Hui ethnic minority groups
  were identified as IP group in 23 project villages and Dongxiang ethnic minority group as IP group in 6 villages of
  Linxia. The social assessment (SA) was conducted by a qualified team including economists and sociologists, who
  carried out intensive fieldwork in selected sample villages. The villages/communities fully understood the potential
  risks and opportunities associated with the project, and expressed their interest, enthusiasm and broad support to
  the project activities.

  Key findings of the SA include: ethnic minority people of Hui and Dongxiang live concentrated in 29 project villages in
  Linxia and the Bank IP policy (OP 4.10) is triggered. The project faces some risks and negative impacts such as land
  acquisition, tomb relocation, house demolition, dust and noise pollution, temporary and partial road blocks, and
  traffic jams during project construction. The project has a range of positive benefits, such as improving roads
  accessibility, safety and transportation efficiency, bringing opportunities of employment and income for local people.
  Road supporting facilities, road maintenance and traffic management are essential. Public publicity and participation
  are critical to optimize project design and smoothen project implementation. The SA report suggests a social
  management plan with measures to address social risks and benefits with roles of relevant project stakeholders. The
  SA report was shared with the FS, EA and design teams to ensure the SA findings and action plan are reflected in the
  project feasibility study report, and separate social safeguards instruments of RAP and EMDP.

  Based on the findings of the SA, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was developed to ensure that project
  activities on roads development in Linxia are offered to these communities in the same way as other project
  beneficiaries and that their participation in the Project would be encouraged.

  For the three new roads proposed under the Project, two of them involve additional land acquisition. One is located
  in Gulang County in Wuwei and one is located in Linxia County. A total of 604 mu of farmland will be acquired for the
  construction of these two roads and 13 households will be relocated. For such impacts, two separate new RAPs have
  been prepared. The new RAPs adopted the Gansu Provincial Unified Compensation Standards as compensation rate
  for acquiring farmland in Gulang and Linxia, which are lower than the compensation rates set in the original RAPs.
  Based on team's initial assessment and external monitoring reports, the Provincial Unified Compensation Standards
  are adequate for mitigating the impacts and meet the Bank's safeguard policy. The client and external consultants are
  currently carrying out additional assessment on the compensation standards, which will be completed by September
  2018. Based on the outcome of the assessment, the RAPs might be updated to ensure the proposed compensation
  rates will be able to restore income and livelihood for the affected people.

  For the new road in Linxia County,since one third of the people affected by land acquisition and all people to be
  physically displaced are Hui ethnic minorities, one supplement EMDP is prepared.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The main stakeholders are project affected people in local communities. In accordance with the Bank’s OP4.01, public
  consultations were conducted during the EA process, including questionnaire surveys and public meetings with
  project affected people and relevant stakeholders (e.g., mosques/temple management committees). Information
  about the project, potential environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to
  the public during consultation. Their concerns have been addressed in the project design and in the EAs and the
  ESMPs.
                       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



                  The EA document for Wuwei was disclosed at local villages and the government’s website on January 4, 2014; while
                  EA document for Linxia was disclosed at local villages and the government’s website on December 26, 2013. Updated
                  EA documents were re-disclosed locally on August 15, 2014. The EA documents in Chinese and English were disclosed
                  in the Bank Infoshop on August 19, 2014, and re-disclosed in September 2014. The social safeguards documents for
                  Linxia were locally disclosed on August 11, 2014 and for Wuwei on August 15, 2014. The social safeguards documents
                  in Chinese and English were disclosed in the Bank Infoshop on August 18, 2014. For three replacement roads, RAP
                  and EMDP for Linxia was locally disclosed between March and April 2018, and for Gulang, RAP was locally disclosed
                  between October and December 2017.

                  For the three proposed replacement roads, two rounds of information disclosure and public consultation were
                  conducted for the supplemental EA. For the proposed road under Linxia County, local water resource bureau and EPB
                  were consulted on the ecological significance of the Huaishuguan River and the proposed mitigation measures. The
                  draft supplemental EA document has been disclosed at local government websites and the affected villages, with the
                  advertisements published on local prime newspaper on December 26, 2017 for Linxia and July 26, 2017 for Gulang.
                  Both draft supplemental RAPs and EMDP have been disclosed at local government websites and local project areas,
                  with advertisements published in local prime newspaper for Linxia between March and April 2018, and for Gulang
                  County, RAP was locally disclosed between October and December 2017.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
        16-Apr-2018                                                       17-Apr-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            China                                                            18-Apr-2018
            Comments
            for the newly added roads at restructuring stage


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
12-Sep-2018                                                                12-Sep-2018
                            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
          China                                                                 13-Sep-2018
           Comments
           RAP for Linxia newly added road was revised after RSS review and disclosed again.
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure
29-Mar-2018                                                                      30-Mar-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            China                                                                01-Apr-2018
            Comments
            for the newly added roads at restructuring stage



       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                   Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                     Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                        Yes



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                       NA
        The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                     NA
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                     NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       Yes

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                   85

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    Yes
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  1,926



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Project (P132775)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Yang Chen
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Ji You

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Peter Leonard                             17-Sep-2018

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
