The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2016| Report No: ISDSR20008




                        Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                               Country Director:    Rachid Benmessaoud
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Juergen Voegele
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Mark E. Cackler
                             Task Team Leader:      Abdoulaye Toure
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust
P112684
                                                               Fund
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Abdoulaye Toure                                                Western Africa
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
04-Dec-2008                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GFA13

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
33,400,000.00                                                  33,400,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Trust Funds                                                                                          33,400,000.00
Total                                                                                                33,400,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)



    Current Project Development Objective
    To strengthen Africa’s capacity for agricultural innovation with purposefully determined outcomes, creating capacity
    forinnovationand enabling environments for implementation.


    Proposed New PDO
    To strengthen Africa’s capacity and commitment to implement the Science Agenda for African Agriculture.
.


3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

       FARA is a continent-wide umbrella organization bringing together and forming coalitions of major stakeholders in
       agricultural research and development in Africa. In 2015, FARA carried out a major restructuring and revision of its
       MTOP in response to a shortfall in financial resources. A new organizational structure was put in place and, as a
       result, staff size significantly reduced and skill mix rationalized. The revised MTOP (MTOP2-R), covering the period
       2016 to 2018 and consisting of the following three Core Programs became operational in 2016.
           (a) Innovation Systems and Partnerships
                 Strengthening and out-scaling of innovation and thematic platforms
                 Partnerships and innovative funding for AR4D and S3A implementation

          (b) Capacity Development for implementation of the science agenda
               Human capital and infrastructure development and sharing
               Enhancement of institutional and agribusiness capacities
               Strengthening of AR4D quality control systems

          (c) Knowledge Management and Decision Support
               Establishment of an Observatory for the S3A and African AR4D
               Options for decision makers in support of S3A implementation.
               Communication and advocacy on AR4D and S3A

       Tracking emerging opportunities and risks and providing foresight and guidance to agricultural research and
       innovation will continue to be main activities of FARA. FARA will host the African Chapter of the Foresight
       Academy that will enable and encourage African decision makers, organizations and experts to use foresight
       systematically as a strategic tool. FARA will fulfill this mandate by continuing to spearhead and facilitate the
       Dublin Process for developing the African science agenda for agriculture. In this process, it will ensure that
       African regional institutions are brought into the science agenda and enabled to contribute and build Africa’s
       self-reliance in agricultural sciences. FARA will also continue to promote intra- and inter-continental
       platforms and partnerships, building on experiences from the North–South and South–South partnerships
       that have developed over the last ten years.

       FARA will strengthen interactions and partnerships among farmers, research, education, extension, and trade
       and agribusiness organizations. It will continue to support such recently established regional organizations
       and encourage and foster links between these organizations and others. It will also spearhead the
       identification and redefinition of skill sets as demanded by public and private sector actors. FARA will support
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)



       the development of partnerships between countries, institutions and local programs as a means to enhance
       capacity strengthening, while bringing together the critical mass needed to undertake complex agricultural
       training and advisory tasks. Strengthening human, organizational and institutional capacities for agricultural
       innovation will be one of its main activities through the selection of supporting activities that exploit FARA’s
       continental perspective by networking, coordinating and harnessing the strengths of its stakeholders.

       Finally, FARA will promote networking and facilitate engagement among the economic research community and
       policy makers concerning strategic policy issues affecting agricultural development in Africa. It will also promote the
       exchange of economic policy research results and the sharing of best practice policy options among policy research
       institutions, policy makers and the broader community of CAADP stakeholders through several avenues, including
       workshops, seminars, conferences and publications.



.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Abdelaziz Lagnaoui, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Alidu Babatu Adam, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
    Safeguard Policies                           Triggered               Explanation

    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No

    Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)              No

    Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                       No

    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                    No

    Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No

    Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)            No

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)      No

    Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No
    Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No
    (BP 7.50)
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)



Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The December 2013 Bank-approved restructuring and AF package was processed outside of the Bank’s Operations
     Portal , and, as a result, several of the approved changes were not reflected in the Portal when the FARA MDTF was
     subsequently migrated. One such change not reflected was a revision to the Environmental and Safeguards
     Category rating. As noted in the December 2013 restructuring/AF package, the original MDTF was classified as a
     category B – Partial Assessment, triggering forestry, pest management and international waterways safeguard
     policies. The overall approach to FARA sub-grants was not designed to finance any research or civil works.
     Therefore, none of the three policies were triggered during project implementation. Accordingly, the Environmental
     Category was re-categorized from B – Partial Assessment (original) to Category C – Not Required (additional
     financing). This is being included as part of this restructuring for the purpose of documenting the previously
     approved change in the Portal.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.




 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     N/A


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
     with an emphasis on potentially affected people.




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
B.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

PDI_TABLE
          The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) Trust Fund (P112684)



The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                    Abdoulaye Toure


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
