The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)




                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


      Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2017| Report No: ISDSR23315




                      Regional Vice President:    Annette Dixon
                             Country Director:    Junaid Kamal Ahmad
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Anabel Gonzalez
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Esperanza Lasagabaster
                           Task Team Leader:      Michael Olavi Engman
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P145502                                                        TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP)
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Michael Olavi Engman                                           India
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
25-Apr-2014                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GTC06

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
400,000,000.00                                                 400,000,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                 200,000,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                        200,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               400,000,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Program’s Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the productivity of MSMEs by improving their access to
    technology and business advisory services as well as skilled workers through systems of financially sustainable
    Technology Centers (TCs).


    Proposed New PDO
    The PDO is to increase access to technology and skilled workers for micro, small and medium enterprises at technology
    centers.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
This project supports the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MoMSME), Government of India,
in setting-up new and upgrading existing Technology Centers (TCs) in selected states. So far, 13 out of 15
new TCs have been identified - Bhiwadi, Durg, Rohtak, Vizag, Bengaluru, Baddi, Sitarganj, Greater Noida,
Puducherry, Imphal, Bhopal, Kanpur and Ernakulam. The 18 existing TCs to be upgraded under the project
are located at Aurangabad, Mumbai, Bhubaneswar, Jamsedpur, Kolkatta, Indore, Ludhiana, Jalandhar,
Hyderabad, Guwahati, Ahmedabad, Ramnagar, Agra (2), Meerut, Chennai, Firozabad and Kannauj.
Manufacturing has been recognized as an essential driver of economic development and has an important
economic and employment multiplier effect. MSMEs play an important role in India’s economic development
and in the creation of productive jobs. The GoI's recently-announced National Manufacturing Policy includes
an objective of creating 100 million additional jobs. However, constraints exist to growth and
competitiveness of India’s manufacturing sector, and especially for MSMEs. These bottlenecks include
constraints to market access (including domestic markets), difficulties to access finance, infrastructure
deficiencies, regulatory red tape, and difficulties for MSMEs to access technology (including
green/environment friendly) and skills. The project aims to support industrial sectors including: (a) Electrical
Systems Design & Manufacturing (ESDM); (b) Fragrances and flavors; (c) Leather and leather products; (d)
Glass and Ceramics and (e) Tooling. The specific technological and environmental (including occupational
health and safety) issues associated with each of these sectors are varied in nature. The TCs will most likely
be set up in existing Industrial Areas of a State or on available government land with ample public transport
infrastructure linkages (road, rail and air) so that they are easily accessible to all stakeholders including
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



trainees and industries. If successful, the project will directly lead to a marked improvement in the lives of
many workers and graduates in industries, with significant positive spill-over effects to the rest of the
economy, including some environmental (including occupational health and safety) benefits. Against this
backdrop, the project aims to develop the technological and skill base of MSMEs in selected manufacturing
industries, via upgraded and expanded Systems of specialized Technology Centers.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM

Samuel Thangaraj, Social Safeguards Specialist
Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Sushmita Sarkar, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered              Explanation
                                                                 Specific interventions (under Component 2)
                                                                 envisaged under the project such as creation of 15
                                                                 new Technology Centers and upgrading of building
                                                                 and related infrastructure of the existing 18 Tool
                                                                 Rooms may have some potential adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts in the local context. Even
                                                                 though it is expected that the new
                                                                 buildings/blocks would be located within an
                                                                 existing industrial estate or on available
                                                                 government       land      elsewhere,     planning,
                                                                 construction and operation of buildings would
                                                                 require appropriate integration of environment,
                                                                 health and safety measures to ensure that adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts are minimized and
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     properly managed.
                                                                 Impacts pertaining to: (a) location (environmental
                                                                 and social features of the site and surrounding
                                                                 land-uses); (b) design (sanitation, water supply,
                                                                 drainage, solid waste arrangements, waste water
                                                                 management,       ventilation,    access,   energy
                                                                 efficiency, material usage, fire safety, storage
                                                                 facility and natural disaster dimension); (c)
                                                                 construction and worksite safety management,
                                                                 including occupational health and safety of
                                                                 construction workers, public safety issues,
                                                                 management of borrow areas and debris/waste
                                                                 material; and; (d) operation/maintenance aspects
                                                                 of physical assets such as buildings,
                                                                 equipment/tools/machinery (such as sanitation
       The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



                                                   and cleanliness/hygiene in the campus and its
                                                   various facilities; waste management from
                                                   workshop floor; e-waste management; water,
                                                   noise and air pollution from generators and other
                                                   workshop       machinery     etc.).would      require
                                                   attention. There is also an opportunity to improve
                                                   the over-all environmental footprint by creating
                                                   ‘green buildings’ or ‘greener facilities’ under the
                                                   program.
                                                   On other project interventions pertaining to
                                                   training/curriculum         development          and
                                                   testing/developing prototypes the anticipated
                                                   environmental impacts are not likely to cause any
                                                   significant or serious damage to natural and
                                                   physical environment. In fact, the Program offers
                                                   opportunity to promote improved environmental
                                                   performance of the selected industrial sectors and
                                                   safer working practices through introduction of
                                                   new/              appropriate             technology
                                                   (equipment/machines) and training.
                                                   OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                   major (like building infrastructure) and minor
                                                   (tools/equipment/machinery,         training     and
                                                   curriculum related) interventions are planned and
                                                   designed to be environmentally sound by
                                                   integrating appropriate principles and approaches
                                                   into the over-all decision making process.
                                                   No physical interventions proposed under the
                                                   project are expected to affect natural habitats. No
                                                   civil works will be financed under the project in
                                                   designated         protected       areas/wilderness
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)   No
                                                   areas/critical natural habitats. The environment
                                                   screening tool will be used to ensure compliance
                                                   in this regard. Therefore, OP 4.04 is not being
                                                   triggered for the project.
                                                   OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as no
                                                   interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)            No
                                                   therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                   natural resource would occur.
                                                   OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                   biological/environmental control methods or
                                                   reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                   envisaged. In case, such a need arises on account
Pest Management (OP 4.09)         No
                                                   of selection of a specific trade/sector, the
                                                   requirement is likely to be very limited. In such a
                                                   scenario, the requirements under the pest
                                                   management policy of the Bank will be built-in as
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



                                                                  part of the over-all Environment Management
                                                                  Plan to be developed for the Technology Center/s
                                                                  in question.
                                                                  By and large, implementation of the
                                                                  project/program is not likely to affect religious
                                                                  structures of local significance. Screening and site
                                                                  verification protocols will help establish this.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                                  However, since civil works are involved, ‘chance
                                                                  finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that will have
                                                                  to be managed by incorporating appropriate
                                                                  provisions in the bidding/contract documents.
                                                                  The existing TCs are not located in areas where
                                                                  local people have characteristics as described in
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes                   OP 4.10. The new TCs will also not be located in
                                                                  such areas and this will be confirmed through
                                                                  social screening.
                                                                  Involuntary land acquisition and land purchase will
                                                                  not be done for any project activity. The facilities
                                                                  are likely to come-up on existing/available
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes                   government lands that are free from encroachers
                                                                  and/or squatters. Availability of a site free from
                                                                  encumbrances has been built-in as a criterion in
                                                                  the site selection process by the MoMSME.
                                                                  OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                  there is no construction of new dams or activities
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                                  that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                  existing dams.
                                                                  OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                                                  there are no interventions planned/proposed over
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                          or around an international waterway that could
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                         cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                  activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                  waterway.
                                                                  OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                                  proposed in any disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The establishment of 15 new TCs and strengthening of 18 existing TCs is envisaged to be completed over a six-year
   period under the project. These facilities will focus on improving access to technology, providing skill up-gradation
   and offering advocacy support for specific industries with high growth potential. The TCs provide technical advisory
   support for entrepreneurs and workers while offering opportunities for technical skill development for the youth.
    The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
    TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



The long-term vision of this project is to ensure competitiveness of the MSME sector by further strengthening its
linkages to the mainstream manufacturing sector in the country. The goal is to ensure easy access to high quality
technology and holistic skill development and training across the industry value chain, geographies and
functionalities.

Environmental Issues: While the project interventions would have an over-all positive impact on economic growth,
skill development and job creation, specific interventions under Component 2 such as the creation of 15 new TCs
and upgrading of building and related infrastructure of the existing 18 TCs may have some potential adverse
environmental impacts in the local context. Even though it is expected that the new buildings/blocks would be
located within an existing industrial estate or on available government land elsewhere, planning, construction and
operation of buildings would require appropriate integration of environment, health and safety measures to ensure
that adverse environmental impacts are minimized and properly managed.

Impacts pertaining to: (a) location (environmental and social features of the site and surrounding land-uses); (b)
design (sanitation, water supply, drainage, solid waste and waste water management, ventilation, access, energy
efficiency, material usage, fire safety, storage facility and improved resilience to natural disasters); (c) construction
and worksite safety management, including occupational health and safety of construction workers, public safety
issues, management of borrow areas and debris/waste material; and; (d) operation/maintenance aspects of
physical assets such as buildings, equipment/tools/machinery (such as sanitation and cleanliness/hygiene in the
campus and its various facilities, waste management from workshop floor, e-waste management, noise and air
pollution from generators and other workshop machinery etc.) would require attention. There is also an
opportunity to improve the overall environmental footprint by creating “green buildings? or “greener facilities?
under the project.

On other project interventions pertaining to training/curriculum development and testing/developing prototypes,
the anticipated environmental impacts are not likely to cause any significant or serious damage to natural and
physical environment. In fact, the project offers opportunities to promote improved environmental performance of
the selected industrial sectors and safer working practices through introduction of new, appropriate technology
(equipment/machines) and training.

In view of the project’s potential impacts on the environment, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been triggered, and the project is designated as Category B. With
proper management, the project interventions are not likely to cause large scale, significant or irreversible damage
to natural, physical or social environment.

Social issues/impacts: The extension/upgrading of existing TCs will take place within the existing complexes and do
not require additional land. Negative social impacts (land acquisition and associated loss of land, income, livelihoods
and full or partial displacement) are therefore unlikely. In case the extension of existing TCs requires additional land
outside existing complexes, social screening will be conducted to assess whether the required land is free from any
encumbrances and/or claims. However, establishment of new TCs may require the acquisition of land or transfers of
government land. The availability of a site free from encumbrances has been built-in as a criterion in the site
selection process by MoMSME. However, in the unlikely event of such a requirement for a specific site, the required
processes have been built into the Social Management Framework to prepare resettlement instruments, as and if
required.

The existing TCs are not located in areas where local people have characteristics as described in OP 4.10. The new
TCs will also not be located in such areas and this will be confirmed through social screening.
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  By strengthening delivery mechanisms for MSMEs, the project is likely to contribute to increased economic activity,
  and hence environmental impact that is both positive and negative. Such environmental impacts may include issues
  pertaining to resource utilization (natural resources, energy, water etc.), pollution management, occupational
  health and safety. They need to be considered as the project seeks to strengthen delivery mechanisms and seeks to
  improve the capacity of the MSME sector, even though no direct physical investment would be made beyond the
  TCs under the project.

  Further, some specific long-term environmental impacts are associated with the operation and management of the
  TCs. Appropriate water and sanitation facilities; water, noise and air pollution management; e-waste handling;
  recycling of materials and disposal of wastes are some of the issues that would require regular/continuous
  attention. However, such adverse impacts are not likely to be large-scale in nature. These can be avoided or
  minimized and the positive outcomes from the project can be enhanced substantially by putting appropriate
  institutional mechanisms, procedures and capacity in place. Considerations of environment, health and safety
  dimensions in the project design will help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of such specific programs
  from an environmental perspective.

  Social safeguards implementation of the project centers on due diligence site visits and undertaking of social
  screening to identify social risks. This process has worked well and will continue to be followed in the restructured
  project. The project has not had any adverse social impact so far. There was a site that had significant social risks –
  loss of land and livelihood of Non-Title Holders - and this site had been excluded by the MoMSME.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  As part of the project preparation process for the original project, a selection/screening methodology was
  developed to allow for appropriate selection of states, clusters and trades that will finally find coverage under the
  program. This system of selection and elimination also includes environmental and social parameters such as
  availability of unencumbered land/site. This mechanism also allows for avoiding potential impacts on
  environmentally sensitive features/areas. Further, through the application of the Environment Management
  Framework, as and where required, building orientation/design alternatives (including green/greener elements) will
  be explored to consider site specific features/constraints.

  The environment management and safeguards approach for the restructured project will also continue to focus on
  due diligence and environment screening while selecting and finalizing sites, integration of appropriate provisions in
  the DPRs and inclusion of EHS requirements in the bidding documents apart from management of environmental
  risks/issues during construction on lines similar to the parent project.

  The TCs will be established only on available government land as far as possible and will not involve any change in
  land use in most cases as the land would be made available within existing/established industrial estates.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
    TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



Safeguard policy issues have been considered by carrying out environment and social assessments and by applying
OP 4.01, OP 4. 11, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12, which has resulted in preparation of distinct safeguard instruments for the
operation. The safeguard instruments, thus prepared for the project include: (a) Environment Management
Framework (EMF) and; (b) the Social Management Framework (SMF). Specific details are given in the sections
below:

Management of Environmental Issues and Risks.

Environment Assessment. A limited Environmental Assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the MoMSME for the
project. The EA study provides an analysis of the potential positive and negative impacts of the three primary
project activities that are relevant from the environmental management and safeguards perspective. These are: (1)
creation of 15 new Technology Centers; (2) upgrading of 18 existing TCs, and (3) strengthening
technological/technical/training capabilities. As part of the EA, the current capacity of the MoMSME and the
existing Tool Rooms (as they are currently called) from an environmental management perspective was also
reviewed.

The EMF developed as an outcome of this assessment provides guidelines for site selection, design, construction
and maintenance of environment-friendly TCs in line with relevant legal and regulatory requirements of Govt. of
India and the environment safeguard policies of the World Bank. The environment management process and tool
for the project have been designed keeping in mind this varied scope of work, which includes setting-up of 15 new
TCs; upgrading of 18 existing TCs, including building, supporting infrastructure/equipment and; technical assistance
for technological and business needs support, including exposure of new technologies, providing access to cutting-
edge equipment, developing and testing new products and patenting. Accordingly, to effectively plan, design and
integrate environmental dimensions into the overall project preparation and implementation, an EMF was prepared
during preparation of the original project drawing from a limited environment assessment exercise that was
conducted by the MoMSME and experiences from the Bank funded Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP),
currently under execution apart from other projects associated with/supporting the MSMEs in the country/region.
The EMF was subsequently revised based on feedback from selected existing Tool Rooms/TCs, which are a part of
the project.

The key elements of the EMF include: (i) a screening exercise to identify key issues (such as availability of
unencumbered sites) and to consider those in the selection of sites for 15 new TCs; (ii) application and
implementation of Codes of Practice for Design and Construction of Green/-er Buildings for the 15 new and 18
existing TCs; and (iii) mainstreaming/strengthening environment, health and safety dimensions in the operations
based on the nature, need and scope of trades/sectors finally selected.

As part of training and capacity building activities, the project will support development of appropriate mechanisms
to deal with issues of occupational health and safety. Further, based on the final selection of trades/activities (based
on nature, need and scope), the project management unit will explore the opportunities for bringing in new
technologies/materials that are cost-effective, efficient and yet environment friendly. The restructured project does
not have any new component that is likely to have adverse environment impacts and, therefore, the project’s
existing EMF needs no further review and/or changes.

Borrower’s Capacity Assessment

The key implementing agency for the project is the Ministry of MSME, Govt. of India. Through the Office of
Development Commissioner, the Ministry operates ten tool rooms and eight technology development centers
   The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
   TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



(together referred as TCs). Several of these are set up through collaborations with German and Danish agencies as
well as with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). The TCs are largely self-sustaining
centers that have been providing technical and vocational training programs to more than 100,000 trainees
annually, including All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and the National Council for Vocational Training
(NCVT) approved certification. They also provide design and manufacturing support to entrepreneurs alongside
technical consultancies. There is variance in the levels of training which is demonstrative of a wide spectrum of
technical sophistication in training inputs. The evaluation studies of TCs have found a strong need to replicate the
facility at more places. The studies also point to the need for technological up-gradation, improved training output
and innovation in the business models of the Technology Centres, strengthening of workforce supply and to
increase the capacities to train youth in India.

The project aims to establish 15 new TCs and strengthen 18 existing ones during the project implementation period.
These facilities will focus on improving access to technology, providing skill upgradation and offering advocacy
support for specific industries with high growth potential. The TCs will provide technical advisory support for
entrepreneurs and workers while offering opportunities for technical skill development for the youth. It is also
envisaged that these existing TCs will act as mother units and thought leaders to the sectors and space in which
they operate. The long-term vision of this project is to ensure competitiveness of the MSME system by
strengthening further their linkages to the mainstream manufacturing sector in the country. The activities under the
project will focus on priority industries such as Tooling, Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM),
Fragrances & Flavors, Leather and leather products and Glass & Ceramics, among others. The goal is to ensure easy
access to high quality technology and holistic skill development and training across the industry value chain,
geographies and functionalities.

To succeed, the proposed project requires strong private sector involvement in all the key decisions pertaining to
the design and implementation. Also, involvement and timely coordination between MoMSME and other major
stakeholders such as the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Ministry of Communication and Information
Technology, the Ministry of Heavy Industry, the Ministry of Labor (DGE&T), Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change, State Governments (through their Department of Industries), industry associations, representatives
from the relevant business associations, industry leaders are required for strengthening the Indian MSME system.

While there is strong commitment and interest in the Ministry, there are institutional challenges and limitations in
capacity to manage an ambitious project of this nature and scale. The institutional deficiencies/gaps exist in terms
of staffing shortages, lack of up-to-date technical knowledge on various industrial sectors and lack of capacity to
coordinate/bring together a large number of diverse stakeholders in a systematic and time-bound manner. There is
a lack of quality information and understanding on what the key safeguard (environmental and social) issues, risks
and opportunities are in the context of the MSME sector. In the light of the importance of the project, complexities
involved in the operation and current limitations in institutional capacity, the preparation and implementation of
the project requires strong technical, advisory, safeguards and management support from consultants/agencies
with apt international experience and expertise to handle this program.

Management of Social Issues and Risks.

The restructured project does not have any new component or activities that are likely to have adverse social
impacts and, therefore, the project’s existing Social Management Framework needs no review and changes. The TCs
are the implementing agencies at the state level and they do not have any structure and process for addressing
social safeguard/management processes at present as the need for such a structure and process had not been felt
at the TCs so far. Nevertheless, each TC will have a designated Nodal Officer for Social Development who will not
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



 only be responsible for social safeguard process but also for social development aspects of the center such as
 gender, equity and social inclusion.

 The Nodal Officer will be present working on extension activities of the center such as support to community based
 organizations such as self-help groups for sustainable sources of livelihood and income and corporate social
 responsibility programs. In case it is not possible for a TC to appoint a Nodal Officer from among its existing staff,
 the TC will appoint a social development consultant who will work with the Project Management Unit on aspects
 related to social safeguards and development. The designation of a Nodal Officer and/or appointment of a social
 development consultant has been completed on the basis of terms of reference approved by the Bank.

 The Nodal Officers and social development consultants will undergo a series of training programs related to: (i)
 structure and process of social safeguards management; (ii) grievance redress; (iii) indigenous peoples
 development, where required; and (iv) gender, equity and social inclusion. The trainings will also focus on
 participatory planning, implementation and monitoring of SMPs/Social Safeguards Instruments such as
 Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) in case they are required in the future.
 The Project Management Unit will also organize training programs for project affected families, vulnerable sections
 among project affected families, non-government organizations, civil society organizations and community based
 organizations on: (i) income generating programs; (ii) participation and grievance redress; (iii) access to
 technical/vocational programs provided by the TC to facilitate gender, equity and social inclusion.

 The Project Management Unit will prepare a detailed plan for capacity building through a series of training
 programs and this includes the contents of training program, the methodology, the timeframe and the budget in
 consultation with the Nodal Officers, the social development consultants, the project affected families, NGOs, CSOs
 and CBOs based on focus group discussions with a view to identify the exact needs. This means the proposed
 specific capacity building programs are an outcome of a participatory process of training needs analysis within the
 broad framework outlined.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of the program
 being supported under the proposed operation: Indian MSMEs (specifically beneficiary MSMEs availing services of
 these centers, especially from auto, plastic, electronic, aerospace, consumer durables and other general
 engineering sector); larger firms (who are a part of the value chains); as well as students and workers at the TCs.
 The secondary stakeholders include officials from MoMSME, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Department of
 Science and Technology, National Skill Mission, the Regional/Sectoral Industry Associations representing MSMEs,
 trainees, the regional/national level academic and vocational training institutions.

 Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and provides for
 information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. A consultation framework has been laid out in the
 EMF and SMF to ensure proper consultation and participation of stakeholders at the various stages of project
 preparation and implementation.

 In accordance with applicable Bank policies, consultations at the local or TC level) so far have been carried out as
 part of the limited environment and social assessment process. The public consultation process has indicated that
 the stakeholders strongly support the proposed project. The feedback/inputs from these field based discussions
 have been primarily used for preparing the EMF and SMF of the project. Additionally, at the national level,
 stakeholders from the line ministries (such as Science and Technology and Ministry of Labour and Employment),
                      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



                  industry associations, cluster leaders, academia and officials from the National Skill Mission were consulted on
                  December 2, 2013. Consultations in the field as well as the national level are expected to be a regular feature of the
                  project and will add value to the decisions being finally made to support and execute the project, including on issues
                  related to mainstreaming environmental and social dimensions into the project design and execution.

                  Once the detailed plan preparation process for the various sites is initiated, specific inputs on site selection, design
                  of the facility, technological choices and other such maters are also being sought.

                  Disclosure. The Environment and Social safeguard instruments (EMF and SMF) prepared for the project have been
                  disclosed in the government website (http://dcmsme.gov.in/tcsp.html). The same have been disclosed in the Bank’s
                  Infoshop. The executive summary of the documents has been translated in Hindi and made public through
                  MoMSME’s website. Further, the documents, including the executive summaries, are available at the office of the
                  Development Commissioner, MoMSME, and all existing TCs for reference and use of interested stakeholders.

            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
        02-Dec-2013                                                         10-Dec-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            India                                                              06-Dec-2013
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
02-Dec-2013                                                                  10-Dec-2013
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
                           The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                           TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



          India                                                          06-Dec-2013
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
02-Dec-2013                                                               10-Dec-2013
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                       Date of Disclosure
            India                                                         06-Dec-2013
            Comments
            Process and requirements pertaining to OP 4.10 have been integrated into the Social Management Framework itself.
            There is no stand alone IPDP/framework.


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                            Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                              Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                              Yes
           credit/loan?



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                Yes

             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                              Yes
             impacts on cultural property?



           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)                       No
        The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             framework/process
                                                                                   Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                   Yes
Manager review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                      No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                   Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS
          The World Bank                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)



                                          Michael Olavi Engman
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Shihab Ansari Azhar

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
