The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2017| Report No: ISDSR23208




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Iain G. Shuker
                             Task Team Leader:      Dafei Huang
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P145586                                                        China Partnership for Market Readiness
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Dafei Huang                                                    China
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
16-Jun-2014                                                    Not Required (C)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEN2A

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
8,600,000.00                                                   8,600,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                     600,000.00
Trust Funds                                                                                           8,000,000.00
Total                                                                                                 8,600,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to enable China to design a national carbon emissions trading scheme.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1.        This is a recipient-executed technical assistance grant project. The proposed project has two components:


2.       Component 1: Enabling Design of Key Building Blocks for a National Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) (indicative
grant financing: US$6.5 million): The component will support technical assistance, studies, including policy research and
analysis, and workshops that aim to assist the DDC in developing the key ETS building blocks. Generally, the studies
under each sub-component will involve a series of activities that will lead to recommendations for each building block.
Stakeholder consultation will be built into the process to ensure relevant governmental agencies, industries and civil
societies’ inputs and comments are taken into account. This component consists of seven sub-components:


3.       Sub-component 1.1: Development of Methodologies for Coverage, Cap, Allocation and Supplementary
Mechanisms (indicative grant financing: US$2.0 million). This sub-component is to provide analytical support on
identifying the sectors, and the type of greenhouse gas (GHG) of the ETS. The sub-component will propose
recommendations on (a) cap setting methodology and program; (b) an initial allowance allocation methodology; (c)
price containment mechanism options; and (d) offset mechanism, including options for basic requirements for linking
national ETS with other systems.


4.      Sub-component 1.2: Development of a Legal Framework and Oversight System (indicative grant financing:
US$1.0 million). The proposed sub-component will provide analytical support for identifying (a) a management system
governing the national emissions trading market; (b) a basic legal framework for the national ETS, including
administrative rules; (c) a market oversight and compliance system plan, including scope, designated authorities, targets
and rules; and (d) treatment of participants and trading products.


5.       Sub-component 1.3: Development of a Data Collection and MRV System (indicative grant financing: US$0.8
million). The technical assistance will provide analytical and technical support for proposals on data management, GHG
emission accounting standards of enterprises and verification guidelines on selected sectors.


6.       Sub-component 1.4: Development of an ETS Registry (indicative grant financing: US$0.5 million). The activities
will provide analytical and technical support to special topics that would refine the framework of a national registry that
has been already developed, e.g. possible data management system improvements, addressing issues of relationship
between the national and local registries (i.e. clarifications of functions of registry at both the national and local levels).
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



7.       Sub-component 1.5: Research on Participation of State-owned Enterprises (indicative grant financing: US$0.3
million). This sub-component will provide analytical support to assess barriers and propose measures to facilitate
inclusion of State Owned Enterprises in the national ETS. State-Owned-Enterprises (SOEs) are considered in China as
special enterprise groups with distinctive characteristics.


8.       Sub-component 1.6: Research on Power Sector Issues for a National ETS (indicative grant financing: US$0.3
million). The component will provide supplementary analytical support for special topics relating to the inclusion of the
power sector in the national ETS including in areas of scope, cap setting methodology, MRV and other supporting
policies that would be needed to include effective participation of the power sector in the ETS.


9.       Sub-component 1.7: Provincial Level Enterprise and Economic Data Collection and Consultation (indicative grant
financing: US$1.6 million). Provincial engagement will be essential for improving the design of the ETS prior to its roll
out. In addition to local engagement activities in other subcomponents, this sub-component will support
complementary data collection, analysis, and stakeholder consultation in provinces. A wide potential scope of activities,
such as economic and energy data collections and projections or participation of provincial representatives in national
consultations, will be tailored to address specific needs to facilitate feedback and vet design aspects of the ETS.


10.       Component 2: China PMR Synthesis Report, Consultations and Project Management (indicative grant
financing: US$1.5 million): This component will support: (i) project management, including incremental operating costs,
(ii) stakeholder and expert consultations; (iii) workshops and study tours; and (iv) a synthesis report for the project
summarizing proposals and analysis supporting the national ETS scheme design. The component will finance consulting
services and consultation expenses to ensure appropriate quality control is provided for terms of reference and outputs.

The project’s proposed restructuring covers two changes of institutional arrangement:


       Change of the PMO. The borrower has proposed to relocate the day-to-day project implementation to the
        National Center for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation (NCSC), a research institute
        affiliated with the NDRC. The PMO will be housed within NCSC. A PMO Director and Executive Director are
        appointed from within NCSC staff. The PMO Director is the Deputy Director General of NCSC. The Director of
        the Carbon Market Division will be the Project’s Executive Director, who will perform the daily implementation
        of the Project. The PMO also comprises a Project Coordinator, a Project Assistant and a Project Accounting
        Officer, who are not civil servants. The Project Director or his designee, is empowered by the NDRC to sign
        documents on behalf of the PMO. This includes employment contracts, purchase of equipment and services
        and other commitments and obligations.

       Relocation of Designated Account. The DA of the CPMR Project has been proposed to relocated from the
        MOF to the execution agency NCSC. The NCSC will also be responsible for managing the DA including
        disbursing grant payments, and contracting independent external auditors annually to audit the project
        accounts.
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
This is a national technical assistance project with no physical footprint, nor will it lead to subsequent
physical investments.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM

Peishen Wang, Social Safeguards Specialist
Aimin Hao, Social Safeguards Specialist
Xiaodan Huang, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                        Triggered              Explanation



    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes



    Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No



    Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No



    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No



    Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No



    Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)      No



Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No


Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No
(BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   Associated Safeguards Risks. The technical assistance project funds the design of a national carbon emissions
   trading scheme, which will assist mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective manner. Project
   activities are policy research and analysis, technical studies, workshops and training to enable China to design a
   national carbon emissions trading scheme. The project does not include any physical works, nor will it result in any
   immediate direct physical investments. The project is likely to have minimal or no adverse impacts. It is anticipated
   to have positive impacts. Therefore, the project was classified as Category C during the PCN review and clearance of
   the project as per OP4.01.

   No separate safeguards instrument is required. As a result, the Bank’s safeguard policy does not require a formal
   environmental assessment to be produced. However, the counterpart will be asked to incorporate directly
   environmental and social safeguards policies into the relevant project activities such as sub-component 1.1. and
   sub-component 1.2. Screening for the application of safeguards policies will be done for each sub-components
   studies and term of reference developed as needed. The key Terms of Reference will be reviewed by the Bank.

   The restructuring in September 2017 only involves change of PMO and relocation of DA, the project activity
   contents remain unchanged. Therefore, there is no change of environmental and social safeguards category and no
   need for any further action.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

   See section 1.
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



   3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

     See section 1.


   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The borrower and involved agencies have very good to limited knowledge and experience in applying the World
     Bank policies. The Bank will ensure when reviewing TOR that the adequate safeguards expertise is associated to
     activities and studies taking into account safeguard policy issues.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
     with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The project design aims to enable China to design national carbon emissions trading scheme that will cap carbon
     emissions, a mitigation instrument that is expected to control carbon emissions in China. As such, the studies will
     investigate design options based on international and domestic experience. The project design includes through its
     studies workshops, interviews and analysis that incorporates views of relevant stakeholders that may be involved in
     the emissions trading scheme. The final outcome of the project is a proposal by the NDRC Department of Climate
     Change to the Vice Chairman of NDRC. The proposal is expected to be processed through an internal vetting process
     involving a wide range of central government agencies.

 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
19-Apr-2014                                                   21-Apr-2014
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 China                                                           15-Sep-2017
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  No



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    NA
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     NA
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    NA
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    NA
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                    NA
 monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
 borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               NA
 documents?




 III. APPROVALS


                                            Dafei Huang
     Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Todd M. Johnson

     Approved By

     Safeguards Advisor

     Practice Manager/Manager

 .
      The World Bank                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
