The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2019| Report No: ISDSR27755




                       Regional Vice President:   Hartwig Schafer
                             Country Director:    Junaid Kamal Ahmad
                             Regional Director:   John A. Roome
                   Practice Manager/Manager:      Michael Haney
                            Task Team Leader:     Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
               The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
               IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low
                                                                  Income States
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene                                   India
    Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
    30-Dec-2013                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
    SSAW1


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                          1,000.00
    Total Financing                                                                                             1,000.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS   -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  500.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                500.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          500.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        500.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to improve piped water supply and sanitation services for selected rural communities
    in the target states through decentralized delivery systems and to increase the capacity of the Participating States to
    respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



.

    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    The proposed project is supporting the implementation of a dedicated rural Water Supply and Sanitation
    (RWSS) Project aiming at improving piped water and sanitation coverage in four Low Income States, Assam,
    Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, through a USD 1 billion (USD 500 million IDA, and USD 500 million
    counterpart funding). The project is implemented through a special window of assistance under the on-going
    National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) of the Government of India. The project interventions will
    be at all four levels: National, State, Districts, and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI), in particular Gram
    Panchayats.
    The Project promotes decentralized service delivery arrangements with increased Panchayati Raj Institution
    (PRI) and community participation, improved financial sustainability and enhanced accountability. The Project
    is supporting the development of Single Village Schemes (SVS), where the local groundwater resources are
    sufficient, and Multi Village Schemes (MVS) where the water resources are not sufficient, and the water has to
    be conveyed from far through a bulk water system.
    The following are the key elements of the RWSS Program:

      •   Placing GPs and communities in the central role - supported by higher levels of PRI, by State governments,
          and by local NGOs and the private sector - for facilitating, planning, implementing, monitoring and
          providing a range of O&M back-up services.
      •   Using sustainable, community or local government managed models for intra-GP RWSS schemes and
          using State-PRI partnership models for MVSs.
      •   Putting water resources security as a core theme of the new model, including increased community
          management of scarce resources.
      •   Moving the RWSS sector to achieve the recovery of at least 50 percent of O&M and replacement costs,
          and initiating contributions to capital costs.
      •   Integrating water supply and sanitation, through convergence with the Clean India mission for rural areas.


    The Project was recently restructured to reduce the IDA Credit amount to USD 250million, update the
    disbursement projections accordingly and revise the performance indicators and target values.
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



    Project Components:
    The Project comprises the following three main components: (A) Capacity and Sector Development;
    (B) Infrastructure Development; and (C) Project Implementation Support.
    Component A: Capacity and Sector Development (15%): This component will support the building of
    institutional capacity for implementing, managing and sustaining the project activities, along with sector
    development studies to inform policy decisions. The main sub-components include: (a) Capacity Building
    activities for the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS);
    (b) Capacity Building and Training activities for State, district, and village level institutions, PRIs, and sector
    stakeholders; (c) Information, Education and Communications (IEC) Program; (d) Innovative Pilot Programs and
    Sector Development Studies; and (e) Monitoring and Evaluation Program at the State and Sector level (across
    participating Low Income States), along with on-line system for financial management and reporting.
    Governance and Accountability Action Plan will also be implemented by the MoJS and the States.
    Component B: Infrastructure Development (80%): This component will support investments for improving
    water supply and sanitation coverage, including construction of new infrastructure or rehabilitation and
    augmentation of existing schemes, along with engineering support costs. Most villages are expected to be
    served by Single Village Schemes (SVSs) using local groundwater sources. In places where local water sources
    are either not sustainable or not of acceptable quality, Multi Village Schemes (MVSs) will be developed, mainly
    relying on surface water sources. The sanitation component will complement the Swachh Bharat mission
    activities and will support the implementation of Gram Panchayat action plans for the development of solid
    and liquid waste management activities, aiming at developing adequate grey and black water management
    systems in areas where the Project would have brought water supply. In addition, pilot programs will include
    24/7 water supply provision in select areas, and the introduction of the use of solar energy and SCADA systems.
    The project will support the universal provision of household connections, meters for bulk water supply in all
    schemes, and the promotion of household meters, where appropriate.
    Component C: Project Management Support (5%): This component includes project management support to
    the various entities at the national, state, district, and village levels for implementing the project, including
    staffing, consultancy and equipment costs, and internal and external Financial Audits.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Under this project, interventions have been taken up in four low income states of the country – Assam,
    Bihar, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh (UP) -, which are also low in terms of capacity, across two Batches –
    Batch I and II. The size of sub-projects taken up vary from multi-village water supply schemes (MVS) covering
    several GPs or villages to single village level (SVS) rural water supply schemes, sometimes as small as to cover
    only one habitation. A total of 551 (529 SVS and 22 MVS) schemes have been taken up in these four states
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



under Batch I. These comprise: Assam (3 MVS), Bihar (127- SVS and 4 MVS), Jharkhand (182 – SVS and 2
MVS), Uttar Pradesh (220 – SVS and 22 MVS). Under Batch II, another 531 schemes, comprising 421 SVS and
110 MVS, are under implementation or at advance stage of procurement. The state-wise break-up for Batch-
II is as follows: Assam (none), Bihar (147 SVS), Jharkhand (5 MVS) and UP (274 SVS and 105 MVS). The
Project’s interventions promise substantial environmental social benefits to the community in the form of
improved health, reduced incidence of water-borne diseases, cleaner surroundings and reduction in
drudgery on account of access to safe drinking water in the village and creation of sanitary conditions. Tribal
population exists in project locations in the states of Jharkhand (having Schedule V areas with predominantly
tribal population) and Assam (having tribal population but not falling within Sixth Schedule Areas). These two
states also have substantial geographical area under forests. UP, particularly the eastern region, is
characterized by high water table and poor drainage resulting in high incidence of water transmitted
diseases. Several districts in the four states have low availability of groundwater and groundwater quality
issues, with presence of iron, fluoride, nitrate and/or arsenic. Many habitations do not have potable water
available locally. There is therefore a need to convey water from surface sources (rivers, streams, etc.)
located far away via large and complex multi-village piping and distribution networks. All scheme require
securing lands for the key infrastructure (intake works, tubewells, water treatment plants - WTPs,
pumphouses, and ESRs) and associated conveyance and/or distribution pipeline networks.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist
Pyush Dogra, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 Some of the schemes implemented across all four
                                                                 states     potentially lead to limited, localized
                                                                 environmental impacts. Possible impacts pertain
                                                                 to, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
                                                                 a.       Ecologically sensitive zones such as forests,
                                                                 natural habitats, river systems, physical cultural
                                                                 resources, tribal areas, etc.
                                                                 b.       Water availability: quantity and quality
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     c.       Topographical features and natural
                                                                 drainage patterns
                                                                 d.       Other (pre-existing) infrastructure such as
                                                                 roads, buildings, structures of historical/cultural
                                                                 importance, etc.
                                                                 e.       Sites where sludge and other kinds of
                                                                 wastes generated from water supply schemes are
                                                                 disposed
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



                                                                Hence, an Environmental Management Framework
                                                                (EMF), which provides the basic criteria and
                                                                procedures was used for environmental screening
                                                                of all sub-projects. The EMF provides further
                                                                guidance for undertaking more focused
                                                                environmental assessments of individual sub-
                                                                projects wherever required leading to the
                                                                preparation of Environment Management Plans
                                                                (EMPs). The EMF also provides guidance on
                                                                institutional  mechanisms     and     monitoring
                                                                procedures to ensure adherence to the EMPs.

Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                In all four states there are specific areas which are
                                                                unique native habitats for certain flora and fauna.
                                                                Destruction of these habitats could adversely affect
                                                                the species survival. The environmental screening
                                                                procedure includes a component for determining
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                                whether any such area is impacted by any of the
                                                                investments in the project thereby enabling the
                                                                project staff to undertake appropriate mitigation
                                                                measures for protecting / preventing conversion of
                                                                such natural habitats wherever relevant.
                                                                In all four states there are a number of forest and
                                                                wooded areas which could be affected by sub-
                                                                projects or components thereof within or in close
                                                                proximity to them. Alternatively, construction
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes                  activity may necessitate felling of some trees. The
                                                                environmental screening procedure would include
                                                                a provision for determining whether any forest area
                                                                is impacted or if any trees are likely to be felled
                                                                during implementation activities.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                                Most infrastructure creation activities proposed
                                                                under this project are expected to take place in the
                                                                vicinity of rural or peri-urban human habitations. In
                                                                the ongoing project sufficient care has been taken
                                                                to avoid such impacts in all four states. However,
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                  in case of Jharkhand, which is a predominantly a
                                                                tribal state, in one of the large Multi Village scheme
                                                                grievances were received relating to selection of
                                                                site impacting cultural resources. It is plausible that
                                                                some such sub-project sites might impact
                                                                monuments, places of cultural significance or
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



                                                                 sacred groves protected by communities through
                                                                 local traditions and cultural values located nearby.
                                                                 Hence this policy is now triggered to safeguard
                                                                 against potential impacts on any known or
                                                                 currently unknown Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                 (PCR) that might be located at or in close vicinity of
                                                                 any of the proposed sub-project sites. Accordingly,
                                                                 a PCR procedure and implementation guideline has
                                                                 been prepared as an Annexure to existing EMF to
                                                                 screen sub projects for PCR.
                                                                 Schemes in Jharkhand are located in Fifth Schedule
                                                                 areas and comprise schedule tribes that meet the
                                                                 characteristics outlined in this OP. Though schemes
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes
                                                                 in Assam do not fall within Sixth Schedule Areas and
                                                                 do not meet the characteristics outlined in the OP,
                                                                 scheme beneficiaries include tribal households.
                                                                 Though schemes have largely been prepared by
                                                                 avoiding involuntary resettlement impacts,
                                                                 agricultural and structural encroachments and
                                                                 squatters in government/public lands cannot be
                                                                 fully ruled out. Besides acquisition of small
                                                                 quantum of private land, particularly in MVS is
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No                  likely, though will be undertaken only as the last
                                                                 resort. RPFs are being prepared in each of the
                                                                 States and will be the focus of an upcoming
                                                                 restructuring. Meanwhile, the team is working
                                                                 closely with our counterparts to ensure that any
                                                                 case arising is managed using appropriate
                                                                 measures, in compliance with OP4.12.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No                  Cleared by RVP with Exception.
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   As a part of project preparation, social and environmental assessments were conducted to identify social and
   environmental issues associated with the proposed project activities and to design appropriate management
   measures to enhance the positive impacts and mitigate potential adverse impacts. The project is not expected to
     The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



have significant adverse environmental and social impacts, but on the contrary has the potential to offer significant
environmental and social development benefits.

Social Issues: The communities comprising are quite diverse: social (scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, others),
economic (landless, small, marginal, and large farmers), female headed households and geographical setting (hills,
plains, forests, flood prone). Project areas comprised of areas affected Naxalites and other Extremist Groups,
rendering accessibility highly difficult. Additionally, the approach to planning and implementation had been
traditionally top-down and hierarchical in decision making. Key social issues included:
(i) participation;
(ii) ensuring inclusion and enhancing equity;
(iii) decentralizing service delivery underpinned by the principle of subsidiarity;
(iv) customer base and demand generation and; marketing the schemes and driving home the health and hygiene
benefits;
(v) human and institutional development.

The other important issues are enabling participation, especially of women; Gram Panchayat (GP) strengthening;
change management initiatives for changing the role of Government from ‘provider’ to a ‘facilitator’ to ensure;
improving accountability and transparency; and Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign along
with capacity building activities. Given the physical as well as socio-economic and culturally diverse conditions,
success of the project depends upon efforts aimed to mobilize local communities to participate in the development
of water supply and sanitation facilities and enable them to take on the responsibility for the operation and
maintenance and derive benefits on a sustained basis. The results helped in designing the delivery system and
addressing safeguards, thus ensuring positive and sustainable impacts – all of which formed the basis for preparation
of the Social Management Framework. SMF provides for step-wise integration of social issues into the overall project
cycle, besides providing for capacity building to functionaries at all levels.

During project implementation, shortcomings and constraints, in varying degrees, were observed and these included:
i) during DPR preparation, lack of screening of selected sites to identify, avoid or minimize adverse social impacts
and/or impacts on culturally sensitive sites;
ii) lack of adequate prior and informed consultations with members of the project affected areas/habitations and its
documentation, particularly during preparation of scheme level DPRs;
iii) delays in obtaining or not obtaining of No-objection certificates from relevant government departments, for siting
project infrastructure on identified government lands;
iv) non-transfer of private lands taken on donation basis, for construction purposes, to respective project
implementing agencies;
v) non-collection of socio-economic profiles to ascertain extent of loss of land by land donors;
vi) Specifically, in Jharkhand, it was observed that even when schemes were duly endorsed by the responsible GP,
these were not well represented by community members of the affected habitation within the GP, besides which the
required quorum for conducting Gram Sabha meetings for discussion and approval of schemes (as is mandated under
PESA provisions that are applicable to Schedule V areas i.e. having preponderance of tribal population), were not met;
vii) also in Jharkhand, it was observed that scheme-specific social assessment towards preparation of a scheme level
TDP was not undertaken as was required for compliance with requirements under Bank’s OP 4.10;
viii) staffing issues – absence of staff or with staff inadequate capacity in the States and District Project Management
Units (S/DPMUs) constrained adherence to the provisions of the SMF and TDP;
ix) delays in conducting or non-conducting of baseline surveys of beneficiary households leading to poor design that
in turn resulted in partial coverage of project areas and therefore poor participation;
     The World Bank                                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



x) lack of an accessible and well-monitored GRM, even though all state-level implementing agencies use multiple
modes of grievance redressal such as a toll-free number, website or verbally or in writing to the Village Water and
Sanitation Committee (VWSC), the Mukhiya or the Jal Sahiya i.e. GP level water and sanitation worker; and finally;
xi) the disclosure of key scheme-specific documents at the scheme level and in local languages.

Land is primarily required for intake well/water source, water treatment plants, construction of Elevated Storage
Reservoirs (ESRs) and pump houses. Transmission and distribution lines are laid mostly in public land or along public
streets and mostly cause temporary disruptions to access, damage to pavements, etc. for which road restoration
works are carried out. Thus far project has been avoiding or minimizing adverse impacts by:
i) avoiding involuntary acquisition of private land;
ii) using alternative encumbrance free parcels for siting infrastructure; and
iii) changing designs or routing of pipelines, etc.

Land take thus far has happened either using government lands i.e. parcels owned by the implementing agency or by
other government departments; lands on donation and land on long term lease (for one scheme in Bihar). However,
there have been a few cases of land take using direct purchase thus far, particularly in UP. The project might also
need to take lands with encroachments – mostly agricultural and in a few cases with possible impacts to encroached
structures and in some cases parcels with unauthorized occupants i.e. squatters using such lands for residential or
livelihood purposes. Though acquisition of privately-owned land using formal acquisition process is very unlikely and
will be the last resort in such community driven schemes, its probability, particularly in case of multi-village schemes
cannot be ruled out. Hence, considering this possibility, it was decided that OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement
would be triggered under the Project. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared separately for each of
the project States, and are in the processed of being formally endorsed by the States, after which the Project will be
restructured to trigger OP4.12. Each RPF lays down the processes and procedures applicable for land taking using
each of these modes, besides mitigation measures including entitlements that are commensurate to the impacts
identified. The framework will guide preparation of Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP), for each scheme,
as required.

OP 4.10, on Indigenous Peoples policy is triggered as scheduled tribes are present in project areas in both Jharkhand
and Assam. Four of the six project districts in Jharkhand are located in Fifth Schedule Areas and have predominantly
tribal population. In Assam, though three of the project districts have tribals but the project locations do not lie in the
Sixth Schedule Areas. However, as majority of the tribals are socially and economically weak, prone to vulnerability,
and often excluded from development initiatives as part of project preparation, a Tribal Development Plan for
Jharkhand had been prepared to enable them to access project on par with others. It aims at promoting inclusive,
equitable and sustainable water supply and sanitation delivery through fostering and empowering grassroots tribal
institutions in the tribal areas. Subsequent to the finalization of the TDP, and to provide more detail on its
operationalization, the SPMU prepared a Tribal Development Implementation Plan (TDIP), involving several rounds
of extensive consultations with tribal experts, academics and tribal representatives, besides consultations with tribal
leaders, members of civil society and through workshops held at state level. The Plan, which was approved in August
2018, is at a state-wide level rather than scheme-specific and provides additional details and guidance on how
schemes in tribal areas, including schemes involving both tribal and non-tribal communities, should be selected,
designed and governed. Subsequently, during project implementation, in January 2016, a TDP for Assam was
prepared by the Borrower. It was approved by the Bank and publicly disclosed on the state line department’s website
in 2016. It was developed for the state of Assam, to ensure that tribal populations are: i) adequately and fully
consulted; (ii) enabled to participate in the project and derive full benefits; and (iii) that the project’s institutional and
implementation arrangements take due note of the existing governance in the tribal areas as specified under the
Constitution of India and relevant legal provisions. preparation of a Tribal Development Implementation Plan (TDIP),
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



to complement the TDP with specific actions and processes to facilitate its implementation. The TDIP was prepared
through several rounds of district-level consultations with tribal leaders, members of civil society and academicians,
and through workshops held at state level. In accordance with the state level TDPs, scheme level plans will be
prepared incorporating context specific suggestions arising from FPICs, suitable measures and actions, besides
commensurate budget to execute these actions.

An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been undertaken individually for each constituent state in the project.
The EIA comprised of:
(a) an assessment of the current status of rural water supply and sanitation in the state;
(b) status of the water resources availability (quantity and quality) for sourcing drinking water;
(c) documentation of an environmental baseline based on issues pertaining to rural water supply and sanitation in
the respective states;
(d) assessment of institutional, legal/regulatory and policy provisions in the respective states;
(e) identification of expected environmental impacts of proposed project interventions;
(f) suggesting corresponding mitigation measures;
(g) preparation of an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that enables respective project implementing
agencies to address all environmental concerns in the project; and
(h) institutional arrangements for effective application of the EMF and its management.

The findings of the EA study indicate that while the proposed project interventions are expected to result in overall
improvement in environmental and public health in each constituent state, potential adverse impacts are expected
to be of low of intensity and localized nature. Most of them are likely to occur only on account of poor implementation
practices such as inadequate adherence to proper siting norms, deficiencies in design/construction or lapses in
operation and maintenance. Such impacts can be managed effectively by rigorously applying the EMF and by fostering
a strong environment management regime in the implementation arms of the project.

Environmental Issues and Management.

(i) Water Availability: As per baseline data, the state of Assam has an annual replenish able groundwater resources of
27.23 BCM out of which 22% is being utilized annually. There are no zones classified as over exploited, critical or semi-
critical in Assam. The Brahmaputra River has an average water discharge at the mouth with a flow of 19,830 cubic
meters per second (cum/sec.), a maximum discharge of 72,794 cum/sec. at Guwahati and a minimum discharge of
1,757 cum/sec. Though surface water is available, risk from floods to intakes and other water supply infrastructure is
an issue of sustainability. Floods may create water quality issues, like flood waters entering toilets resulting in
contamination of surface and groundwater aquifers. Decreasing groundwater levels are observed in some districts.

The annual replenishable groundwater resources in Bihar are estimated to be 29.19 BCM out of which about 39% is
being utilized. There are no zones classified as over exploited, critical or semi-critical in the state. The surface water
resource in Bihar includes 69,000 ha of ponds and tanks, 9,000 ha of oxbow lakes, 7,200 ha of reservoirs, 3,200 km of
rivers and 1 lakh ha of riverine and other flood plains. Due to the general lowering of groundwater table, during
summer months hand pumps run dry. Floods in Bihar create water quality issues and spread of water related diseases
after floods are recorded. The ground water table in some of the north Bihar district is high; this may create water
quality problems due to rampant open defecation and solid waste disposal.

The annual replenishable ground water resources in Jharkhand are estimated to be 5.58 BCM out of which about 20%
is being utilized. Major rivers/ streams of Jharkhand include Brahmanni, Subarnarekha, Damodar, Amanat, Anuranga,
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



Barakar Ajoy and Mayurakshi. Wetlands constitute an area of 170,000 ha. in the state. Groundwater availability is not
an issue in most places.

The groundwater levels in Uttar Pradesh show a wide variation from less than 2 mbgl to more than 30 mbgl. The
annual replenishable groundwater resources in UP are 76.35 BCM, out of which about 70% is being utilized. Of the
rivers and canals in the country, Uttar Pradesh occupies the first place with the total length of rivers and canals as
31.2 thousand km. that is about 17 percent of the total length of rivers and canals in the country. The state of UP falls
in Ganga Basin with the sub basins of Yamuna, Ramganga, Gomati and Ghaghra Rivers. The state is estimated to have
161.70 BCM (131.0 m.a.f.) of surface water. Frequent drying of groundwater sources and their contamination is an
issue. To avoid flood related risks the HFL of the source and nearby rivers need to be taken into consideration during
the design.

(ii) Water Quality: Increasing levels of water contamination due to anthropogenic activities is slowly becoming an area
of concern. Open defecation, lack of means to dispose animal waste, and garbage are major contaminating factors in
all the states.

The aquifers in many districts of Assam are affected with excess of Fluoride, Iron and Arsenic. The discharges of
untreated domestic wastewater, industrial wastewater, run of from the agricultural fields and the urban sewage
water is polluting the surface water in the state of Assam.

Ground water in Bihar is affected in many districts with excess Fluoride, Iron, Nitrate and Arsenic. Bacterial
contamination is found in surface water in Bihar. Water quality of shallow hand pumps is considered poor by the
villagers.

Groundwater in Jharkhand is affected in many districts with excess Fluoride, Nitrate and Arsenic. Bacterial
contamination is found in surface water in many places in Jharkhand in addition to increase in turbidity levels due to
mining activities. Mining of mineral resources affects the groundwater availability and quality while streams and
water bodies get affected by to ore-waste, coal washeries etc.

The Shallow groundwater in certain locations in eastern districts of UP is found to be in high state of Arsenic, Fluoride,
and Iron, leading to the concentrations that are often exceeding the drinking water standards. In order to ensure
sustainability, groundwater is sourced from deep aquifers after scientific hydrogeological investigations.

(iii) Environmental Sanitation: In Assam, about 62% of the households have household latrines and out of these only
around 66% use them. In Bihar, the present level of sanitation coverage in the rural areas is less than 25 % with usage
percentage much lower. The status of sanitation in Jharkhand is very dismal, with only about 8% households having
access to sanitation in the rural areas and the balance defecating in the open. There are no sanitation facilities in most
of rural households in eastern Uttar Pradesh. Most villagers practice open defecation which is a source of
contamination of shallow groundwater and spread of water related and contagious diseases. Poor or unfinished
installations, lack of super structure and reluctance to change behaviour is leading to non-use of toilets.

(iv) Solid and Liquid Management: There is no drainage or sewerage system in villages of Bihar with most of the liquid
waste is going to either agricultural land or to open ponds and open fields affecting the surface water quality. There
is no drainage or sewerage system in villages of Jharkhand. In many of the Eastern UP districts solid and liquid waste
management facilities are nearly non-existent. Major issues that arise of this situation in all states are that wastewater
logging takes place near residences, thereby posing health problems and polluting groundwater sources. The solid
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



  waste strewn around the village is posing a major public health problem in the villages in all states, apart from
  contaminating water sources.

  (v) Capacity of Implementing Agencies: Significant emphasis on capacity enhancement had been laid as part of the
  original project design and capacity support was provided through many implementation support partners such as:
  District Project Management Consultants (DPMC), Support Organizations, Community Mobilizers/Organizers, Jal
  Shahiyas, besides implementation of IEC strategy through professional agencies, etc. Bank task teams too have
  provided extensive handholding to implementation agencies by conducting many periodic trainings, workshops as
  well as undertaking many technical and interim missions, supplementing regular supervision missions.

  Most infrastructure creation activities proposed under this project are expected to take place in the vicinity of rural
  or peri-urban human habitations. Efforts were made in the project to manage potential negative impacts in all four
  states. However, in case of Jharkhand, which is a predominantly a tribal state, in two large Multi Village schemes
  grievances were received relating to shortcomings in implementing Bank Safeguards requirements of free, prior and
  informed consultations of potentially affected people, in particular with respect to the selection of sites with potential
  impacts on cultural resources and in following due process for the timely preparation of scheme EMPs. These
  grievances led to an investigation by the World Bank Inspection Panel. To address such shortcomings and ensure that
  proper measures are taken in sub-project where sites might impact monuments, places of cultural significance or
  sacred groves protected by communities through local traditions and cultural values located nearby, it was agreed to
  trigger OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) for this Project. Accordingly, a PCR procedure and implementation
  guideline has been prepared as an Annexure to existing EMF to screen sub projects for PCR and address such impacts,
  if observed, through a management plan described in the EMF annex.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  No indirect and/or long term impacts are expected as a result of the future activities in the project area. Most of the
  project components will have complementary positive impacts on the environment e.g. a combination of ground
  water recharge measures, greater ownership by communities and willingness to improve sustainability of local water
  sources e.g. activities selected under the tribal development plan could include renovation of existing water bodies
  in the project area. The selection of safe drinking water sources coupled with water quality monitoring programs and
  environmental sanitation and health hygiene education will contribute in sustainable water supply systems and in
  improving environmental conditions in villages.



3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Environment: Based on the implementation practices of the project in Batch-1 schemes, gaps were observed in the
  screening of schemes and developing self contained EMPs. Project teams understanding of environmental issues and
  challenges were strengthened using capacity building workshops exclusively on environmental safeguards. The
  project teams were guided to analyze sub projects for various alternatives available for the water availability for the
  particular sub project and bringing out clarity on the final selection of alternative supply of water to scheme. In various
  schemes source sustainability and water quality was explored at the field level in a more realistic way through
  screening and developing environmental management plans. Such as in MVS schemes some important considerations
  from environmental safeguards procedures were introduced such as , 9a) exploring debris disposal sites , 9b)
  appropriate management of sludge from WTPs , (c) reutilizing of debris and sludges for community use. In addition
      The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



 bio-engineering techniques were also suggested wherever landslides prone areas / sites were seen within the project
 to minimize large scale erosion impacts e.g near Bagbera WTP. Also water yields of the sources included for any sub
 projects were also screened through the safeguard screening to help sustainability of the scheme.

 Social: In schemes implemented thus far in Batch I and also those under preparation under Batch II, efforts have been
 made to avoid or minimize involuntary resettlement impacts by: i) using either land that belongs to implementing
 agency or to other government departments, without encroachments; Gram Panchayat land; private land taken on
 voluntary donation basis; direct purchase through negotiation (in UP); land taken on long term lease (in Bihar), etc.;
 ii) changing sites due to land related problems such as non-availability of land, encroachments, inadequate size of
 land plot, etc.; iii) using modified designs, re-routing of pipelines to address community concerns relating to impacts
 on assets including on culturally sensitive locations etc. E.g. in Jharkhand, the site originally selected for the WTP was
 changed to another location due to the opposition of local residents, who claimed that they used the hill as a place
 of worship. This led to identification of an alternative WTP site, wherein district authorities modified the footprint of
 the WTP site, to avoid disturbances to the identified places of significance. The contractor too adapted the WTP design
 to fit in the new site dimensions and made a U-shape in the boundary wall alignment to accommodate a sacred tree
 located within a meter of the plot boundary. Likewise, the land area taken for the ESR under another adjoining scheme
 represented less than 14 percent of the total area of the plot.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Roles and responsibilities for ensuring implementation of the environment and social safeguards have been detailed
 out at state, district, Block and village/scheme levels. A State Project Management Unit (SPMU) at the state level and
 District Project Management Units (DPMUs) at the district, have been set up at time of project preparation and have
 been functional since, These include an Environment and Social Development Specialists given the overall
 responsibility of ensuring environmental and social compliance. Besides, in the case of Jharkhand there is a Tribal
 Development Specialist at the SPMU level.

 Implementation experiences till date have brought to the fore issues pertaining to low skills levels, management
 capacities in implementation agency staffs, lack of dedicated project leadership and the national level and in most of
 the states, poor human resource (HR) practices e.g. prolonged gaps in staffing. Except for the state of Assam that has
 had relatively stable set ups at both SPMU and DPMU levels, staffing issues i.e. either absence or presence of staff
 with inadequate capacities for prolonged periods, have hampered adequate attention to E&S aspects. Specifically,
 UP and Jharkhand had no social specialist and tribal specialists respectively for a period of two years. Though UP
 currently has a Social Specialist in place, the position of Tribal Development Specialist in Jharkhand SPMU has fallen
 vacant yet again and so it the position of Social Specialist in the DPMU of the East Singhbhum district where the
 grievances originated. In Bihar too, the social specialist position in the SPMU has been vacant for nearly two years
 and the social specialist contracted through the Project Management Consultant firm to support the SPMU has also
 left. Further, in cases where E&S specialist are in place, they are burdened by absence of other staff positions of M&E,
 Contract Management, Procurement, etc. and hence unable to dedicate due attention to E&S aspect. Poor payment
 terms plus lack of annual increments have led to Bihar and Jharkhand being unable to attract or retain competent
 E&S professionals. The combination of these factors resulted not only in sub-optimal implementation quality and
 inordinate delays in output delivery but also most significantly inadequate integration of E&S aspects into scheme
 preparation and implementation. For instance, in Batch I, completed schemes suffer from many shortcomings as
 pointed out during multiple ISMs and field visits of Bank team members.
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



During implementation, two grievances were received by the Inspection Panel, in relation to two large Multi village
schemes (MVS) in state of Jharkhand. Both grievances related to the selection of sites of major infrastructure for the
MVS in the tribal dominated areas. In both cases, complainants alleged, amongst other aspects:
i) inappropriate consultation relating to the site selection of the Water Treatment Plant or Elevated Storage Reservoir
(ESR);
ii) insufficient assessment of the site that the communities claimed to have been using for a number of community
functions;
iii) environmental impacts of the construction and operation of the WTP & ESR have not been sufficiently and timely
studied.
These complaints also pointed out shortcomings relating to weaknesses in design and supervision, insufficient free,
prior and informed consultations and documentation thereof, lack of disclosure of key scheme-specific Safeguards
documents, initiation of works without meeting the requirement for prior approval by the Bank of an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP), and failure to identify concerns and apply the Bank’s Operational Policy on Physical Cultural
Resources (OP 4.11).

A comprehensive Safeguards compliance review was performed between October and February 2019, to assess
compliance of Batch I schemes and document readiness of schemes proposed or ongoing under Batch II. This
assessment identified the following shortcomings: i) weak environmental screening in absence of proper community
consultation; ii) schemes tendered and contracted without proper environmental endorsement; iii) requisite
environmental clearances or statutory permissions not obtained prior to commencement of works; iv) EMPs weak in
content and not finalized and cleared before commencement of construction; v) multiple environmental non-
compliances arising out of improper scheme design, construction or finishing; vi) schemes had to be dropped because
on non-availability of land or; vii) lack of adequate community consultations to elicit community support while
planning of schemes; viii) inadequate integration of E&S aspects into planning and implementation processes; ix)
prolonged gaps in staffing of environmental and social and tribal specialists in SPMUs and DPMUs leading to poor
monitoring and supervision of E&S aspects; x) inadequate monitoring of commissioned/handed over schemes; and
xi) non-submission of E&S progress cum-monitoring reports.

To address these important gaps, the team is reviewing the environmental and social safeguards documents of all
schemes, with the objective to have them brought in compliance with safeguards requirements, including on PCR, by
the October 31, 2019. This is part of a comprehensive review of all project-funded schemes to ensure and document
readiness of schemes in relation to:

a) assessment of E&S impacts through Environmental Data Sheets and notes on impacts on PCRs and associated
community consultations;
b) for category 2 schemes, preparation of accurate and well-structured EMPs that capture and address all associated
environmental issues and make use of latest techniques such as GIS and strip maps;
c) review and approval of all EMPs by the Bank;
d) public disclosure of all safeguards documents including EMF, SMF, EDS, EMP and ARAP, as the case may be, on the
relevant State Government websites;
e) ensuring documentation of community consultations conducted at all levels – revenue village/habitation level, etc.;
f) obtaining “Agree-to-do? consents from communities, particularly Gram Sabha resolutions as per mandated
quorums, where applicable;
g) obtaining requisite statutory clearances for schemes and environmental endorsement;
h) documenting land availability through no objection certificates and transfer of land parcels;
i) documentation of socio-economic profile of households that have, donated/will donate land, for NNP Schemes.
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



Monitoring of all of these aspects are being streamlined through a detailed checklist that enable DPMUs to undertake
a thorough review of scheme level compliance related documentation with a view to ascertain compliance to due
processes and requirements. SPMUs in each state to ensure adequate monitoring of the implementation of E&S
related aspects. Likewise, DPRs & ARAPs for schemes comprising tribal areas and population and/or having
involuntary resettlement impacts, will be reviewed by the Bank.

These aspects and the timely processing of each of these steps was clarified in the EMPs. In addition, the team has
further increased capacity building activities to strengthen the implementing agencies’ skills on process, monitoring
and evaluation in the remainder implementation period of the project by organizing capacity building workshops,
hand-on support for safeguards preparation and regular visits for on-the-job training on supervision of E&S aspects.
Particular activities in this respect include:

i) Refresher safeguard trainings have been carried out in Bihar and Jharkhand, which focused on enabling
implementation agencies to enhance effectiveness of their environmental & social screening of activities, improve
quality of associated documents such as scheme level DPRs EDSs and EMPs under Batch II; Similar trainings are to be
organized in the states of UP and Assam;

ii) Carrying out a separate screening for Physical and Cultural Resources (PCR) to identify any such sites that may be
affected by the scheme construction. The screening will also be done from PCR perspective retroactively to all
completed schemes. If any affected PCR is identified, appropriate mitigation strategy will be decided in accordance
with applicable regulations/guidelines in consultation with the community; For all schemes, the community will be
formally consulted (as per proper consultation procedure) on the issues listed in the EDS and PCR screening formats
before they are finalized;

iii)   efforts to strengthen Project and site-level GRMs and identify steps to strengthen them;

iv) Ensuring rigorous and continuous monitoring through the following actions: a) monitoring checklists on
technical, environmental and social aspects for use by DPMU and SPMU level E&S specialists during field supervision
visits;
b) Bank’s review of state wise Environmental & Social Monitoring report that is to be submitted on a quarterly basis;
and
c) disclosure of safeguard documents and Executive summaries on websites of MDWS, each SPMU and Bank’s
operations portal;

v) Additional interim mission and site visits will be undertaken by the Bank team to ensure compliance.
Additionally, as an outcome of the IP cases, the following management actions have been undertaken and are being
regularly monitored:
i.    An anthropologist with local experience has been hired to better understand concerns of the complainants and
identify/agree on possible compensatory measures;
ii. implementation stage consultations in all GPs covered by Bagbera and Chhotagovindpur MVSs to update
community members on implementation progress, have been undertaken;
iii. follow up with the Project Management Units at the national, state and district level (NPMU/SPMU/DPMU) to
ensure appropriate monitoring of EMP implementation, staffing, and application of safeguards instruments;
iv. review of the scope of works and training of the all Community Organizers that have been placed in all five
districts of Jharkhand to give them a greater role in disseminating information about the Project, relaying community
concerns, and environmental and social monitoring;
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



  v. review and update existing Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials (including basic
  information about the Project and its expected benefits as well as about water, sanitation and hygiene in general) to
  consider current community concerns, and its dissemination in the most widely spoken tribal languages in this area;
  vi. review of the processes followed to document community “no objection? to the siting of significant
  infrastructure (WTPs, ESRs) associated with the two MVSs in Jharkhand;
  vii. disclosure of executive summaries of safeguard documents in Hindi that are translated and disclosed in local
  languages predominantly used in the Project areas, namely Hindi and Assamese; and
  viii. Preparation of safeguard documents for application of OP 4.11 to the Project.

  The environmental screening procedure will continue to be strengthened during the remainder period of the Project,
  to ensure it covers all the following salient points in sufficient details:
  •     Schemes, which should have been screened based on the information of the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs),
  will be screened based on actual design or implemented schemes;
  •     Screening to use the Environmental Data Sheet (EDS) which records important project parameters of
  environmental significance and the PCR screening format.
  •     For all schemes, the community needs to be formally consulted (as per proper consultation procedure) on the
  issues listed in the EDS and PCR screening formats before they are finalized.
  •     The Bank will review and approve each EDS and PCR screening format for each scheme funded under the Project.
  •     If the value of any of the parameters listed on the EDS/PCR Format is indicative of an issue or issues of
  significance, the scheme will be flagged as Category-2 and a more focused environmental assessment leading to the
  preparation of a scheme specific Environment Management Plan (EMP) needs to be undertaken. In case an affected
  PCR is identified, the EMP will provide details on the agreed mitigation strategy arrived at in consultation with the
  community.
  •     All MVS are to be classified as Category-2 as they require a closer scrutiny to their large size and extent of
  coverage.
  •     EMPs pertaining to all Category-2 schemes will be reviewed and approved by the Bank before they can be
  finalized.
  •     Any variation / design change in the scheme will mandate corresponding revision of the EDS and EMP and its re-
  approval by the Bank.
  •     For both Categories, environmental endorsement will continue to be the culmination of the environment
  screening procedure. Category-1 schemes can be endorsed directly after completion of screening and uploading EDS
  on the web site for Bank’s approval,Category-2 schemes will be endorsed only on finalization of the EMP and its
  subsequent approval by the Bank and EMP to be displayed n department’s website.
  •     Approved EDS, PCR Formats and EMPs pertaining to all schemes be disclosed on relevant State Government
  website(s). If any EDS or EMP is revised during implementation as a consequence of variation in design or for any
  other reason, the re-approved version will also be disclosed.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  During project preparation, key stakeholders were identified, and consultations held to seek their views and
  incorporate the same into the project design. Grassroots level stakeholders include: i) benefiting households
  (including women, poor, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes); ii) Gram Panchayats (men and women elected
  representatives), iii) Junior Engineers of RWSSD, and (iv) other community-based organizations such as Support
  Organizations, Community Mobilizers/Organizers including Jal-Shahiyas (GP level water and sanitation workers)
  particularly in Jharkhand and Bihar, etc. Block/ district level stakeholders are: the respective Panchayat Raj
  Institutions; other concerned line departments such as health, rural department, power, irrigation; district/ block
                          The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                          IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



                     administration; the RWSSD; and non-governmental organizations, contractors/ suppliers and consultants.
                     Departments of Finance, Drinking Water Supply & Sanitation, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj, Irrigation, Tribal
                     Welfare, political leaders, NGOs and consultants contracted for DPR preparation and Project Management (Bihar).

                     There have been consultations throughout the project preparation both by the Bank Missions as well as by the state
                     governments. The environmental and social assessment studies were conducted with active participation of relevant
                     stakeholders. Summary of all safeguard documents - Environment Management Framework, Social Management
                     Framework and Tribal Development Plans (Jharkhand and Assam) have been translated into local language and
                     disseminated throughout the state. Stakeholder consultation workshops were held at all levels grassroots, regional
                     and state. During implementation stage, consultation meetings of VWSCs/MVWSC, meetings between implementing
                     and VWSC and respective contractors have continued with use of Support organizations and Community
                     Organizers/Mobilizers and Jal-Shahiya (Jharkhand and Bihar).

                     However, during the course of project implementation over the years, when the project leadership as well as
                     SPMU/DPMU staffs changed several times, the disclosed documents got removed from website of Jharkhand for
                     reasons such as maintenance of websites, updation of websites, change of hosting to different server, etc. The Bank
                     is now working with the respective states to address the issue and ensure that all public documents are uploaded
                     again and disclosed as earlier. In addition, As per the revised strategy, all EDSs, EMPs and ARAPs (when prepared) will
                     also be disclosed on the respective state websites.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
       12-Mar-2013                                                             05-Apr-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
            India                                                                 28-Feb-2013
            Comments
            Team required the republishing of all documents and executive summaries in local languages in State department
            websites and disclosing them locally.


INDIG ENOUS_TAB LE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)




Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
22-Mar-2013                                                        05-Apr-2013
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 India                                                            25-Mar-2013
 Comments
 Team require republishing of all documents and executive summaries in local languages in State department websites,
 and local disclosure.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                      Yes
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
 critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                             NA
 acceptable to the Bank?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                  Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                      Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
        The World Bank                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)



Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                       Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                       Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                       NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                       Yes
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                       Yes
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                       No
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups         Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           IN Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States (P132173)




III. APPROVALS


                                           Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Mariappa Kullappa

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                     Charles Ankisiba                       30-Sep-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager               Michael Haney                          30-Sep-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
