The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Aug-2017| Report No: ISDSR23062




                        Regional Vice President:    Annette Dixon
                               Country Director:    Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Karla Gonzalez Carvajal
                             Task Team Leader:      Amali Rajapaksa
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P132833                                                        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Amali Rajapaksa                                                Sri Lanka
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
09-May-2016                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GTI06

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
125,000,000.00                                                 125,000,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
International Development Association (IDA)                                                         125,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               125,000,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the Road Development Authority’s (RDA) capacity for asset
    management and improve the road service delivery on the selected corridor. The selected corridor means the road
    section from Ja-Ela to Chilaw on National Highway A003 in Sri Lanka.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The proposed section targeted under the project is approximately 58 km along the Ja-Ela to Chilaw section of
the A3 corridor, which was last rehabilitated in 2001. Ja-Ela to Madampe Road section (A03) is an existing
paved national road that covers mainly Gampaha district and small extent within Puttlam- district. Gampaha
District is located in the west of Sri Lanka and has an area of 1,387 square Kilometers. It is bounded by
Kurunegala and Puttalam districts from north, Kegalle District from east, Colombo District from south and by
the Indian Ocean from west. The borders of the district are the Maha River on the north, Kelani River on the
south and 1,000 feet contour line on the east. Gampaha has a tropical monsoon climate. The annual rain fall
is about 2500mm and the average temperature is about 27.9 °C. The Puttlam district has a land area of 3,013
square Kilometers including inland water bodies and a coastal belt of 288 Kilometers in length. Pattalam has
a short dry season from June to September and a second dry season from January to March. The wet season
is mainly from October to December. Temperatures remain steady throughout the year with little variations
in between. The road section to be supported under the project traverse through highly built up area. There
are number of religious sites along the section. A number of rivers go across the road section including
Attanagalu Oya and Dandugam Oya that falls into the Negombo lagoon, Maha Oya, and Gin Oya. One man-
made tank names Maha Oya is located closer to Madampe section of the road. There are trees planted
within the Right of Way (RoW) in some places. There may be activities off the area of the road to be
rehabilitated and maintained, including borrow-pit areas, disposal sites for soil spoil material, establishment
of workers camps, equipment storage areas, and operation of quarries, which are to be identified by the
contractor. The total population of the two districts amounts to 2.99 million (2280860 – Gampaha District,
709677 – Puttalam District) according to Census of Population conducted in 2012 spread within a total land
area of 4459 Km. The total population of the Divisional Secretariat areas covering the road section from Ja-
ela to Madampe in both Gampaha and Puttalam Districts amount to 808,202, i.e Gampaha (3 DSDs) - 578948
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



and Puttalam (4 DSDs) - 229254 (Department of Census, 2012).



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU03), Darshani De Silva (GEN06), Bandita Sijapati (GSU06)
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered           Explanation

                                                               Although the road corridor is known (existing), the
                                                               detailed engineering design has not yet been
                                                               done. A framework approach for safeguards was
                                                               recommended, as the detailed design will be done
                                                               by the DBMOT/OPRC contractor considering the
                                                               prevailing conditions of the road. The existing
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                               ESMF of RDA was updated. In addition, based on
                                                               the current alignment and conceptual design
                                                               proposed, an Environmental Assessment (EA) has
                                                               also been done. This EA will be updated by the
                                                               OPRC contractor parallel to completing the
                                                               detailed design during project implementation.
                                                               The natural habitats along the selected road
                                                               corridor include few small rivers, two man-made
                                                               tanks and a lagoon. An initial, assessment of
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           Yes
                                                               potential sites that may get impacted has been
                                                               identified in the EA including mitigation measures
                                                               to manage significant negative impacts.
                                                               There are no natural forests along the selected
                                                               road corridor, However, there may be off-site
                                                               impacts to the forests as many of gravel and metal
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    Yes                 extraction sites are located within natural forests
                                                               in Sri Lanka. EA identifies potential impacts and
                                                               mitigation measures, as well as potential sites
                                                               outside forests to be considered by the contractor.

                                                               The project does not involve pest management
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                               activities.

                                                               This policy is applicable because there are number
                                                               of religious sites along the road corridor, but out
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                               from the ROW that may require protection when
                                                               rehabilitation and upgrading activities take place.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                                                                There are no indigenous people living within the
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No
                                                                identified project area.

                                                                Given the detailed engineering design is to be
                                                                carried out in the future, a framework approach
                                                                (ESMF, RPF) has been adopted based on the
                                                                conceptual design available. In addition, a Social
                                                                Impact Assessment (SIA) and a Resettlement
                                                                Action Plan (RAP) for the Ja-Ela to Chilaw corridor
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes
                                                                is being revised to reflect the recent engineering
                                                                design. Consultations will be organized on the
                                                                revised RAP and will be publicly disclosed. The
                                                                specific instruments will be updated by the OPRC
                                                                contractor parallel to completing the detailed
                                                                design.

Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No                  The project does not involve dam related works.


Projects on International Waterways (OP)                        The project     does    not   affect   international
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                       waterways.


                                                                There are no disputed areas along the project
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                                corridor.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The section to be supported under physical interventions of the project for A03 corridor has not changed. Hence,
   the starting point of 18 km post and end point of 76km post continue to be the same. The Environmental
   Assessment (EA) disclosed on March 8, 2016 by the Government of Sri Lanka based on the conceptual design
   continue to be applicable.

   The project activities will include rehabilitation and/ upgrading and routine and periodic maintenance as well as
   instituting road safety measures and traffic management along a 58km section of the existing road corridor of A3.
   The Project has been assigned Environmental Category B because the environmental impacts are generic to
   upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads that will be predictable, localized and can be
   readily mitigated. The potential environmental impacts of the proposed road corridor of the project include:
   clearance of trees that have been planted on the road side due to realignment and safety needs (to avoid black
   spots), changes in drainage patterns to address current flooding issues within the road corridor and its immediate
   impact areas and increase in sediment load into waterways, and soil and water contamination due to spillage and
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  leakage of oils and other toxic materials, noise, dust and air pollution from road works, health and safety issues due
  to operation of borrow pits, quarries, crushers and asphalt plants. There are no potential large scale, significant
  and/or irreversible impacts anticipated given the fact that the proposed road corridor follows the existing road
  alignment, with likely road re-alignment not causing any changes to physical cultural resources or natural habitats.
  The client is expected to ensure the EA is updated once the detailed design has been done once the implementation
  commences, if there are significant changes to the EA consultations with stakeholders are held, clearance is
  obtained from the Bank and the EA is disclosed again to public. Restructuring is not changing environmental issues
  and impacts identified during the project preparation stage.

  Social impacts intrinsic to rehabilitation and maintenance works are localized and can be readily mitigated. In the
  main road corridor, 48 private owners and 32 non-titleholders are expected to be affected by land acquisition, and
  an additional 217.93 perches (0.55 ha) is required for road re-alignment to rectify identified black-spots. Livelihoods
  of approximately 187 HHs, including a significant amount of mobile vendors along the road corridor, is expected to
  be affected by the project. Further, 16 shops are likely to require relocation and 35 individuals are expected to lose
  their income due to the acquisition of their properties (19 permanently and 16 temporarily).

  Besides these adverse impacts, the project is also expected to have positive impacts with the most significant
  benefits perceived by the affected HHs being improvement of the quality of environmental conditions, high demand
  for land, and prospect of appreciating the value of land. Other notable advantages include improvement of road
  safety, a perceived reduction in the cost of living, development of business premises, work place and social
  infrastructure.

  Nineteen vulnerable families are likely to be impacted by the project, especially since they occupy structures that
  are likely to be affected from the rectification of identified black-spots (as stated above), derive their livelihoods
  from selling fish in temporary huts, and are economically active as wayside fruit, vegetable and corn sellers. Except
  for the probable income loss that they may suffer during construction, they would not face any other economic
  disadvantages as a result of the planned improvement. There appears to be no other major impact on their daily
  lives as most of them have facilities at close proximity to their dwellings for health, education and preschools for
  children.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  NA


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Realignment to rectify identified black spots is being considered as part of the conceptual design. However, these
  are proposed to be avoided by introducing some deviations from the existing alignment to minimize or avoid
  potential environmental and social impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The potential environmental impacts of rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance works for the existing national
  road, A003 will be mostly localized and can be easily managed through good planning and established good
  practices. Therefore, the project has been assigned Environmental Category B.
    The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
    Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




At this stage of the project, the targeted road section for DBM/OPRC has been identified with a conceptual design.
However, the final engineering design including the specific road works required for the various sections and timing
is not yet determined and will be carried out by the Contracting Entity (CE) once selected. Therefore, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for World Bank projects was updated and used as a
guiding document for the conceptual design and to develop the site-specific safeguard instruments. The ESMF has
established clear guidelines and methodologies for the identification and assessment of environmental and social
impacts. Therefore, in line with the ESMF, the Environmental Assessment (EA), Environmental Management Plan
(EMP), Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were developed for the project by the
Road Development Authority (RDA) in close consultation with key stakeholders. In addition, a stand-alone
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been adopted to provide guidance on the resettlement and rehabilitation
principles to be applied in the preparation of the RAP. The EA/EMP and SIA/RAP provide the environmental and
social baseline condition of the road corridor, identify potential impacts as per the conceptual design and propose
mitigation measures to avoid, mitigate and/or compensate for significant environmental and social impacts
associated with project activities.

The most critical environmental issues have been identified as the flooding due to the extensive hydrological system
present in some parts of the corridor. In order to understand how the current hydrological system is functioning a
detailed hydrological study has been also carried out. The potential issues that require attention under the project
including maintaining the quality of surface water bodies/natural habitats and proposed mitigation measures have
been identified through this study have been included in the EA and the conceptual design of the project. In
addition, there is one archeological site and some religious and sensitive sites closer to the RoW of the road that
could be impacted due to road works. While there will not be any physical relocation of these sites, during
rehabilitation/upgrading works impacts due to dust, noise and temporary access issues are anticipated. The EA as
part of the EMP, provides suitable measures to mitigate and/avoid such impacts. The EA also includes monitoring
plan for these sensitive receptions both during pre-construction, construction and operations and maintenance
periods. Some trees that have been planted within the RoW may have to be removed or pruned to ensure safety of
the road users. The EA proposes to avoid the removal of threatened species as much as possible or try to relocate
them to a new location if cost-effective or ensure replanting similar plants in a public place.

The interventions proposed by the project for the corridor does not require national approval from Central
Environmental Authority (CEA), as this project does not fall within the prescribed project list identified as part of
National Environmental Act. However, site clearances requires permission from CEA and local authorities.
Environmental Protection Licenses, Licenses from Geological Survey and Mines Bureau and local authority permits
will be necessary for offsite activities such as quarry operations, crusher plants, borrow pits, etc. The EA identifies
potential sites that are currently been operated with the necessary licenses/permits outside sensitive areas such as
significant natural habitats and forests. The EA also indicate that sites outside the RoW that will the supporting the
road works need to be redeveloped prior to abandoning or handing over to the owners.

The most critical social issue is identified as the possible acquisition of land and the resulting physical displacement
due to the proposed rectification of black-spots. As the black-spots were identified subsequent to the SIA and the
finalization of RAP, the RPF will give guidance on the principles to be applied in the relocation of the project
affected persons, which should be reflected in the updates made by the CE.

There is no change to the EA that has been prepared for A3 because of the restructuring. However, the RAP
referenced in the previous Financing Agreement assumed that the special status for the priority projects (under the
2013 regulations) would be granted for this Project which would have allowed for expedited land acquisition
     The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



 process, better entitlements/payments, and a stronger Grievance Redress Mechanism. Following the cabinet
 decision in June 2017 that this Project will have to follow the regular procedures for all projects (under the 2008
 regulations), the RAP is being revised accordingly. Prior to finalization, consultations will be held on the revised
 draft, and it will be disclosed publicly in-country and in World Bank's Infoshop.

 The Contracting Entity who will be preparing the detailed design is expected to update the EA/EMP and SIA/RAP
 and get it approved by RDA and Bank prior to commencement of physical activities on the ground. The EA and SIA
 identify significant impacts anticipated due to the project as described above under sub-section IIA1. The potential
 environmental and social impacts and proposed mitigation measures for the impacts identified as included in
 EA/EMP and SIA/RAP will be included in the bidding document of the OPRC format and will form the basis for
 monitoring by the Borrower and the Monitoring Consultant to be engaged under the project. The frameworks
 (ESMF and RPF), on the other hand, will provide guidance to the Contracting Entity in the likely event that more
 interventions are identified during the implementation period. The bidding document will also include the need to
 update the safeguard instruments in line with the detailed design and preparation of an Environmental Methods
 Statement in line with the EMP and construction method statement to be kept regularly updated satisfactory to the
 RDA and the Bank.
 RDA already has a Project Management Unit (PMU) set up with a seasoned Environmental and Social Specialist who
 is very conversant with the environmental and social safeguard requirements of the Bank to manage project related
 safeguard activities. RDA also has an Env ironmental and Social Division with adequate capacity who will also
 support the PMU in reviewing documents and monitoring.

 Nevertheless, further (and continuous) training programs will be proposed on environmental and social safeguard
 compliance, targeting the staff of RDA, the general public / local CBOs and NGOs in the project area, as well as the
 staff and laborers of the CE. This training will mainly focus on sensitizing the need for environmental and social
 safeguards compliance in road development projects and use of safeguards instruments in place to mitigate
 potential impacts.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 During preparation of safeguards instruments for the project, consultations with key stakeholders and potential
 project affected persons were carried out and has been documented as part of the EA and SIA. Additional
 consultations will be held during the revision of RAP.

 The key stakeholders for the project are the people living and working along the identified road corridor, as well as
 the road users. A participatory approach was undertaken to carry out a comprehensive consultation process to
 study the socio economic status and to identify key impacts of the project. Stakeholder meetings, Focused Group
 Discussions and Key Informants Discussions were held with identified persons, in addition to a Socio Economic
 Survey and Road Users Survey.

 Stakeholder meetings were carried out during the month of January 2015, usually held at the Divisional Secretary’s
 (DS) office, chaired by the Divisional Secretary himself. At the stakeholder meeting carried out in Puttalam, for
 example, thirty six participants were present including affected persons, the DS, Urban Councilor, Chief incumbent
 priest of the Puttalam Buddhist centre, the divisional engineers of Chilaw and Puttalam of RDA. A framework has
 been proposed for continuing consultations during the implementation.

 The EA and SIA have been publicly disclosed in country and the documents have also been disclosed in Bank’s
 Infoshop. The revised RAP will also be disclosed in country and in the Infoshop.
                        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
        15-Dec-2015                                                     09-Mar-2016
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Sri Lanka                                                      09-Mar-2016
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
08-Jan-2016                                                               22-Feb-2016
“In country? Disclosure

        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                            Yes

            If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                              Yes
            and approve the EA report?

            Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                              Yes
            credit/loan?



            NH_TABLE
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                    No
natural habitats?

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures       NA
acceptable to the Bank?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              framework/process
                                                                                    Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                    Yes
Manager review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       Yes

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  16

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
                                                                                    Yes
leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  187



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                    NA
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                    NA
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                    No
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
          The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                   Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Amali Rajapaksa


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
