The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2018| Report No: ISDSR24740




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar
                              Country Director:    Jesko S. Hentschel
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Ming Zhang
                            Task Team Leader:      Catherine Lynch
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
                                                                 Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation
    P159843
                                                                 Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Catherine Lynch                                              Argentina
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    27-Feb-2017                                                  Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU10


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             242.50
    Total Financing                                                                                                242.50
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 200.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                           42.50
         Borrower                                                                                                   42.50


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objectives are to improve housing conditions and access to selected basic services and
    infrastructure in selected disadvantaged neighborhoods in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA), and strengthen
    the institutional capacity for urban management at the metropolitan level.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component 1: Urban and Social Integration of Barrio 31 in CABA (Estimated cost: US$ 194.6 million, of which US$
159.6 million IBRD financing). This Component, to be executed by CABA, will support the completion and upgrading of
basic infrastructure in Barrio 31, the construction of new housing units on adjacent land, and the resettlement of
families currently living under a section of the Illia Highway that crosses the neighborhood. These activities are part of
the city’s Comprehensive Action Plan for Barrio 31 (Plan de Acción Integral 2016-2019).

Component 2: Habitat improvement of disadvantaged neighborhoods in Greater Buenos Aires (Estimated cost: US$
36.3 million, of which US$ 29 million IBRD financing). This component will involve: (i) carrying out of diagnostic studies
and the preparation of related investment plans for selected disadvantaged neighborhoods located in Greater Buenos
Aires; and (ii) carrying out of the investments mentioned in (i) above, including, inter alia: (a) the carrying out of housing
improvements and related land titling formalization, and construction of public buildings; (b) the carrying out of
investments in basic infrastructure; (c) the carrying out of small works for the improvement of public spaces and
accessibility; (d) the provision of social and violence prevention programs; and (iii) if applicable, provision of land and
compensation in connection with resettlement in (ii) above. The Presidente Sarmiento Housing Complex, also known as
Barrio Carlos Gardel, located in the Municipality of Morón, has been pre-identified as a potential site for the
intervention. The lower amount allocated to this component reflects the framework nature of the proposed
intervention, in which the initial activities will consist of diagnostic studies that will define the specific investments to be
financed.

Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacities for metropolitan urban management (Estimated cost: US$ 3
million, of which US$ 3 million IBRD financing). This component will involve: (i) the development of a metropolitan
information system, to collect, share and publish data relevant to urban planning and service delivery at the
metropolitan level; (ii) the identification and development of financing instruments and mechanisms for investments at
the metropolitan level; and (iii) the provision of technical assistance and capacity building to develop CABA’s and PBA’s
joint agenda for institutional coordination at the metropolitan level.

Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring – CABA (Estimated Cost: US$ 7 million, of which US$ 7 million
IBRD financing). This component will involve the provision of support for Project management activities performed by
CABA PIU, including: (i) the carrying out of audits; (ii) the carrying out of monitoring and evaluation activities; (iii) the
carrying out of activities to strengthen CABA PIU’s and CABA’s technical staff capacity; (iv) the financing of Operating
Costs; (v) the collection of data at specific stages of Project implementation; and (vi) the definition of baselines for the
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



periodic monitoring and evaluation of the Project’s results. It will also involve the provision of technical assistance,
including, inter alia: (i) the development of an impact evaluation mechanism for CABA’s Barrio 31 Intervention; (ii) the
development of strategies for managing the transfer of the operation and maintenance of the investments mentioned in
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 (iv) of the Project to the respective water and sanitation, gas and electricity service
providers; and (iii) the development of strategies for Land Value Capture (LVC) in CABA’s territory.

Component 5: Project Management and Monitoring – PBA (Estimated cost: US$ 1.12 million, of which US$ 0.9 million
IBRD financing). This component will involve the provision of support for Project management activities performed by
PBA, including: (i) the carrying out of audits; (ii) the carrying out of monitoring and evaluation activities; (iii) capacity
strengthening of the PBA staff, (iv) provision of technical assistance; (v) financing of Operating Costs; (vi) collection of
relevant data at specific stages of Project implementation; and (vii) the definition of baselines for the periodic
monitoring and evaluation of the Project’s results.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project is located in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA). AMBA is one of the largest urban
    agglomerations in Latin America. It is composed of Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (CABA) and the
    surrounding municipalities belonging to the Province of Buenos Aires.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Santiago Scialabba, Social Specialist
    Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Environmental Specialist
    Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto, Social Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered               Explanation
                                                                       Interventions / works under Component 1 form
                                                                       part of the comprehensive plan for the
                                                                       transformation of Barrio 31 and include: i) design
                                                                       and conduction of small-to-medium scale basic
                                                                       infrastructure works (water supply, sanitation,
                                                                       drainage, electricity, public lighting, gas, and paved
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                       roads), involving the participation of the respective
                                                                       utilities in the definition of the designs; ii) large-
                                                                       scale construction of housing units in the YPF plot
                                                                       (approximately 1,200 houses), including the
                                                                       resettlement of around 1,100 households and the
                                                                       construction of minor public spaces in the area
The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                        located under the Illia highway. Interventions
                                                        under Component 2 include: i) diagnostic studies
                                                        and preparation of investment plans, ii) small-to-
                                                        medium scale basic infrastructure (same as
                                                        Component 1, but in a much smaller scale), iii)
                                                        housing improvements, iv) property formalization,
                                                        v) public space improvements and construction of
                                                        public buildings, as well as vi) social intervention
                                                        programs and strengthening of neighborhood
                                                        institutions.

                                                        This Policy is triggered since Project activities are
                                                        expected to have environmental and social impacts
                                                        (both positive and negative, some of them
                                                        significant) in highly sensitive areas from a social
                                                        perspective.

                                                        The Project provides benefits to low-income
                                                        inhabitants of the largest metropolitan area of
                                                        Argentina. It supports interventions aimed at
                                                        bringing a sustainable urban and social inclusion of
                                                        the targeted neighborhoods. In addition, the
                                                        Project supports the two participating jurisdictions
                                                        to develop coordinated policies and platforms for
                                                        urban management at the metropolitan level.

                                                        The Project is classified as a Category A under
                                                        OP/BP 4.01, based upon the magnitude and
                                                        complexity of the interventions under Component
                                                        1, particularly the resettlement of approximately
                                                        1,100 households. Interventions under Component
                                                        1 have some potential for significant adverse social
                                                        and environmental impacts, although they are not
                                                        considered irreversible or non-mitigable.

                                                        Interventions/works under Component 2 are
                                                        expected to have less adverse potential effects, are
                                                        site specific, non-irreversible and can be readily
                                                        mitigated.

                                                        Regarding Component 1, a comprehensive plan for
                                                        the transformation of Barrio 31 has been prepared
                                                        and consulted, and the physical interventions have
                                                        been designed as subprojects, and most of the
                                                        infrascturture works are under execution. The
                                                        interventions have been developed in inter-
                                                        institutional collaboration between the agencies in
The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                        charge of public services and in consultation with
                                                        the local community. During preparation, an
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) was developed to establish the criteria to
                                                        manage all potential impacts related to Component
                                                        1, as well as for Component 3 on institutional
                                                        strengthening at the metropolitan level, in case any
                                                        activity with induced environmental and/or social
                                                        impacts would be financed. The ESMF sets forth the
                                                        mechanisms       that   SECISYU,     the     CABA’s
                                                        implementation agency needs to conduct for each
                                                        intervention, and its implementation has been
                                                        satisfactory.

                                                        With respect to Component 2, the Barrio Carlos
                                                        Gardel, located in the Municipality of Morón, is
                                                        subject to specific interventions, which, as
                                                        mentioned above, are smaller and less sensitive
                                                        than the ones in CABA. Similarly, an ESMF was
                                                        developed specifically targeted to the foreseen
                                                        activities under Component 2 of the Project; and its
                                                        implementation, which is still at an initial stage due
                                                        to an overall slower advance with Component 2
                                                        than Component 1, has also been satisfactory.

                                                        The two ESMFs were developed by CABA and PBA,
                                                        for Components 1 and 3 and for Component 2,
                                                        respectively, and approved by the WB to be
                                                        implemented by the corresponding PIU (SECISYU in
                                                        CABA and OPISU in PBA). Having two safeguards
                                                        management instruments is appropriate given that
                                                        there are two PIUs and there are slight variations in
                                                        the legal framework and regulations for the two
                                                        implementing agencies and their administrative
                                                        areas/responsibilities. The ESMFs take into account
                                                        the typologies of the foreseen interventions under
                                                        the Project, and include, among other items, the
                                                        mechanisms to (i) ensure compliance with
                                                        pertinent legislation and Bank policies for works of
                                                        the type considered under the Project; (ii) screen
                                                        subprojects and establish the scope of the required
                                                        environmental studies/assessments, (iii) develop
                                                        the environmental assessment of the different type
                                                        of subprojects, and (iv) conduct consultations and
                                                        implement community participation activities
                                                        during Project implementation.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                               The CABA ESMF addresses Component 3 in terms
                                                               of 3 aspects: 1) potential indirect/induced
                                                               environmental or social impacts will need to be
                                                               considered as the activities get further defined; the
                                                               only defined activity is development of a
                                                               metropolitan level information system; and 2)
                                                               public participation and/or consultation will be
                                                               organized for Component 3 activities as pertinent.

                                                               SECISYU      has developed satisfactory citizen
                                                               engagement and grievance response mechanisms,
                                                               and a robust communication strategy that has been
                                                               subject to continued strengthening as the Project
                                                               implementation advances. In the case of OPISU, it
                                                               is also developing a robust citizen engagement and
                                                               grievance and redress mechanisms that will be
                                                               integrated to the Provincial official channels.

                                                               In addition, both SECISYU and OPISU conducted
                                                               thorough social assessments in order to forecast
                                                               the impact of the completed transformation of
                                                               Barrio 31 and the works in Carlos Gardel,
                                                               respectively; and to identify the potential risks to
                                                               citizens and other inhabitants, particularly the poor
                                                               and other vulnerable residents. The findings and
                                                               recommendations of the social assessments have
                                                               been considered in the Project design and the
                                                               preparation of safeguards instruments, and are also
                                                               being considered to ensure a successful Project
                                                               implementation.

Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               This Policy is not triggered since Project
                                                               interventions take place in highly dense urban
                                                               areas where land has already been converted by
                                                               long-standing        anthropogenic           physical
                                                               modifications. The Project does not require
                                                               significant conversion of natural habitats or critical
                                                               natural habitats, and is not taking place in
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                               protected areas or ecologically sensitive sites.

                                                               The area in Barrio 31 where physical interventions
                                                               are financed under Component 1 is not located in
                                                               or within the influence zone of any natural habitat
                                                               nor it is next to the riparian zone of the La Plata
                                                               River. The drainage and sanitation infrastructure
The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                        works financed by the Project in this neighborhood
                                                        will be connected to the existing master conducts
                                                        of the city’s pluvial drainage system (managed by
                                                        the Ministry of Urban Development) and the city’s
                                                        sewerage system (managed by AySA, CABA’s water
                                                        supply and sanitation utility). The hydrologic
                                                        characteristics of the La Plata River favor higher
                                                        concentrations of contaminants in a relatively
                                                        narrow strip, approximately 500 meters wide,
                                                        measured from the coastline, which is seriously
                                                        compromised due to the presence of physical and
                                                        bacteriological     contaminants.      Based     on
                                                        concentrations       of     nitrogen     substances
                                                        (NH4+/NO3), Total Cr, Pb, detergents, phenolic
                                                        substances, BOD, and fecal coliforms, this coastal
                                                        zone could be considered as Type III Use (non-apt
                                                        for recreational purposes with direct contact),
                                                        according to a regional guideline on water quality
                                                        (ACUMAR). Thus, it is not expected that the aquatic
                                                        habitat of this river be affected by the drainage
                                                        interventions supported by the Project.
                                                        Furthermore, since the YPF plot will be used for
                                                        residential purposes, CABA has completed
                                                        addressing the environmental liabilities identified
                                                        through an environmental baseline study on soil
                                                        and groundwater quality that CABA contracted and
                                                        collaborated on with the City’s Environmental
                                                        Protection Agency (ApRA). The identified
                                                        remediation actions met the necessary level
                                                        required by the national soil quality guidelines for
                                                        residential uses, set forth in Annex 9, 831/1993
                                                        Decree, 24051 National Hazardous Waste Law.

                                                        The Project locations in PBA have also been
                                                        modified by long-standing human interventions.
                                                        PBA’s low-income neighborhoods are generally
                                                        located in shallow areas, next to streams or canals
                                                        tributaries of any of the three main basins in AMBA
                                                        (Luján, Matanza-Riachuelo, and Reconquista
                                                        Rivers). These streams or canals are typically highly
                                                        polluted, mainly from direct discharges of
                                                        untreated wastewater and solid wastes from the
                                                        residents of these neighborhoods. Given the lack of
                                                        access to sanitation and waste collection services,
                                                        residents use these water bodies to eliminate
                                                        waste. Thus, there are no expected negative
                                                        impacts in the riparian natural areas located near
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                               the potential locations of Component 2 activities.
                                                               Similarly, the pluvial drainage and wastewater
                                                               infrastructure works that will be financed by the
                                                               Project are expected to connect to the existing
                                                               systems in the Province (either under AySA or ABSA
                                                               management (both AMBA water utilities),
                                                               depending on the location; and for drainage, under
                                                               the management of the Provincial Directorate for
                                                               Sanitation and Hydraulic Works, Ministry of
                                                               Infrastructure and Public Services).

                                                               This Project is located in a highly dense urban area,
                                                               where land has already been converted. Therefore,
                                                               this Policy is not triggered since there are no forests
                                                               areas nor forest-dependent communities that
                                                               could       be       affected,      or     significantly
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                               converted/impacted due to the activities
                                                               conducted under the Project. Furthermore, the
                                                               Project does not involve changes in forest
                                                               management since it does not involve any forest-
                                                               related activity.
                                                               This Policy is triggered since diverse construction
                                                               works in disadvantaged/informal settlements often
                                                               require preparation of pest management plans.
                                                               This has indeed been the case under Component 1,
                                                               particularly regarding cleanup of rats’ nests as part
                                                               of the thus far urban upgrade works. The
                                                               application of this Policy was covered under the
                                                               ESMFs prepared by CABA and PBA. All use of
                                                               pesticides under the Project has and will follow
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 Yes
                                                               applicable good practices of integrated pest
                                                               management. The Project does not finance or allow
                                                               use of pesticides of categories not permissible
                                                               under OP 4.09 or by national legislation. SECISYU
                                                               contracted the University of Buenos Aires to
                                                               prepare an integrated pest management plan
                                                               (IPMP) focused on rat control for Barrio 31 and the
                                                               IPMP is being implemented in a satisfactory
                                                               manner.
                                                               Given the Project involves construction and
                                                               significant excavations, demolition and soil
                                                               movements, there is a chance of finding physical
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 cultural resources and this Policy is triggered. As
                                                               part of the EA processes, specific procedures to
                                                               avoid impacting potential physical cultural
                                                               resources were included in the ESMFs that CABA
      The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                              and PBA developed. No chance finds have taken
                                                              place thus far.
                                                              Argentina is a multicultural country with a notable
                                                              presence of indigenous and afro-descendants
                                                              populations, and the majority of these populations
                                                              live in urban areas. Indigenous people (2.54 percent
                                                              of the population) traditionally lived in rural
                                                              communities in the provinces of Salta, Jujuy,
                                                              Chubut, Neuquén, Tierra del Fuego, Chaco,
                                                              Formosa, Santa Fe, Tucuman, and Mendoza.
                                                              However, more than 80 percent of the indigenous
                                                              population in Argentina lives today in urban areas,
                                                              with the largest concentration living in the Buenos
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No                  Aires Metropolitan Area. This is due to numerous
                                                              factors, including new and improved access to basic
                                                              services as well as improved market opportunities.
                                                              For that reason, the Social Assessments prepared
                                                              by the CABA and PBA teams incorporated some
                                                              variables on ethnicity to define if the policy is
                                                              triggered under this project. Main findings indicate
                                                              that that there are no indigenous peoples as
                                                              defined by OP 4.10 in any of the neighborhoods
                                                              that might receive interventions financed by the
                                                              project, neither in CABA, nor in PBA. For that reason
                                                              OP 4.10 is not triggered.
                                                              This Policy is triggered. The project will finance the
                                                              relocation of around 1,100 households and small
                                                              business from the area located under the Illia
                                                              highway to the new housing units to be constructed
                                                              on the YPF plot adjacent to the neighborhood.
                                                              Specific housing units affected by activities under
                                                              Component 1 are being identified. Both CABA and
                                                              PBA have prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                              Framework (RPF) for their respective components
                                                              during project preparation, and both documents
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                 have been approved by the Bank.
                                                              A Resettlement Action Plan is under preparation to
                                                              guide the resettlement process for households
                                                              living under the Ilia Highway (Subcomponent 1.1).
                                                              A first draft RAP has been shared with the Bank
                                                              team and is now under review by the Government.
                                                              The final version of the document is expected to be
                                                              finalized by the end of 2018. An additional RAP will
                                                              be prepared for resettlement prior to carrying out
                                                              works under Subcomponent 1.1.
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                               Works in Carlos Gardel (Component 2) are also
                                                               expected to require taking of land that would
                                                               generate physical or economic displacement of
                                                               close to 75 households. Once the final number of
                                                               Project Affected People is defined, a Resettlement
                                                               Action Plan will be prepared in accordance with the
                                                               RPF.
                                                               Other activities of the Comprehensive Action Plan
                                                               for Barrio 31 that are not linked to this Project, nor
                                                               caused by activities financed and/or supported by
                                                               it, may require the implementation of resettlement
                                                               processes during the Project’s implementation
                                                               period. SECISYU will be the implementing agency of
                                                               these resettlement processes, and intends to
                                                               execute these processes in a way consistent with
                                                               the principles outlined in the RPF.

                                                               In addition, TA activities under Component 3 on
                                                               urban management at the metropolitan level will
                                                               need to be consistent with the principles of OP 4.12
                                                               to identify, avoid, minimize and address potential
                                                               downstream impacts.

                                                               This Policy is not triggered since the activities in this
                                                               Project does not imply construction/rehabilitation
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                               of dams nor other interventions which rely on the
                                                               performance of existing dams.
                                                               This Policy is triggered since the activities in CABA
                                                               and PBA include water supply, sanitation and
                                                               drainage infrastructure that makes use of water
                                                               resources from La Plata River Basin. Nevertheless,
                                                               an exception under the notification requirement to
                                                               the riparian state applies to the Project since it falls
                                                               within the exceptions provided for in paragraph
                                                               7(a) of OP 7.50, which states: "For any ongoing
                                                               schemes, projects involving additions or alterations
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           Yes                 that require rehabilitation, construction, or other
(BP 7.50)
                                                               changes that in the judgment of the Bank (i) will not
                                                               adversely change the quality or quantity of water
                                                               flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not be
                                                               adversely affected by the other riparians' possible
                                                               water use. This exception applies only to minor
                                                               additions or alterations to the ongoing scheme; it
                                                               does not cover works and activities that would
                                                               exceed the original scheme, change its nature, or so
                                                               alter or expand its scope and extent as to make it
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



                                                                       appear a new or different scheme." Consequently,
                                                                       there was no need to prepare a notification.
                                                                       The Policy is not triggered because the Project is
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No                     not implemented in areas known to involve
                                                                       disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The Project triggers the Bank Operational Policy (OP)/Bank Policy (BP) 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and is
      categorized as ‘A’ based on the same, due to the necessary resettlement of around 1,100 households in Barrio 31
      under Component 1. Although the primary objective of the resettlement is to provide access to improved housing
      conditions to households currently living under the Illia highway, its implementation requires systematic and
      comprehensive consultations and social management to provide equitable and transparent support and minimize any
      adverse impact on the livelihood of the affected people.

      Thorough management of environmental impacts is necessary and is being implemented by SECISYU due to the high
      population density of Barrio 31. The risk of existing soil contamination particularly on the YPF plot was addressed
      through an environmental baseline study conducted by CABA on the respective soil and groundwater quality to
      identify any required environmental clean-up before construction. Based on the study results described in the ESMF,
      CABA hired an authorized operator to carry out removal of the identified underground hydrocarbon storage systems,
      and transportation and final disposition of hazardous waste material that was located in the premises.

      Small to medium scale infrastructure works for basic services and construction of houses under Components 1 and 2
      have impacts that are site-specific, reversible, and possible to prevent and/or mitigate. The major adverse impacts
      identified in the CABA and PBA ESMF and subprojects’ Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and
      Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) thus far under Component 1 are alteration of everyday urban
      movement, potential contamination by particulate matter, gaseous emissions, noise and vibration related to the
      movement and operation of vehicles and machinery, soil excavation, handling of construction materials, temporary
      air alteration or contamination, potential discharges to groundwater, waste generation of different types, issues with
      workers and/or public health and safety, and accidental damage to objects of personal value. During the operational
      stage, potential adverse impacts are linked to the lack of maintenance or incorrect application of management
      measures.

      Technical activities under Component 3 are not expected to have a direct social or environmental impact. Potential
      indirect impacts, such as change in land use zoning, or changes in vehicular traffic, will be identified when specific
      TORs are prepared, in accordance with the ESMF prepared by CABA.




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



  Anticipated long term impact is positive, since the Project is helping to integrate disadvantaged neighborhoods to
  their surrounding urban environment and contribute to the urban transformation of the territory. In addition, the
  Project will contribute to strengthening metropolitan coordination mechanisms to improve alignment of policies and
  programs of urban development at the metropolitan level.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  No alternative was considered related to the Resettlement process under Component 1 since the Urbanization Law
  of Villa 31 (Law 3343/2009) mandates that all houses below the Illia highway are to be resettled and that any
  households that need to be resettled be provided with a housing solution within the perimeter of Barrio 31.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

  During Project preparation, the Governments of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (CABA) and of the Province of
  Buenos Aires (PBA) carried out Social Assessments (SAs) for Component 1 & 3 and for Component 2, respectively. The
  SAs identify the main socio-economic characteristics of the population living in the Project area, the main challenges
  they face, and how the Project can address some of those challenges through its planned interventions. CABA and
  PBA also developed specific and robust Grievance Redress Mechanisms for the Project. Main social issues are linked
  to involuntary resettlement, in particular under Component 1. Both CABA and PBA have prepared a Resettlement
  Policy Framework (RPF). Social risks are being mitigated through the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
  under Subcomponent 1.2 for the households living under the Illia Highway and the implementation of a citizen
  engagement strategy and grievance redress mechanism (GRM). A first draft RAP has been shared with the Bank team
  and is now under review by the Government. The final version of the document is expected to be finalized by the end
  of 2018. Additional RAPs will be prepared for resettlement prior to carrying out works under Subcomponent 1.1 and
  Component 2.

  Both CABA and PBA prepared an ESMF that establishes the criteria to manage potential impacts related to their
  respective components. The choice of ESMF as the safeguards instrument was pertinent as the specific sets of physical
  interventions have been or are defined as subprojects and their specific designs prepared during Project
  implementation. The environmental procedures defined in the ESMFs are consistent with the applicable national,
  provincial and municipal level regulations and the Bank’s safeguard policies. The ESMFs provide the mechanisms to
  screen subprojects, establish the scope of the required environmental studies/assessments, conduct consultations
  and implement community participation activities during Project implementation. Prior to initiating any activity on
  the ground, all subprojects have an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) in place, consistent with the
  scale of the potential impacts, consulted with the affected people and reviewed and received a no-objection by the
  World Bank as established in the respective Operational Manual.

  TORs have been developed for the proposed technical activities under Component 3, screened for potential indirect
  impacts such as change in land use zoning, or changes in vehicular traffic.

  SECISYU and OPISU have maintained qualified environmental staff in number and functions as necessary throughout
  thus far Project implementation to lead the preparation and implementation of ESMPs and RAPs, and the World Bank
  has provided active implementation support particularly to SECISYU, taken the advantaged state of implementation
  of Component 1.
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Component 2 ESMF and RPF were disclosed by PBA in-country on October 21 and the World Bank external website
       on October 25, 2016, and the ESMF and RPF of Components 1 and 3 by CABA on October 26 and October 27,
       respectively. The consultations with key stakeholders on the two sets of safeguards instruments were organized by
       PBA on November 9, and by CABA on November 10, 2016.

       Both Social Assessments preparation processes included a series of consultations with different stakeholders through
       focus groups and interviews. In the case of CABA, this was carried out as a complement of a thorough socio-economic
       assessment that SECISYU is carrying out in all Barrio 31. In addition, specific consultations on the safeguards
       instruments were undertaken on November 9 (PBA) and 10 (CABA), 2016. The main findings of those consultations
       have been incorporated in the revised version of each document. Feedback received in both consultation events
       focused on the poor conditions of the buildings’ infrastructure, lack of public spaces, issues related to local
       governance, and citizen engagement. In both cases, CABA and PBA representatives responded to the concerns and
       explained how some of the issues presented would be addressed through the Project. The ESMFs and RPFs were not
       object to particular comments or adjustments based on said consultations. The final versions of both ESMFs include
       an annex that describes in detail the consultations conducted during the Project preparation. The final ESMFs were
       re-disclosed in-country on December 14, both by PBA and CABA, and at the World Bank external website on December
       13, 2016.

       The RAP under preparation (linked to works under Subpcomponent 1.2) will be subject to consultation once a draft
       version is cleared by the Bank for its publication. A revised version will be publshed once it has incorporated inputs
       from the PAPs during the consultation process. The same process will be carried out for the additional RAPs that will
       be prepared linked to works under Subcomponent 1.1 and Component 2.



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
13-Dec-2016                                                      13-Dec-2016
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 27-Oct-2016
 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
 Argentina                                                          14-Dec-2016
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
13-Dec-2016                                                                 13-Oct-2016
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
          Argentina                                                          14-Dec-2016
           Comments


PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                              Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes



           PM_TABLE
           OP 4.09 - Pest Management
           Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                           Yes
        The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



Is a separate PMP required?                                                         Yes

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project       Yes
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       Yes

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  3,000

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PIW_TABLE
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                               NA

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP            Yes
prepared and sent?

Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                             Yes



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Metropolitan Buenos Aires Urban Transformation Project (P159843)



    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Catherine Lynch
    Task Team Leader(s)                      Beatriz Eraso Puig
                                             Horacio Cristian Terraza

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
