The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSR25319




                      Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                             Country Director:    Michel Kerf
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Jie Tang
                           Task Team Leader:      Kamleshwar Prasad Khelawan
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P098423                                                     Sustainable Energy Financing Program
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Kamleshwar Prasad Khelawan                                  Pacific Islands
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    12-Jun-2007                                                 Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE09


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             19.65
    Total Financing                                                                                                19.65
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          11.20
         Borrower                                                                                                    0.50
         Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                                                 10.20
         Sub-borrower(s)                                                                                             0.50
      Trust Funds                                                                                                    8.45
         Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                           8.45
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project aims to (i) significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and the more efficient
    use ofenergy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to participate in sustainable energy
    finance in the Recipient's Territory (Fiji) and (ii) support knowledge sharing and capacity building on renewable energy
    and energy efficiencytechnologies in the Participating Island States.


    Proposed New PDO
    The objective of the Program is (i) to significantly increase the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and
    the more efficient use of energy through a package of incentives to encourage local financial institutions to participate
    in sustainable energy finance in the Participating Pacific Island States; and (ii) to support knowledge sharing and
    capacity building on renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies in the Participating Pacific Island States.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project will make available a Risk Sharing Facility to guarantee 50% of the loans by commercial banks to individual
and micro and small enterprise (MSE) to borrowers to finance renewable energy technologies and energy efficient use
of energy. In addition, the project provides funds for technical assistance, market incentives and communications and
for the management, monitoring and evaluation of the program.

The loans made under this project will need to meet a Covered Loans Criteria and will be to finance equipment as set
out in an Approved Product Catalog and in the case of MSE borrowers, based on an approved business plan.
The project includes the following components:

Component 1. Risk Sharing Fund (RSF)
(a)     Providing partial credit guarantees through the Fund Manager from the Risk Sharing Fund to Approved PFIs to
make Covered Loans to Participating Individual Borrowers and Participating MSE Borrowers to enable them to make
investments in Sustainable Energy technologies from the Approved Product Catalog and/or in related Sustainable Energy
services under an Approved Business Plan.
(b)     Providing technical assistance to the Recipient, for the Participating Pacific Island States, in order to: (i) select
Approved PFIs to be eligible for partial credit guarantee coverage under the Risk Sharing Fund; and (ii) develop and
monitor: (A) the Approved Product Catalog and Approved Business Plans; and (B) the terms and conditions for Covered
Loans to be eligible for financing support under the RSF.

Component 2. Technical Assistance, Market Incentives and Communications
Providing technical assistance to the Recipient, for the Participating Pacific Island States, in order to:
(a)     strengthen the capacity of Approved PFIs to service client’s borrowing to purchase Sustainable Energy
equipment by providing training to establish and maintain a profitable Sustainable Energy portfolio, including support
with appropriate management information systems, risk mitigation and recovery techniques;
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



(b)     strengthen sales and after sales incentive structures for Sustainable Energy service providers through detailed
market surveys;
(c)     strengthen the financial and technical capacity of MSE Sustainable Energy service providers;
(d)     assist vocational schools and other training institutions to: (i) provide training on energy planning and
Sustainable Energy solutions; and (ii) develop and deliver Sustainable Energy technology repair and maintenance
training;
(e)     develop and implement consumer protection, testing and accreditation programs, including accreditation of
renewable energy suppliers, auditors and managers;
(f)     assist local retailers and MSEs to attend training institutions and trade fairs on Sustainable Energy topics and
support trade fairs, showcases and community presentations, to promote Sustainable Energy and energy efficiency
technologies;
(g)     install Sustainable Energy and energy efficiency demonstration facilities to promote their adoption and use;
(h)     review the energy policies of the Participating Pacific Island States to identify, and recommend actions to
remove, barriers to significant increase in the adoption and use of renewable energy technologies and more efficient
use of energy, and carry out renewable energy resource and technology studies and studies regarding the efficient use
of energy; and
(i)     develop a communications strategy for the Program to address all relevant stakeholders, including communities,
potential Borrowers and potential Approved PFIs.

Component 3. Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Providing the services of a Regional Program Manager to the Recipient, for the Participating Pacific Island States, in
order to:
(a)     ensure effective management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the Program;
(b)     promote regional coordination of the Program; and
(c)     monitor, report and support any outstanding matters arising from the ongoing Program.

The SEFP will be expanded into a regional program, for implementation in both Fiji and Vanuatu. The Fund Manager
would thus provide Guarantees under the RSF to eligible PFIs in Fiji and to eligible PFIs in Vanuatu. The management of
RSF activities in Vanuatu be carried out by the Department of Energy in the Ministry of Climate Change and Natural
Disasters of the Government of Vanuatu (GoV), while Fiji’s Department of Energy, in the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Transport of the Government of Fiji (GoF) will continue with management of the RSF in Fiji. However, no GEF funds will
be provided to the GoV for its management of the RSF activities in Vanuatu; instead, these activities will be supported by
the Program Manager (Regional Program Manager) engaged by Fiji, whose terms of reference will be expanded to
implement the RSF in Fiji and Vanuatu under the direction of each country’s Department of Energy.

The responsibilities of the GoV will be captured through a new Project Agreement between Vanuatu and the World
Bank, and the GoF’s responsibilities for implementation of the RSF in Fiji and its support to the GoV will be captured in a
second amended and restated GEF Grant Agreement with Fiji. The GoF and the GoV will enter into an Implementation
Agreement to coordinate the RSF implementation activities in Vanuatu. The extension of the Fund Manager’s
responsibility to Vanuatu will be captured in a second amended and restated GEF Grant Agreement with the Fund
Manager.

The SEFP program will support the two existing World Bank Rural Electrification Projects (VREP) in Vanuatu. Only those
participants in the VREP who meet the criteria for RSF support may access the RSF program in Vanuatu. This will be
captured in the Operations Manual developed by Fiji for the existing project, to be updated for the restructured project
as a Regional Operations Manual acceptable to the World Bank. The existing agreements for VREP between Vanuatu and
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



the World Bank will be amended to link Vanuatu’s obligations under RSF to the VREP, by specifying that a failure by
Vanuatu to meet its obligations under RSF will be an additional condition of suspension under each of the VREP
agreements.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project activities will take place in Fiji and Vanuatu.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Ross James Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      The policy was triggered in the original project
                                                                      because of the environment and social impacts
                                                                      expected from the community-based investments
                                                                      on sustainable energy such as pico hydro and solar
                                                                      PV and the disposal of used lead acid batteries from
                                                                      solar PV.
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                      For the restructuring, the policy remains triggered
                                                                      as the project is expected to continue supporting
                                                                      these investments in Fiji. The policy if triggered
                                                                      under VREP I and VREP II in Vanuatu as the project
                                                                      will support solar photovoltaic investments and the
                                                                      disposal of batteries is an issue.
     Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                                No
     Activities OP/BP 4.03
     Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No

     Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No

     Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No

     Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
       The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



                                                        The policy was triggered for Fiji under the original
                                                        project and remains triggered as Fiji is known to
                                                        have IPs, namely the ethnic Fijians, who are
                                                        indigenous to Fiji, and the “Rotumans,? native to
                                                        the Rotuma Island and nearby islets.

                                                        The project is demand driven and IPs will benefit
                                                        from supported activities; benefits are considered
                                                        culturally appropriate as individual households and
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes          small community groups will choose on their own if
                                                        they want to borrow funds for small-scale
                                                        sustainable energy investments. Measures to
                                                        ensure that IPs are not adversely affected are
                                                        included in the project’s Environmental and Social
                                                        Safeguards Framework (ESSF).

                                                        This policy is triggered for Vanuatu under VREP I but
                                                        a recent change in policy has meant that it was not
                                                        triggered for VREP II.
                                                        ESSF and ISDS states that the distribution lines from
                                                        pico hydro may affect/traverse private
                                                        lands/properties in Fiji. The project has thus far not
                                                        included activities with distribution lines traversing
                                                        third party properties.

                                                        The restructured project will not include activities
                                                        that require land acquisition or relocation.
                                                        However, OP 4.12 is triggered to the restructured
                                                        project to provide measures that ensure that third
                                                        party land owners provide permission for low-
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes          voltage distribution lines and are not adversely
                                                        affected by such arrangements.

                                                        This policy has not been triggered for VREP I in
                                                        Vanuatu as the systems are plug and play solar
                                                        home systems. This policy has been triggered for
                                                        VREP II in Vanuatu for component 2, mini grids
                                                        which will not be supported by the restructured
                                                        project. The restructured project will support
                                                        component 1, solar home systems and single owner
                                                        micro grids that will not have an impact on
                                                        neighboring properties or assets.
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           No
(BP 7.50)
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The current safeguard classification of Category C for operations in Fiji will remain no changes to the ISDS or
      safeguards instrument (Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework - ESSF) for Fiji. Safeguards arrangements
      established under the Vanuatu Rural Electrification Projects (VREP I - P150908 and VREP II - P160658) will apply for
      the Vanuatu part of the operations.

      This ESSF manages environmental and social safeguard risks and issues associated with the program in Fiji. Specific
      safeguard instruments apply to the two World Bank supported energy projects in Vanuatu (VREP I and VREP II - the
      Environmental Code of Practice for Disposal of Batteries, Environmental and Social Management Framework), to
      which this program is being extended. The legal agreements refer to the relevant safeguards instruments applicable
      for operations in Fiji and Vanuatu.




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      There are potential direct and indirect negative impacts as a result of the activities. The physical works are limited to
      very minor works and are effectively managed via the existing safeguard instruments and implementation
      architecture.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
      There are many alternatives to decentralized renewable energy which will be supported by this project; almost all of
      which have significant long term environmental impact both in the project area and elsewhere. Low scale renewable
      energy such as that supported by this project are universally seen as having a lower negative impact and greater
      positive impact than other energy generation and distribution alternatives.


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      The project activities are managed via existing safeguard instruments in both Fiji and Vanuatu which have been
      effectively applied in both countries over an extended period. Both Fiji and Vanuatu have proven capacity in terms of
      undertaking the activities which will be partly funded by this project.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                        Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



                   The EAs, PM and PFI are the key stakeholders. The PM will prepare safeguards information in a brochure which will
                   be part of the information package provided to potential beneficiaries. The revised ESSF will also be disclosed in Fiji
                   and Vanuatu.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                          Date of submission for disclosure
        05-Nov-2013                                                          12-Nov-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            Fiji                                                                08-Nov-2013
            Comments




            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            Vanuatu                                                             02-Aug-2014
            Comments
            VREP II 30 December, 2016


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Date of submission for disclosure
05-Nov-2013                                                                    12-Nov-2013
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
          Fiji                                                                  08-Nov-2013
                            The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)



           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
05-Nov-2013                                                                  12-Nov-2013
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            Fiji                                                             08-Nov-2013
            Comments




       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                               No



           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                 No
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                                 No
            (as appropriate) been prepared?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                                 NA
            review the plan?

            Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                                        No

            Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                                                 No
            to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sustainable Energy Financing Program (P098423)




    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Kamleshwar Prasad Khelawan


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
