The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSR25227




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                              Country Director:    Yaye Seynabou Sakho
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Michal J. Rutkowski
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Pablo Gottret
                            Task Team Leader:      Snjezana Plevko
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P155097                                                      Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Snjezana Plevko                                              Panama
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    23-Sep-2015                                                   Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GSP04


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                            75.00
    Total Financing                                                                                               75.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                75.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to increase the efficiency of the social protection system and improve the income
    generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable.




.
         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)




 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Project was approved by the Bank on September 23, 2015, signed on December 18, 2015 and declared
effective on April 18, 2016. Soon after loan signing, Project implementation was adversely affected by a series
of events that led to a slowdown in implementation a lack of progress towards the PDO achievement. The
Government and the Bank agreed, therefore, to adjust the Project design and to align it with the Government
Zero Poverty Strategy. The restructuring of the Project involved the following:
Component 1, “Strengthening and Efficiency of the Social Protection System?: In this Component, while the
Sub-component structure will remain the same, the activities within sub-components will be modified. While
some activities initially envisaged under the Project will be reduced in scope as their implementation has been
initiated using other financing sources (i.e., development of a single registry), the scope of this Component will
broaden to include activities related to evaluation and strengthening of all MIDES social programs. Under Sub-
component 1.1 “Social protection system instruments,? the Project will support the development of a single
entry window (Ventanilla Unica) to facilitate the referral of MIDES beneficiaries, strengthening and expansion
of the use of existing instruments (unique registration form, PMT, etc.), digitalization of beneficiary records that
are currently available only on paper, and development and enhancement of the Social Protection (SP) system
to strengthen its ability to quickly address the needs of affected population post-disaster. The Project will also
continue providing technical support to MIDES to strengthen its capacity to oversee the development of the
single registry that will be carried out by an external developer. In addition to original activities, Sub-component
1.2 on “Social programs management tools? will include the assessment and revision of operational procedures
of key social programs in MIDES, as well as the development of MIS modules to manage the information
gathered by productive inclusion programs in a comprehensive and coherent manner within MIDES. The Sub-
component will also include activities to improve coordination, strengthen the design, enhance business
processes and management of the existing MIDES productive inclusion programs, and complete Operations
Manuals for each of these programs. In addition, the Project will support the design of a pilot and development
of an Operations Manual for a new vocational training program. Activities under Sub-Component 1.3
“Monitoring and Evaluation capacity? will be strengthened to include a rapid impact assessment and process
assessments of existing productive inclusion programs, and an evaluation of the productive inclusion pilot
interventions designed under the Project.

Component 2, “MIDES Territorial Structure and Direct Family Support? : The financing for the engagement of
promotores and social workers as consultants in Component 2 will no longer be needed as they became MIDES
staff, but the activities related to the design and implementation of family support programs and the capacity
building of promotores will be maintained and strengthened. Also, Sub-component 2.1 “MIDES Territorial
coverage of promotores and social workers? will include the mapping and geo-referencing of the supply of social
programs offered by MIDES, as well as the development of social programs for indigenous poor and vulnerable
population that would complement the activities under the “Support for the National Indigenous Peoples
Development Plan Project? (P157575). Activities under Sub-Component 2.2 “Social Feedback Mechanism? will
be maintained, and further expanded to include activities related to the development of culturally appropriate
mechanisms for MIDES to deliver services to all the targeted populations, including attending the specific needs
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



of indigenous and afro-descendant populations. These expanded activities will be coordinated by the Division
of Social Policy, as the new responsible entity within the MIDES to develop these protocols. The activities are in
line with the Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF) already developed during original Project preparation.
In addition, MIDES’s Centers for Infants (Centros de Atención a la Primera Infancia, CAIPI) and Centers for Seniors
(Centros de Atención para Adultos Mayores) will be upgraded to provide adequate infrastructure for social
services. Since this is a new activity under the Project, before the implementation of these improvements,
MIDES will conduct a structural assessment of these Centers. As the Project can only support minor retrofitting
and repairs, following the finalization of the structural assessment, the Project activities will only be
implemented in Centers that are deemed structurally sound. Therefore, a new Sub-component 2.3 is to be
included under the Project to support the structural assessment, minor retrofitting and repairs of selected CAIPIs
and shelters for vulnerable people, as well as the purchase and installation of necessary equipment in these
Centers.

Component 3, “Productive social Inclusion services for the poor and vulnerable?: Following the Government’s
request, the Component will be revised to focus on the implementation of a pilot for a new vocational training
program for poor and vulnerable youth (including vocational training by INADEH), as well as scaling up of the
existing apprenticeship (Padrino Empresario/Enfoca/MITRADEL) and asset-transfer (Redes Territoriales and
Cohesion Social) programs. Prior to implementation of existing programs through the Project, an evaluation of
programs’ current results and processes will be conducted to inform the programs’ redesign, and facilitate the
development of each program’s operations manual. Implementation of each of these programs under the
Project will be subject to Bank approval of the program’s operations manual. While the existing activities related
to cooperation with MITRADEL and INADEH will remain similar to those in the original Project design, they will
be reduced in size. However, at the same time, the scope of the Component will be expanded to include the
support for the implementation of the redesigned MIDES productive inclusion programs.

Vocational Training Program: The Component will support the piloting of a new vocational training program
that seeks to increase the human capital of poor and vulnerable youth to improve their employability and ability
for income generation. The pilot will primarily target the district of Las Minas in the Herrera province, and will
be further expanded to other priority districts identified in the " Panama para Todos" Strategy. The program
would support poor and vulnerable youth from the targeted areas in finalizing vocational training in the skills
that are in demand in the labor market, by providing a cash transfer -- conditional on their participation in the
training under the program -- to cover their food and transportation costs. For the provision of training
opportunities, the program will rely on INADEH, based on the signed Memorandum of Understanding between
MIDES and INADEH, as well as on other vocational training institutions in the priority districts identified in
Panama para Todos Strategy.

Apprenticeship Program: The restructuring will build on the existing MIDES apprenticeship program - Padrino
Empresario, and will rely on the cooperation of other existing MIDES programs and on continued cooperation
with MITRADEL to provide apprenticeship opportunities to poor and vulnerable members of CCT beneficiary
families. Padrino Empresario is an existing apprenticeship program that provides internship opportunities to
youth at risk between 15 and 17 years. The program ensures a placement of its beneficiaries for a three-month
apprenticeship in a private sector company. Currently there are 94 companies registered under the program,
but some of them do not participate actively due to the lack of clarity regarding the procedures, appropriate
work placement opportunities, capacity to provide mandatory training in soft skills, or funding. As part of the
           The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



restructuring, the program would be redesigned to expand the group of beneficiaries and participating
companies, secure the provision of social skills training prior to the internship through the support of the Enfoca
Program, another MIDES productive inclusion program, and provide stipends to participants to cover their basic
costs (transportation, food, etc.). Given that the Memorandum of Understanding between MIDES and
MITRADEL has also been signed, the program will also continue to cooperate with MITRADEL and place some of
its participants in internships in companies that are participating in the on-going MITRADEL ProJóven and PAIL
programs. As with all other productive inclusion programs that will be supported under the Project, the
implementation of the apprenticeship program under the Project will require the finalization of the Program
Operations Manual and its approval by the World Bank.

Asset-Transfer Productive Inclusion Programs: Redes Territoriales (RT) and Cohesion Social (CS) are asset-
transfer productive inclusion programs that provide poor and vulnerable households and communities with
training, asset transfers and technical assistance to promote income generating activities. Redes Territoriales
targets households in rural and peri-urban areas, while Cohesion Social targets indigenous territories. Both
programs seek to improve the living standards of poor communities through productive inclusion activities that
include community development and empowerment, human capital, and social sustainability. The RT program
offers community development, provision of seeds, chicken, livestock or other assets to support the growth of
crop and livestock production, training and technical advice and support throughout project implementation.
Currently the program has 191 on-farm and 39 off-farm income generation projects in 230 communities (15-20
households per program), benefitting 2,767 households across rural and peri-urban areas of Panama. Cohesion
Social will use the same productive inclusion package as Redes Territoriales, but tailored to the customs and
culture of indigenous population. The intervention in the indigenous territories will start in 2019.

As the asset-transfer programs include the distribution of various assets including livestock and seeds to
beneficiaries, their inclusion in the Project triggers potential environmental risks, thus resulting in the upgrading
of the Project’s environmental assessment category from C to B.

The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and published on the Ministerio de Desarrollo Social
(MIDES) website on June 6, 2018, and on the Mi Ambiente website on June 12, 2018, and preliminary
consultations with stakeholders were completed. Continuous consultations are planned throughout the
implementation of the Project to mitigate any possible environmental risks. Also, an overview of the EMP will
be included as part of the mandatory training curriculum within the Project, and the brochures with key
information on the EMP will be published under the Project and distributed to the program beneficiaries.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project will be country-wide, including Indigenous autonomous territories and collective communities.
    Despite a decade of sustained fast growth and poverty reduction in Panama, there are sharp regional
    disparities as the extremely poor are increasingly concentrated in remote geographic areas where
    Indigenous peoples live. The Indigenous territories have the highest poverty rates (between 80 and 90
    percent) and show the lowest poverty declines: poverty declined just 4.2 percentage points between 2007
    and 2014. In 2014, extreme poverty was five times larger in Indigenous territories (58.2 percent) compared
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



to the national incidence. As a result, extreme poverty has become an indigenous phenomenon: in 2007, 24
percent of all extremely poor people in Panama lived in three indigenous territories, a figure which rose to
42 percent by 2012. The population in extreme poverty in Panama live in households where the heads have
on average only 5 years of education (4.5 fewer than the national average), are concentrated in the
agricultural sector, and work mainly as self-employed or unpaid family workers. They have much higher
dependency ratios, driven by a much greater share of young children. The slower poverty reduction in
Indigenous territories and rural areas points to the need to address bottlenecks in access to social services
and improvement in their productivity. There are other demographic groups that are lagging behind in
benefitting from the recent growth experience. The last years of growth had an impact on poverty through
reduced unemployment rates (4.3 percent in 2014) and higher labor incomes that explain two thirds of the
reduction in poverty. Still, labor markets did not benefit all individuals in the same way. Youth
unemployment in 2014 reached 10.3 percent, more than twice the national rate, and it was particularly high
among secondary education graduates (14.8 percent). Youth from families that receive social assistance like
Red de Oportunidades conditional cash transfer program (CCT) that have lower levels of secondary
completion, also show high unemployment rates reaching 17 percent. Unemployment has also a strong
geographic concentration in urban areas, reaching 9.8 percent in areas like Colon. This recent growth and
poverty reduction experience emphasizes the need for a differentiated social policy agenda across
geographic areas in Panama and across socioeconomic and ethnic groups.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Gunars H. Platais, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Dianna M. Pizarro, Social Safeguards Specialist
Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered           Explanation
                                                                 Program interventions under Redes Territoriales
                                                                 and Cohesion Social pose the potential for
                                                                 additional – though easily managed and not
                                                                 irreversible – impact to the environment.
                                                                 Therefore, an Environmental Management Plan
                                                                 (EMP) was prepared and published on the MIDES
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     website on June 6, 2018 and Mi Ambiente website
                                                                 on June 12, 2018, and preliminary consultations
                                                                 with stakeholders were completed that included
                                                                 the implementation arrangements for the
                                                                 identification, avoidance and mitigation of any
                                                                 potential impacts on the environment from the
                                                                 newly restructured project.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector                        None of the activities under the Project qualify as a
                                             No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03                                           private sector activity, therefore, they will not
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



                                                                trigger the Performance Standards for Private
                                                                Sector Activities, as defined under the policy.
                                                                None of the activities under the project will have
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No
                                                                any impact on natural habitats.
                                                                The Project does not consider any works in forest
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                                areas or changes to forest management.
                                                                Program interventions under Redes Territoriales
                                                                and Cohesion Social include activities related to
                                                                pest management. As a result, this policy is newly
                                                                triggered and an EMP has been prepared to include
                                                                a Pest Management Plan. The PMP was published
                                                                on the MIDES website on June 6, 2018 and Mi
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 Yes                   Ambiente website on June 12, 2018, and
                                                                preliminary consultations with stakeholders were
                                                                completed that included soliciting input on the
                                                                proposed integrated pest management approaches
                                                                proposed in the PMP, as well as the measures for
                                                                effective and safe handling, storage, use and
                                                                disposal of pesticides.
                                                                The Project will not involve works and thus no
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                   significant impacts on physical cultural resources
                                                                are expected.
                                                                The Project triggers OP/BP 4.10 as indigenous
                                                                peoples that meet the policy's four criteria are
                                                                among the project’s beneficiary populations and
                                                                the project specifically targets Indigenous peoples
                                                                in Component 3. Therefore, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared, broadly
                                                                consulted, and disseminated both in country and
                                                                on the Bank's website before appraisal of the
                                                                original project. A social assessment that evaluates
                                                                lessons learned from the previous Social Protection
                                                                Project (P098328), and previous work with
                                                                Indigenous communities governance structures
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes                   and their relation to social service provision was
                                                                also prepared to develop the original IPPF. The
                                                                team carried out a consultation on the IPPF with
                                                                Indigenous peoples and their traditional authorities
                                                                in the Indigenous territories of Guna Yala, Embera
                                                                Wounanna and Ngäbe-Bugle. The Project Appraisal
                                                                Document (PAD) and Appraisal Stage ISDS included
                                                                a summary of the consultations, including a
                                                                description of how the feedback was incorporated
                                                                in the original project design. Consultations are
                                                                ongoing with Indigenous peoples throughout the
                                                                project to ensure that the IPPF is updated to reflect
                                                                their preference for involvement in the Redes
           The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



                                                                         Territoriales and Cohesion Social program
                                                                         interventions, and that the final IPPs correctly
                                                                         capture all of the activities that will occur in IP areas
                                                                         Whereas, project activities include small
                                                                         retrofitting and minor repairs of Centers for infants
                                                                         and Seniors under Component 2, any investment
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         No
                                                                         requiring the involuntary taking of land that would
                                                                         produce the impacts under OP/BP 4.12 will be
                                                                         deemed ineligible.
                                                                         The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
                                                                         investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                         dams.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                                The Project will not affect international waterways
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)                                                               as defined under the policy.
                                                                         The proposed Project will not affect disputed areas
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                         as defined under the policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Under the original Project, the MIDES’s three conditional cash transfer programs (Red de Oportunidades, Angel
      Guardian, 120 a los 65) were already providing services to a targeted population of Panamanians. The programs’ users
      benefitted from the cash transfers, and in compliance with co-responsibilities related to the programs, accessed
      government financed health and education services. However, the health and educational services were not fully
      adapted to the culturally diverse and in some cases very remote location of their users, especially the diverse
      indigenous populations living in the traditional territories. At the same time, the social assessment and consultation
      process carried out during project preparation signaled the importance to also adopt the content and delivery
      methodologies for the training activities to be supported under Component 3. The IPPF calls for territorial level
      consultations and adaptations of all services provided under the project that need to be established in the
      corresponding Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) for each territory.

      The new Project-supported interventions under Redes Territoriales (RT) and Cohesion Social (CS) assets-transfer
      programs seek to improve the living standards of poor and vulnerable communities through productive inclusion
      activities that include tailored support for crop and livestock income generating activities in rural and peri-urban (RT)
      and indigenous areas (CS). Currently the RT program has 191 on-farm and 39 off-farm income generation projects for
      230 communities, totaling 266 projects that benefit 2,767 households within those communities. While RT is
      operating, CS is still under design and is yet to be rolled out. The team working on a complementary Bank trust fund
      to support Indigenous women's economic empowerment in Panama is coordinating with the MIDES team the testing
      of a methodology that could potentially be adopted and scaled up through CS for integral interventions in Indigenous
      communities. These interventions would address access to finance (community banking), general training needs on
      income generation and financial management, and tailored technical assistance for women's productive
      organizations. While these interventions are limited in scope, they could potentially have negative impact on the
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



  environment. Therefore, although MIDES has been monitoring these impacts closely using the existing national
  regulations, an Environmental Management Plan was prepared for the revised Project to guide MIDES and the
  beneficiaries in the implementation of these activities, in pesticide management, and in avoiding negative
  environmental impacts. The EMP covers potential risks, related mitigation measures and best practices applicable to
  new project activities related to asset transfer, including livestock and use of pesticides.

  Originally at appraisal, the Project had an Environmental Risk Category C; however, given the new supported transfer-
  asset activities which include the use of pesticides, the project’s environmental Risk Category has been upgraded to
  B. No large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts have been identified.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  Not applicable


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  Not applicable


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  In addition to the already triggered OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous peoples safeguards for which an IPPF was prepared,
  consulted, and disclosed before appraisal, the Project under its revised design, is triggering two additional safeguards
  which are OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, and OP 4.09 Pest Management. This is due to the insertion of two
  productive inclusion programs - Redes Territoriales and Cohesion Social – into the Project. These two programs
  include transfer of assets (livestock, seeds, etc.), which, albeit small, might have an impact on the environment.
  Therefore, an EMP, which includes guidance on integrated pest management, has been prepared, published on the
  MIDES website on June 6, 2018, and Mi Ambiente website on June 12, 2018, and the preliminary consultations with
  key stakeholders have been completed and will continue during Project implementation to ensure mitigation of risks
  for potential negative environmental impacts.

  During early stages of the revised Project implementation, MIDES will initiate the consultation process with each of
  the 12 Indigenous Congresses, Councils and program's beneficiaries to design an IPP to facilitate differentiated service
  delivery to indigenous populations in order to ensure that their programs’ methodologies and services are culturally
  appropriate, accessible and reliable.

  A draft social assessment was prepared describing demographic data, as well as knowledge gaps, on Indigenous
  peoples in the country and in each of the three CCT MIDES programs, and MIDES initiated dialogue and consultation
  with the twelve congresses. The consultations on the project, the social assessment and the IPPF were carried out
  with the main representatives from the country's twelve Indigenous congresses and councils. The first workshop was
  carried out and well attended in May 2015, in Panama City, and was considered by all participants to be an initial
  dialogue rather than a "consultation." Subsequently, another consultation workshop was held and well attended on
  June 12th, 2015 in Panama City as well. The original components of the project were discussed and minor
  observations and suggestions were made which were thoroughly documented by the MIDES team and included in
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



  the draft social assessment. Generally, the original project design was accepted as a starting point to be completed
  and enhanced by the specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), to be jointly developed by the MIDES and the relevant
  congresses to identify the design and implementation improvements needed to adequately serve the country's
  diverse Indigenous populations. The two workshops provided recommendations regarding the proposed
  methodology that will guide the consultations processes that MIDES will carry out in order to prepare an Indigenous
  Peoples Plan for each indigenous group. As a result, MIDES prepared a draft framework based on these inputs and
  circulated it to all participants and their designated technical liaisons for feedback. Instructions were provided on how
  to present the feedback provided and the implementation timeline. MIDES has been documenting the feedback
  status from each congress and its incorporation into the IPPF. The IPPF also states that the Government is committed
  to receiving and incorporating the remaining feedback and will be updating the framework once feedback or
  acceptance from all twelve congresses is received.

  The project will uphold a continuous feedback loop with direct and indirect stakeholders and interested parties. This
  will be undertaken by the borrower and through the existing Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which has been
  in place since the start of the project and will continue to exist, thus ensuring socially inclusive and culturally adequate
  feedback mechanisms.

  A complementary trust fund currently being implemented by the Bank in coordination with the country's two national
  Indigenous women's organizations will help design and deliver an integral support pilot for Indigenous women's
  economic empowerment that should inform the design and implementation of the Cohesion Social (CS) program.

  In terms of borrower capacity, the MIDES's Department of Social Policies has already brought together a team of
  social scientists dedicated to mainstreaming ethnicity across the MIDES's programs. Moreover, the three CCT
  programs and the productive inclusion ones vary substantially in terms of their own capacity to implement social
  safeguards. Red de Oportunidades has in-house social scientists who are currently the recipients of capacity building
  provided by a local expert on indigenous engagement in public policy and indigenous consultation methodology, while
  the other programs are expected to build such capacity during Project implementation. In addition, Panama has the
  in-house environmental management capacity for projects of much larger potential impacts in agriculture. Therefore,
  MIDES has worked with the Ministry of Agriculture (MIDA) and also of Environment (Mi Ambiente) in the preparation
  of the EMP and will continue to collaborate as needed during project implementation.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The main stakeholders of the project are the poor and vulnerable beneficiaries of the Ministry of Social Development's
  social programs including the three conditional cash benefit programs (Red de Oportunidades, Angel Guardian, 120
  a los 65), existing productive inclusion programs (RdO, Cohesion Social, Padrino/Enfoca) and the new Vocational
  Training pilot program. In the case of indigenous families, their own governing structures and traditional authorities,
  as well as technical and coordinating organizations, such as the National Indigenous Peoples Roundtable, play
  important roles in influencing public policy and how and to what extent the Ministry's programs intersect with their
  own National Indigenous Development Plan.

  The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared and published on the MIDES website on June 6, 2018
  and Mi Ambiente website on June 12, 2018, and preliminary consultations with stakeholders have been completed
  and will continue throughout the implementation of the Project to mitigate any possible environmental risks. Also,
  an overview of the EMP will be included as a part of the mandatory training curriculum within the Project, and the
                          The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                          Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



                     brochures with key information on the EMP will be published under the Project and distributed to the program
                     beneficiaries.

                     The design and implementation of a citizen feedback mechanism for MIDES' CCTs is a key activity under Sub-
                     component 2.2. The aim of this mechanism is to provide MIDES with constant inflow of up-to-date geo-referenced
                     data on user feedback of the quality, coverage and reliability of the health and education services -which beneficiaries
                     are required to comply with as co-responsibilities- as well as effectiveness of delivery of bimonthly payments. The
                     information will be used to redress grievances regarding MIDES’ service delivery. The types of feedback will be
                     classified and displayed by category, including, inter alia, targeting errors, payment irregularities, quality, and cultural
                     pertinence of services. This information will be processed and presented to the Social Cabinet, which is responsible
                     for inter-sectoral coordination of social policies.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
       05-Jun-2018                                                                27-Jul-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                  Date of Disclosure
            Panama                                                                   12-Jun-2018
            Comments
            Document disclosed in MIDES web-site June 6 and MiAmbiente web-site June 12


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                          Date of submission for disclosure
30-Jul-2015                                                                          03-Aug-2015
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                  Date of Disclosure
            Panama                                                                   31-Jul-2015
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



 Comments
 An IPPF was disclosed prior appraisal.



PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
TBD
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure

05-Jun-2018                                                     27-Jul-2018
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Panama                                                          12-Jun-2018
 Comments
Guidance on Integrated Pest Management is included in the EMP as required per new Pesticides Management
safeguard triggered. Document disclosed in MIDES web-site June 6 and MiAmbiente web-site June 12
COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                        Yes

 Is a separate PMP required?                                                                       No

 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
 PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project                     NA
 team include a Pest Management Specialist?



 IP_TABLE
         The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                     Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                     Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                     NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
 and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                     Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                     Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                     Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                          Snjezana Plevko
Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Gonzalo Javier Reyes Hartley
           The World Bank                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
