The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-May-2019| Report No: ISDSR27243




                       Regional Vice President:    Hartwig Schafer
                              Country Director:    Junaid Kamal Ahmad
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Martien Van Nieuwkoop
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Kathryn Hollifield
                            Task Team Leader:      Raj Ganguly
              The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P152210                                                       India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Raj Ganguly                                                   India
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    19-Dec-2014                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    SSAA2


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             107.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                107.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   75.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                 75.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                           32.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                         32.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The PDO is to enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes and secure increased access to human
    development services and social entitlements.

    The selected poor households will include households that are geographically and socially excluded and have low income
    levels. The incomes for these households will be enhanced by ensuring increased incomes from agriculture and allied
    sectors through increased productivity and enhanced market access. The human development services include services
    related to health, nutrition and sanitation. The social entitlements mainly include social safety nets like the wages from
    National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, pensions and insurance benefits that are provided by the government.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Communities from 150 most backward mandals in the Andhra Pradesh covering about 5,000 villages. These
    mandals were identified as based on the following parameters: i. SC/ST population within a mandal (Data
    taken from census 2011) ii. Female illiteracy in the mandal (Data taken from census 2011) iii. Mandals having
    more unirrigated land (Data taken from DES-2011) iv. All the Urban Mandals notified as Class 1 & 2 towns
    (Municipalities) are excluded from the list While Scheduled Tribes are present in all the districts of Andhra
    Pradesh, they are concentrated more in the districts of Srikakulam (6%), Vizianagaram (10%),
    Vishakhapatnam (14%) as well as East Godavari and West Godavari. All these districts are characterized by
    general backwardness, lack of social infrastructure and services and higher poverty and exclusion. All these
    districts would be covered under APRIGP.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Varun Singh, Social Specialist
    Aditi Jha, Environmental Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered            Explanation
                                                                While the activities are small scale, with relatively
                                                                low environmental risks, cumulatively these
                                                                impacts may have a larger and more serious
                                                                environmental footprint and would require some
                                                                environmental due diligence measures to be put in
                                                                place. The Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty
                                                                (SERP) has undertaken an situational assessment of
                                                                the project to ensure that the planned activities are
                                                                environmentally sustainable.        The study was
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                conducted with an objective of understanding
                                                                environmental implications of project activities,
                                                                and to define remedial measures to mitigate any
                                                                negative impacts, in line with the national and state
                                                                legal and regulatory framework and the World
                                                                Bank Operational Policies. The project has prepared
                                                                an Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                to delineate the key issues and the measures to be
                                                                implemented to address them.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                Although no significant or large scale impact is
                                                                foreseen, some of the value chain and Human
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                                Development activities happen in tribal areas near
                                                                natural habitats.
                                                                Although no significant or large scale impact is
                                                                foreseen, some of the value chain and Human
                                                                Development activities happen in tribal areas
                                                                within or near forests. Hence the OP4.36 has been
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes                  triggered. Sector wide analysis of policies,
                                                                institutional issues and constraints have been
                                                                carried out in the EMF. Based on this the EMF
                                                                includes component specific guidelines and
                                                                checklist for working near forest areas.
                                                                APRIGP will not finance pesticide procurement, but
                                                                there is possibility of pesticide use by farmers as
                                                                part of productivity enhancement efforts. A
                                                                separate Pest management Plan has not been
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  Yes
                                                                prepared for the project; however due diligence
                                                                mitigatory measures for the sustainable use and
                                                                management of pesticides has been included in the
                                                                project EMF
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



                                                                        APRIGP will be implemented in districts and
                                                                        mandals which have significant concentration of
                                                                        tribals. Project interventions on rural value/retail
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)               Yes                    chains, health and nutrition and access to social
                                                                        entitlements and services would have a strong
                                                                        focus on targeting and including tribal
                                                                        communities.
                                                                        There will be no involuntary land acquisition under
                                                                        RIGPand this will be tracked through the social
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         No
                                                                        screening checklist included in the social
                                                                        management and tribal development plan
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project interventions could have the possible environmental issues
      •    Possible over exploitation of the resources such as ground water for irrigation
      •    Introducing high yielding varieties which need intensive irrigation and fertilization that may have negative impact
      on soil and water
      •    Setting up mills, processing units and storage structure which need high energy requirement and may release
      wastes that are harmful to the environment
      •    Use of chemicals, waste disposal and energy use in micro enterprises and possibility of health hazards.
      •    Possibility of contamination of the surrounding environment due to drinking water and sanitation interventions
      when environment guidelines are not followed


      APRIGP aims to enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes and secure increased access to
      human development services and social entitlements, with a specific focus on schooled tribe and scheduled caste
      households in the most excluded and backward districts/mandals of the state. Project interventions are anticipated
      to have significant and widespread positive impact on these households by way of increased incomes from agriculture
      and allied sectors through increased productivity and enhanced market access, enhanced access to health, nutrition
      and sanitation services, and better access to wage opportunities, pensions, insurance and unique identity cards etc.
      The main safeguard issue is to ensure effective outreach, coverage and inclusion of tribal habitations and households
      with respect to project supported interventions, institutions and investments.

      All activities under the restructured APRIGP are continuation of the originally identified interventions, with the
      exception of construction and installation of prefabricated Giri Seva Kendra (tribal citizens service centre) that would
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



  provide financial and digital inclusion in tribal communities. The small, localized and fully manageable environment
  and social risks posed by this activity deal with improper disposal of e-waste as well as improper selection of GSK
  sites. These risks are already and adequately covered under the existing EMF and SMF/TDP, and no new environment
  and social risks are anticipated.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The project activities have small environmental footprints, if the environmental guidelines and proper due diligence
  measures are implemented. Therefore there are no long-term impacts anticipated. Longer term impacts are
  anticipated to be enhanced incomes and improved health, education and nutritional status of scheduled tribes and
  scheduled caste households, specially women and girls.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The EMF incorporates sound remedial measures which will minimize potential adverse impacts. APRIGP interventions
  do not anticipate any large scale adverse impacts, if the measures are well implemented.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Given the numerous little activities in multiple sites, a framework approach was adopted to identify the potential
  environmental impacts and remedial measures. The Environment Management Framework (EMF) identifies the
  possible environmental implications of each interventions proposed under each component and sub component and
  suggests environment friendly alternatives or mitigation measures for each. It provides a strategy to manage negative
  environmental impacts of the value chain and human development activities there by sustaining the benefits of these
  interventions. It also provides the institutional mechanism to operationalise the EMF which contains guidelines,
  systems and procedures for ensuring environmental sustainability during project implementation. It includes
  ‘environment guidelines’ or ‘environment friendly alternatives’ for all the components. It also encourages Green
  Business Opportunities on the critical environmental issues identified in the proposed activities through ‘innovation
  forums’ ‘solution market places’ and ‘knowledge events’ under partnership component. the EMF also includes a
  negative list of activities which cannot be funded under the projects – into section 4 second last sentence

  AP SERP has integrated several measures into the APRIGP project design such as selection of high tribal presence
  areas as project mandals, rural value chains for tribal areas, linkages with SC/TSP programs of tribal and social welfare
  departments and ITDAs. AP SERP has leveraged its long standing experience of working with tribal and scheduled
  caste households and updated its social assessment and prepared a social management and tribal development plan
  (TDP) that summarises the main issues and strategies for targeting and inclusion of women and men from scheduled
  caste and scheduled tribe households in project interventions. The social management and tribal development plan
  identifies specific approaches and strategies on consultation and participation, targeting, inclusion, and gender with
  respect to APRIGP components on rural value chains, rural retail chains, health and nutrition interventions and access
  to social entitlements and services. The plan also includes institutional and staffing arrangments, capacity building
  plan, grievance redressal mechanism and monitoring and evaluation system.

  Given the numerous little activities in multiple sites, a framework approach was adopted to identify the potential
  environmental impacts and remedial measures. The Environment Management Framework (EMF) identifies the
  possible environmental implications of each interventions proposed under each component and sub component and
  suggests environment friendly alternatives or mitigation measures for each. It provides a strategy to manage negative
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



  environmental impacts of the value chain and human development activities there by sustaining the benefits of these
  interventions. It also provides the institutional mechanism to operationalise the EMF which contains guidelines,
  systems and procedures for ensuring environmental sustainability during project implementation. It includes
  ‘environment guidelines’ or ‘environment friendly alternatives’ for all the components. It also encourages Green
  Business Opportunities on the critical environmental issues identified in the proposed activities through ‘innovation
  forums’ ‘solution market places’ and ‘knowledge events’ under partnership component. The EMF also includes a
  negative list of activities which cannot be funded under the projects – into section 4.

  AP SERP has long experience of implementing strategies and programs for inclusion of tribal and scheduled caste
  households and promoting sustainable agricultural practices among poor farmers through ‘Community Managed
  Sustainable Agriculture’ programme, however given the multisectoral nature of APRIGP, it would need capacity
  building for implementing SMF/TDP and EMF. Additionally the state has been recently bifurcated and there will be
  need for strengthening capacity of the personnel at SERP and at the various levels of the state machinery.These
  aspects have been included in the plans for capacity building and technical assistance partnerships in both documents.

  Existing EMF and SMF/TDP apply to the restructured APRIGP. All provisions of the EMF and SMF/TDP of APRIGP, that
  was prepared and finalised by AP SERP in 2014 and approved by the Bank, will apply to the restructured project. AP-
  SERP as well as the Department of Women Development and Child Welfare, Department of Health, Medical and
  Family Welfare, Department of Tribal Welfare, and Department of Panchayat Raj and Rural Development will carry
  out the project activities in accordance with the EMF and the SMF/TDP. AP-SERP has updated the ESMF/TDP for the
  restructured APRIGP, with an addendum in the existing EMF/SMF/TDP. All activities presented in the table below will
  need to comply with the applicable requirements of the EMF and the SMF/TDP.

  The restructuring discussions include strengthening of the following implementation measures;

  i)   The Environment Nodal Staff and Social Safeguard Nodal Staff in AP-SERP will continue to be responsible for
  application and implementation of the EMF and SMF/TDP provisions, across all project components, including the
  new IAs. They will also prepare and share half yearly reports on EMF and SMF/TDP implementation under the
  restructured APRIGP.
  ii) Nodal staff for Environment and Social Safeguard will be designated/engaged in i) Department of Women
  Development and Child Welfare; ii) Department of Health, Medical and Family Welfare; iii) Department of Tribal
  Welfare, iv) and Department of Panchayat Raj and Rural Development. These staff will work in coordination with the
  Environment and Social Safeguard Staff of AP-SERP.




5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The EMF was designed in consultation with various stakeholders – the project teams, concerned departments,
  community representatives through field consultations. Workshops were held in 2 locations – in Karimnagar on 11th
  July 2014 and Rangareddy district on 15th July 2014 which were attended by local community, NGOs and
  representatives from government line departments.

  In preparing the project and the social and tribal plans, SERP has undertaken a series of field visits, stakeholder
  consultations and indepth situation assessment studies, with focus on SC and ST households across many districts.
  These consultations and focus group discussions were held with key stakeholders of the projects: excluded SC/ST
                          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                          India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



                     houseohlds, tribal farmers and leaders, women members of VOs and MS etc. These consultations were held in SC and
                     ST dominated mandals of Vishakapatnam, Guntur, Srikakulam, Prakasam and Nellore

                     APRIGP has Grievance redressal systems to provide effective services, coupled with counseling and facilitation
                     services. These systems will ensure better implementation of the programs and also have increased outreach to the
                     beneficiaries. The GRM and Feedback systems include One Stop Shops, Call Centres and GRM monitoring cell.

                     AP-SERP will continue to ensure a functioning and accessible grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for stakeholders
                     and Project beneficiaries, throughout the project implementation period. The GRM will also cover the new IAs, with
                     any necessary enhancements, customization and convergence. The amended EMF and SMF/TDP have been disclosed
                     on the website of the IAs, as well disseminated locally.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                           Date of submission for disclosure
       01-Aug-2014                                                           18-Sep-2014
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            India                                                               09-Sep-2014
            Comments
            The EMF was consulted with a wide range of stakeholders and was translated and disclosed in the state of Andhra
            Pradesh.
            Amended EMF and SMP has disclosed on 16 February 2019



INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
01-Sep-2014                                                                     09-Sep-2014
“In country? Disclosure
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 India                                                           09-Sep-2014
 Comments
 The draft social management and tribal development plan has been disclosed through SERP website (9 SEP) and a
 stakeholder disclosure workshop (27 Sep 2014).
 Amended EMF and SMP has disclosed on 16 February 2019.


PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure

09-Sep-2014                                                     18-Sep-2014
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 India                                                           09-Sep-2014
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.     COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                        Yes
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



Is a separate PMP required?                                                         No

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project       NA
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    Yes
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                    Yes
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                    Yes
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                    No
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)



    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                    Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                    Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                    Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                            Raj Ganguly
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Samik Sundar Das

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Kathryn Hollifield                       08-Jul-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
