The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)




                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                 Restructuring Stage


   Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 3 September 2018| Report No: ISDSR22026




                     Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                            Country Director:    Carlos Felipe Jaramillo
              Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                 Practice Manager/Manager:       Aurelio Menendez
                          Task Team Leader:      Josphat O. Sasia, Haileyesus Adamtei
                                                 Mengesah
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT
    P126321
                                                                PROJECT
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Josphat O. Sasia                                            Kenya
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    02-Aug-2012                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR01


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             300.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                300.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  300.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                300.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                             0.00
         Borrower                                                                                                     0.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to: (a) improve the efficiency of road transport along the northern corridor;
    (b) improve the institutional capacity and arrangements in the urban transport sub sector; and (c) promote the private
    sector participation in the operation, financing and management of transport systems.


    Proposed New PDO
    To improve: (a) the efficiency of road transport along selected road corridors in Nairobi, Kisumu and Meru Counties,
    and (b) institutional capacity in the transport sector.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.

    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


    Changes to Components and Cost

    Component A: Support to KeNHA to Upgrade the Urban Road Transport Infrastructure

    Due to the inflation and making a provision for the BRT infrastructure in design which was not in the original project at
    appraisal, delays, and an increase in the scope of works arising from unexpected growth in traffic leading to expansion
    rather than rehabilitation, the total costs of construction works for road section of JKIA turn off to Rironi road (Lots 1, 2,
    and 3) and Kisumu Bypass are currently estimated at about US$630 million and US$40 million, respectively.

            The revised activities under this component will cover the following:

            (a) Expanding and upgrading the Northern Corridor road section through Nairobi from James Gichuru road
                junction to Rironi and the associated service and access roads;

            (b) Constructing the Kisumu Northern Bypass, including the expansion of the adjoining Kisumu airport-Kisian
                road section;

            (c) Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering design studies of selected roads adjoining major towns and
                studies for improvement of traffic flows, scaling down the number of studies;

            (d) Strengthening the capacity of KeNHA by: (i) supplying and installing a management information system; (ii)
                developing an environmental and social management system for the road sub-sector; and (iii) improving its
                capacity for contract management, monitoring and evaluation through training and provision of technical
                advisory services required for that purpose; and

            (e) Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering design studies, preparation of bidding documents and
                related studies for the selected Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) in Nairobi.
        The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



The activities that have been dropped include (a) civil works for the road section of JKIA turn off to Southern Bypass;
Southern Bypass to James Gichuru road junction (Lots 1 and 2), (b) consultancy services for the construction supervision
of the highway capacity enhancement under the road section of JKIA turn off to James Gichuru road junction (Lots 1 and
2), and (c) promotion of private sector participation in the road subsector. A program to address HIV/AIDS in all the roads
contracts is no longer an independent activity as this has been mainstreamed to civil works contracts. The PPP aspects
are now covered under the ongoing Kenya Infrastructure Finance/PPP Project (P121019). The rest remains unchanged.

Component B. Support to KURA and KRC to Prepare the Development of Selected Mass Transit Corridors

        The revised component will cover the following:

        Subcomponent B1 (KURA).

        (a) The revised activities are (a) carrying out activities to improve traffic management including construction of
            traffic control centers, provision of traffic management ICT solutions, design, installation and monitoring of
            an intelligent transport system (ITS) for Nairobi; (b) a study for the improvement of traffic flow covering
            Nairobi; and (c) construction of Meru Bypass roads.

        (b) Activities that have been dropped, according to justification, are (a) feasibility and design studies for the BRT
            along line 3 (Juja Road), (b) study and development of a master plan for urban transport for Mombasa, (c)
            providing public transport and associated services, (d) developing and implementing a scheme to decongest
            major urban areas, and (e) implementing regulatory reforms to rationalize the provision of public transport
            services and strengthen the management of public transport operations. A program to address HIV/AIDS in
            all the roads contracts is no longer an independent activity as this has been mainstreamed the roads
            contracts.

        (c) The feasibility and design studies for the BRT Line 3 and the master plan for Mombasa have been funded
            and successfully completed by the EU and JICA, respectively. The feasibility and design studies of selected
            missing road links in Nairobi and other towns are financed by counterpart funding and IDA funds originally
            allocated to these activities will be reallocated to Meru Bypass and ITS for Nairobi.

        Subcomponent B2 (KRC).

        (a) The feasibility, detailed design and studies for the selected commuter and light rail routes in Nairobi and
            other major towns will be replaced with development of master plans and the investment plans for
            sustainable commuter rail systems for Nairobi and Mombasa.

        (b) The revised activities are (a) preparation of the necessary bidding documents for construction of selected
            commuter rail systems in Nairobi and other major town, and (b) procurement of track recording car (goods).

        (c) The activities dropped include preparation of bidding and contract documents for the selection of the private
            sector operators providing commuter rail operations and associated service.

Component C. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building

Subcomponent C1 (State Department of Transport, former Ministry of Transport) and Subcomponent C2 (State
Department of Infrastructure, former Ministry of Roads) remain unchanged.
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



    Other Change(s)

       (a) Environmental Assessment Category. As discussed elsewhere, delayed commencement of works as well as
           incorporating MRTS in the road-related civil works led to further encroachment on the right-of-way and the
           updated RAPs identified the higher number of involuntary land acquisition and the associated physical and
           economic displacement of PAPs. As a result, environmental assessment category of the project is changed from
           B to A.

       (b) Change in institutional arrangements. The implementation arrangements would largely remain the same.
           NaMATA takes over the role of the Mass Rapid Transit Consultative Committee to coordinate activities related
           to MRTS but is not an implementing agency. NaMATA is mandated to oversee, coordinate, and plan the provision
           of public transport system, including Mass Rapid Transit, and related infrastructure in the NMA, among other
           responsibilities which are being operationalized.

       (c) Change in implementation schedule. The updated implementation schedule for major activities is summarized
           in table 3.

                              Table 3. Updated Implementation Schedule of Major Activities
             Component A                                                      Updated Completion Schedule
             Capacity enhancement of A104 section James Gichuru road                            April 2021
             junction-Rironi road section (Lot 3)
             Construction of Kisumu Bypass                                                         June 2021
             Component B
             Construction of Meru Bypass                                                     December 2018
             Implementation of Traffic Management System                                     December 2021
             Commuter Rail Master Plan for Nairobi                                             October 2018
             Detailed design of Mombasa commuter rail (selected line)                             June 2020
             Supply of a track recoding car for Kenya Railways Corporation                         July 2019


.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project area remains the same, spread across Nairobi, Meru and Kisumu Counties, as that of the original
    project. Hence, there are no changes in the salient physical characteristics. Key change relates to the activity
    spread in respect of Nairobi’s key road- JKIA airport turnoff to Rironi, of about 42 Km. For operational
    purposes, this road was conceptualized in three major parts: (i) JKIA airport to Southern Bypass (Lot1); (ii)
    Southern Bypass to James Gichuru Junction (Lot-2); and (iii) James Gichuru Junction to Rironi, Lot-3. In the
    restructured project, the Bank will only finance works for Lot 3, which is about 26 km and is currently under
    construction. For the purpose of sequencing construction with resettlement, Lot- 3 is being implemented in
    three phases- A, B and C. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for all the three sub sections have been prepared,
    approved and disclosed. As of now, construction of 3C, about 9 Km, is under progress. Restructuring, relates
    to: (i) modification of the PDO- to better reflect the new scope of the project; (ii) Expanding and upgrading
    the Northern Corridor through Nairobi from James Gichuru junction to Rironi and the associated service
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



roads and access roads;(iii)construction of the proposed Kisumu Northern Bypass, including the expansion of
the adjoining Kisumu airport to Kisian road section; (iv) feasibility and detailed engineering studies of
selected roads adjoining major towns;(v) feasibility and detailed engineering design studies, preparation of
bidding documents and related studies for the selected BRT in Nairobi; (vi) improve traffic management
including construction of traffic control centers, provisions of traffic management ICT solutions, design,
installation and monitoring of an intelligent transport system for Nairobi; (vii) ongoing construction of the
Meru Bypasses; and (viii) feasibility and detailed engineering design studies of missing road links in major
towns financed by GoK . The following activities have been dropped from the original project: (i) civil works
for the road section of JKIA turn off -Southern Bypass; Southern Bypass-James Gichuru junction; (ii) feasibility
and design studies for the BRT along Line 3 (Juja road); (iii) study and development of a master plan for the
urban transport for Mombasa; and (iv) feasibility and detailed designs for the selected commuter and light
rail routes in Nairobi and other major towns.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Lilian Wambui Kahindo, Social Specialist
Ben Okindo Ayako Miranga, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered            Explanation
                                                               Theoriginal project was assigned Environmental
                                                               Category B. However, during implementation of the
                                                               James Gichuru junction-Rironi road section and the
                                                               Meru Bypasses, it has emerged that the magnitude
                                                               and impact of several issues is greater relative as
                                                               envisaged during preparation. This is expected to
                                                               result in significant, large scale and irreversible
                                                               adverse environmental and social impacts such as
                                                               traffic disruptions and access restrictions; noise and
                                                               air pollution; construction camp impacts;
                                                               occupational, health and safety impacts on the
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                               workers, pedestrian and commuters during
                                                               construction; and physical and /or economic
                                                               displacement. Thus, cumulative environmental and
                                                               social impacts resulting from the project activities
                                                               are likely to be substantial. Hence, the project’s
                                                               categorization is changed from B (assigned during
                                                               the preparation of the original project) to A.

                                                               The restructured project        shall finance     the
                                                               following:
                                                               Component A:
The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



                                            (a) James Gichuru Junction-Rironi road section,
                                            that entails expanding and upgrading the 26 km
                                            road section and associated service and access
                                            roads, the Environmental and Social Impact
                                            Assessment (ESIA) for the expansion and
                                            improvement of the Northern Corridor road section
                                            through Nairobi starting from JKIA turn off -
                                            Westlands -Rironi was prepared, approved and
                                            disclosed in country and InfoShop on May 9, 2012.

                                            (b ) Construction of the Kisumu Northern Bypass,
                                            the original subproject design involved
                                            construction of 9 km bypass , but the restructured
                                            project will encompass expanding the adjoining
                                            Kisumu airport to Kisian junction (7 km) road
                                            section, to accommodate potential increase in
                                            traffic. The ESIA for Kisumu Northern Bypass was
                                            prepared and disclosed in country May 8, 2012 and
                                            on the InfoShop in May 9, 2012 . Based on the
                                            additional scope to include the expansion of the
                                            adjoining Kisumu Airport -Kisian Junction road
                                            section, KeNHA will update the existing ESIA during
                                            the implementation of the restructured project.
                                            ToRs for the updating the ESIA, have been
                                            prepared, cleared by the World Bank, and were
                                            disclosed in country on October 15, 2018 and on
                                            the World Bank external website on October 17,
                                            2018.

                                            (c) KeNHA will prepare the ESIAs for the feasibility
                                            studies and detailed engineering design studies for
                                            selected roads adjoining major towns during the
                                            implementation of the restructured project, the
                                            ToRs for the ESIAs were prepared by KeNHA,
                                            cleared by the World Bank, disclosed in country on
                                            October 24, 2018 and in the World Bank external
                                            website on October 25, 2018.

                                            (e) feasibility and detailed engineering design
                                            studies, preparation of bidding documents and
                                            related studies for selected Bus Rapid Transport
                                            (BRT) in Nairobi. KeNHA will prepare an ESIA for
                                            the selected BRT line during the implementation of
                                            the restructured project.The ToRs for the ESIA were
                                            prepared, cleared by the World Bank, disclosed in
                                            country on May 28, 2012, and the World Bank
                                            InfoShop on May 11, 2012.
The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)




                                            Under the restructured Component A, the
                                            following activities are dropped: civil works for the
                                            road section between JKIA turn off-Southern
                                            Bypass; and Southern Bypass-James Gichuru
                                            Junction part of the original project is dropped.

                                            Component B:
                                            The restructured Component B1, includes:
                                            (a) improvement of traffic management including
                                            construction of traffic control centers, provision of
                                            traffic management ICT solutions, design,
                                            installation and monitoring of an intelligent
                                            transport system. KURA will prepare an ESIA, during
                                            implementation of the restructured project, and
                                            the ToRs for the ESIA have been prepared, cleared
                                            by the World Bank, and were disclosed in country
                                            on October 16, 2018, and on the World Bank
                                            external website on October 17, 2018.

                                            (c) for the ongoing construction of the Meru
                                            Bypasses, which involves construction of the 21.5
                                            km bypasses to bitumen standards. The ESIA for
                                            Meru Bypass roads was prepared and disclosed in
                                            country and on the InfoShop on April, 24, 2012
                                            respectively; and

                                            Under the restructured Component B1, the
                                            following original activities have been dropped: (i)
                                            feasibility and design studies for the BRT along line
                                            3 (Juja road); and (ii) study and development of a
                                            master for urban transport for Mombasa.

                                            The restructured Component B2, includes :
                                            The Kenya Railway corporation (KRC) will prepare
                                            Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                            (SESA) for the proposed commuter rail master
                                            plans and the investment plans for sustainable
                                            commuter rail systems for Nairobi and Mombasa .
                                            KRC has prepared the SESA ToRs, they were cleared
                                            by the World Bank, disclosed in country on October
                                            25, 2018 and in the World Bank external website on
                                            October 26, 2018.

                                            Under the restructured Component B2, the
                                            feasibility and detail design and studies for the
       The World Bank                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



                                                   selected commuter and light rail routes in Nairobi
                                                   and other major towns has been dropped.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                   This policy is not triggered as none of the proposed
                                                   works have potential to cause significant
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                   conversion or degradation of natural habitats,
                                                   whether directly or indirectly.
                                                   The policy is not triggered because construction of
                                                   the Meru Bypass will not impact the the Imenti
                                                   forest, the forest is fenced off, and there is a buffer
                                                   that will ensure that elephants will not be impacted
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No      by noise or air pollution. Kenya Forest Service as the
                                                   lead agency for managing Imenti forest were
                                                   involved public consultation process. There are no
                                                   other natural forests that are expected to be
                                                   impacted by other subprojects.
                                                   The policy is not triggered as the project will not
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No      finance any activities that will involve use of
                                                   pesticides or pest management.
                                                   ESIAs include guidelines for chance finds
                                                   procedures, which will be integrated into the
                                                   contracts for construction. If physical cultural
                                                   resources are found, a cultural property
                                                   management plan (CPMP) will be developed. The
                                                   project received a complaint from a PAP along the
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes     James Gichuru junction-Rironi road section, raising
                                                   concerns that Sigona House is likely to be impacted
                                                   by the road improvement works, and is considered
                                                   a cultural heritage site by residents in the area.
                                                   KeNHA has redesigned this section of the road
                                                   alignment to avoid the Sigona House structure.

                                                   The policy is not triggered as the proposed route
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No      roads construction and rehabilitation activities are
                                                   in urban areas and peri-urban areas.
                                                   Subsequent to the conduction of ESIA, RAP(s) will
                                                   be prepared for: (i) (updating of) Kisumu Northern
                                                   Bypass, KeNHA has prepared the RAP ToRs, they
                                                   have been cleared by the World Bank, and were
                                                   disclosed in country on October 15, 2018, and in the
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes     World Bank external website on October 17, 2018 ;
                                                   and (ii) feasibility and detailed engineering design
                                                   studies of selected roads adjoining major towns,
                                                   KeNHA has prepared ToRs, they have been cleared
                                                   by the World Bank, and were disclosed in country
                                                   on October 15, 2018 and on the World Bank
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



                                                                      external website on October 17, 2018; (iii) RAP for
                                                                      the selected improvement of traffic management
                                                                      including construction of traffic control centers,
                                                                      provision of traffic management ICT solutions,
                                                                      design, installation and monitoring of an intelligent
                                                                      transport system. KURA will prepare the RAP,
                                                                      during implementation of the restructured project,
                                                                      and the ToRs for the RAP have been prepared,
                                                                      cleared by the World Bank, and were disclosed in
                                                                      country on October 16, 2018, and on the World
                                                                      Bank external website on October 17, 2018. KeNHA
                                                                      / KURA will prepare RAPS deploying external
                                                                      independent consultants and share with the Bank
                                                                      for comments and arrange for their disclosures.
                                                                      Social safeguard assessments/ instruments, apart
                                                                      from RAPs, will include the following management
                                                                      plans: (i) Stakeholder Engagement Plans; (ii)
                                                                      Labour; and (iii) GBV/SEA.

                                                                      The policy is not triggered because the project will
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No                    not finance any activities that include dams or
                                                                      irrigation infrastructure.
                                                                      The Policy is not triggered because the project will
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                No                    not finance any activities that involve international
 (BP 7.50)
                                                                      waterways.
                                                                      The policy is not triggered because the project will
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
                                                                      not finance activities in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Environmental category of the project is changed from B to A as a result of the significant adverse social and
      environmental impacts observed during the current implementation and the likelihood of its continuance for the
      remaining activities as well. The adverse impacts include: traffic disruptions and access restrictions; noise and air
      pollution; soil erosion and pollution; construction camp impacts; occupational, health and safety impacts on the
      workers, pedestrian, residents and commuters during construction. These apart, significant physical and/ or
      economic displacement is expected. In respect of Lot 3, project is expected to affect 5,300 households. Thus,
      cumulative environmental and social impacts resulting from the project activities are likely to be substantial.

      Safeguards Policies triggered in the original project were: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural
      Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and the Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). No new safeguard policies will be triggered.
     The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: Overall, the project would significantly contribute to improved public
transportation, reducing traffic congestion and spur economic development. However, as the project activities will
be implemented within urban and peri-urban areas where many schools, businesses, institutions, farms and
residential estates/houses are located, it is expected to have health and safety impacts on the communities,
commuters and pedestrians during the construction phases of the projects.

OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: The project has two major ongoing civil works: one, James Gichuru to Rironi
road; and the other, around Meru Bypass. The latter has progressed as planned and resettlements have been
completed viz., lands acquired and compensations paid. The former, Improvement of James Gichuru junction to Rironi
road section, aggregating to about 26 Km, is in progress. For strategic purposes, as the contractor had been in place
and towards effecting resettlement aptly, the entire section is visualized in three lots- A, 7km; B, 9 Km; and C, 10 km.
Accordingly, three different Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have been prepared and disclosed. Overall, it is likely
that the project will affect about 5,300 persons. The least number (about 700) is in 3C and the remaining are spread
equally between the other two sub sections (A and B). One of the lots- 3A- has a road side market with many vendors
on either side of the road.

Construction of the James Gichuru Junction to Rironi road, is expected to affect commercial establishments,
institutions and petty businesses. Given the complexity of the situation, civil work has begun only in 3C. Enumeration
of PAPs is reported to be completed and that valuation viz., compensation amounts computed. Total compensation
for 3C as estimated initially worked out to 1.5 billion KS (US$ 15 M) (reportedly gone up after NLC’s verification to
US$ 65M). No compensations have been made so far as KeNHA is awaiting funds from Government of Kenya
(Treasury). The works have started only in such places where land acquisition is not an issue. KeNHA has assured that
no works will be undertaken in such sections where lands are to be acquired until compensations are disbursed. In
respect of other two sections, compensation requirement is estimated at about 7 billion Ks (US$ 70 million). Further,
in respect of 3A, lands for constructing the market is yet to be secured. So, road construction will have to wait till
such time the market is fully developed and traders relocated. Total compensation amounts, US$ 135 Million, is too
huge relative to the construction cost of US$ 164 million. KeNHA and GOK are abreast of this situation and efforts are
underway to address this situation.

OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources: A PAP along James Gichuru junction-Rironi road section, raised concerns that
Sigona House is likely to be impacted by the road improvement works and is considered a cultural heritage site by
the area residents, the PAP took the issue to the High Court and the ruling has not been determined. KeNHA has
redesigned this section of the road alignment and the Sigona House structure has been avoided.

Community/Occupational Health and Safety: In October, 2017 KeNHA informed the Bank of a fatal traffic accident
along the James Gichuru junction-Rironi road, at the Kamandura area involving a pedestrian and contractor's vehicle
truck. The investigation to the accident established that the contractor's team on site did not follow the health and
safety and traffic management plans and procedures resulting in the fatal traffic accident. The Bank and KeNHA
agreed on an action plan to improve the traffic management, and the health and safety performance for the
subproject. KeNHA has fully implemented the action plan, and there is significant improvement on the
community/occupational health and safety performance and compliance in the subproject, and no serious or fatal
accident has been reported. In the Meru Bypass, the construction works are ongoing, no serious or fatal accident has
been recorded in the contract.The environmental and social performance is considered satisfactory.

Labour influx and Labour issues: The project two main ongoing active civil contracts are the James Gichuru junction
to Rironi road and the Meru Bypasses. Both are located within the urban and peri urban settings, most of the workers
are from within the project areas, few of them are national and expatriates staff. Only expatriate workers are housed
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



  within the construction camps, the national and local workers are accommodated in residential areas along the
  project areas. The projects have put in place code of conduct which has been signed by all the workers as part their
  contracts, HIV/AIDs awareness and training has been carried out and GRMs have been operationalized in both
  subprojects. The James Gichuru junction to Rironi road section has reported sporadic industrial action by local
  workers, demanding increase for their wages, these issues have been addressed by the contractor and KeNHA through
  the engagement of the relevant national labour office and other stakeholders.

  The project environmental and social performance and compliance as per implementation support mission carried in
  (November-December, 2017) was rated "Moderately Unsatisfactory" , while the latest mission carried out in (May-
  June 2018) was rated "Moderately Satisfactory", this is a result of KeNHA and the Contractor satisfactorily
  implementing the action plan agreed with the Bank to address the community/occupational health and safety risks
  and impacts in the James Gichuru junction -Rironi road section.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Long term impacts because of the road improvements are expected to be positive as it would result in reduced traffic
  congestion and reduction in time and costs of transport. The improved connectivity could also spur economic
  development and the spread of inhabitation. However, it could cause social impacts such as labour influx to these
  areas and exacerbate conflicts with the host communities/residents and result in increased HIV/AIDs infections. The
  ESIAs/ESMPs have taken/ will take into account mitigation measures to manage the potential indirect impacts that
  may result from the projects.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Alternative alignments had been drawn and selection of the final road is made such as to minimize adverse impacts.
  For example, in case of Kisumu Northern Bypass, the road was aligned to avoid the vicinity of a nursery school. In
  James Gichuru junction-Rironi road section realignment has been undertaken to avoid Sigona House claimed by the
  area residents as site of cultural and historic importance..


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA), Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA), Kenya Railways Corporation
  (KRC), and the Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing and Urban Development (MoTIHUD) are responsible for
  implementing the project activities. KeNHA is responsible for the management of all national roads in Kenya; KURA
  is responsible for all urban roads, KRC is responsible for the development of railways, MoTIHUD is responsible for
  policy and technical standards pertaining to roads sub sector issues and is responsible for other transport matters.

  During preparation of the original project,the ESIAs were prepared and disclosed as follows: (i) Expansion and
  improvement of the Northern corridor road section through Nairobi starting from JKIA-Westlands-Rironi road section
  was prepared by KeNHA, disclosed in country on May 9, 2012, and in the InfoShop on May 9, 2012; (ii) ESIA for Kisumu
  Northern Bypass was prepared by KeNHA, disclosed in country on May 8, 2012, and on the InfoShop May 9, 2012; (iii)
  ESIA for Meru Bypasses was prepared by Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA), disclosed in country on April 24, 2012
  and the InfoShop on April 24, 2012; (iv) ToRs for ESIA for construction of a commuter rail system in Nairobi was
  prepared by KRC, cleared by the Bank, and disclosed in country on May 28, 2012 and on the World Bank InfoShop on
  May 11, 2012; and (v) ToRs for ESIA for Mombasa Road (JKIA) -Nairobi Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor were prepared
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



  by KURA, cleared by the World Bank, disclosed in country on May 28, 2012, and in the World Bank InfoShop on May
  11, 2012. Meanwhile the RAPs were prepared and disclosed as follows: (i) JKIA-James Gichuru Junction-Rironi road
  section was prepared by KeNHA, disclosed in country on May 2, 2012, and in the InfoShop on May 3, 2012; (ii) RAP
  for Kisumu Northern Bypass was prepared by KENHA, disclosed in country on May 9, 2012, and on the InfoShop May
  9, 2012; and (iii) RAP for Meru Bypasses was prepared by Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA), disclosed in country
  on May 9, 2012 and the InfoShop on May 9, 2012. Looking forward: following safeguards instruments will be prepared
  and disclosed during the implementation of the restructured project: (i) updating of ESIA and RAP for Kisumu northern
  bypass, to include the expansion of the adjoining Kisumu airport-Kisian road section; (ii) ESIAs and RAPs for the
  feasibility and detailed engineering design studies of selected roads adjoining major towns; (iii) ESIA, SEP and RAP for
  selected BRT corridor in Nairobi; (iv) the ESIA and RAP for the improvement of traffic management including
  construction of traffic control centre, provision of traffic management ICT solutions, design installation and
  monitoring of an intelligent transport system (ITS) for Nairobi; and (v) SESA for the proposed master plans as well as
  investment plans for sustainable commuter rail for Nairobi and Mombasa .

  Environmental and Social Impacts from the projects will be mitigated according to the measures set out in the ESMPs.
  Mitigation measures taken or to be taken include the following: (i) construction sites will be sprinkled with water; (ii)
  workers will be provided with appropriate and adequate PPEs; (iii) workers will be regularly trained on the OHS risks;
  (iii) contaminated soils, solid waste and waste water will be removed and disposed off site by licensed waste handlers
  and in appropriate sites; (iv) quarry sites and burrow pits will be restored as per the national regulations and good
  practices; (v) adequate and appropriate signage, markings and diversions to warn motorist and other road users to
  ward off traffic accidents; sensitize workers and surrounding communities on awareness, prevention and
  management of HIV/AIDs; and the ESMPs have/will be included in the bidding documents and contracts as legal
  obligation for contractors to implement.

  Capacity building to manage safeguards issues is ongoing for all agencies that are implementing the project. The
  project coordination is led by MoTIHUD and the implementation through the KeNHA, KURA and KRC who have been
  implementing similar projects funded by World Bank. A capacity assessment conducted of the entities/implementing
  agencies (MoTIHUD, KeNHA and KURA) for planning, designing, implementing and monitoring of the safeguards has
  revealed standards to be good. However, the number of safeguards experts at post are inadequate. In this regard, (i)
  KeNHA and KURA have increased the number of environment and social safeguards staff, and are proposing to hire
  more additional safeguards staff (ii) in the ongoing contracts for Component A, KeNHA’s Supervision Consultants
  have/ will provide for full time environmental, Health and Safety and social experts to ensure day to day
  implementation and monitoring of the safeguards is adequate, (iii) the contractor has/will recruited full time
  environment, social, health and safety experts to support environmental, social, health and safety risk management
  (iv) the World Bank is supporting KeNHA to establish the Environmental and Social Management System that will
  enhance the organization capacity to manage environmental and social risk and impacts within its portfolio of projects
  and (v) the Bank is continuously organizing short and targeted trainings for the Safeguards teams working with
  respective implementing agencies, supervision consultants and contractors to ensure their ability to identify and
  manage environmental and social risks in the project is enhanced.




5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)



                   Key stakeholders are the commuters, residents in the nearby vicinity, traders and other commercial and institutional
                   establishments. Extensive consultations have been held/ will be held in the preparation of the ESIAs/ESMPs , and
                   RAPs.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        22-Apr-2012                                                         24-Apr-2012
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            Kenya                                                              24-Apr-2012
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
22-Apr-2012                                                                  26-Apr-2012
“In country? Disclosure

        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                  Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     NA
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)




PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    NA
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       TBD

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                    Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                    Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           KENYA: NATIONAL URBAN TRANSPORT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126321)




III. APPROVALS


                                          Josphat O. Sasia
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Susan Apudo Owuor

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
