The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jun-2018| Report No: ISDSR25081




                        Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                               Country Director:    Paul Noumba Um
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Halil Dundar
                             Task Team Leader:      Harisoa Danielle Rasolonjatovo
                                                    Andriamihamina
              The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                     Project Name
    P156001                                                        Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
    Harisoa Danielle Rasolonjatovo Andriamihamina                  Lesotho
    Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
    26-May-2016                                                    Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
    GED13


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              25.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                 25.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   25.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                 25.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve basic education service delivery and student retention in targeted
    schools.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1.      The Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (LEQEP) was approved by the World Bank Board of Directors
on May 26, 2016 and became effective on July 8, 2016, following the signing of the Financing Agreement by the Lesotho
Minister of Finance and the World Bank Country Representative on June 10, 2016. After 2.5 years of implementation, the
project progresses is moderately satisfactorily.

       A. Project Beneficiaries

2.     The project is expected to benefit approximately 86,500 beneficiaries by 2021. This includes students from 312
primary schools, students in 65 junior secondary schools in the same catchment areas as primary; primary teachers; junior
secondary teachers; district resource teachers (DRTs), subject advisors, and inspectors; and 377 school boards.

       B. PDO Level Results Indicators

3.        The proposed PDO Level Results Indicators include the following:

          (a) Improvement in teacher content knowledge in targeted primary and junior secondary schools (%)

          (b) Reduction in the dropout rate (Grade 1–Grade 6) in targeted primary schools (%)

          (c) Reduction in the dropout rate (Grade 8–Grade 9) in targeted junior secondary schools (%)

       C. Project Components

Component 1: Improving the Teaching and Learning Environment in Targeted Primary and Junior Secondary Schools
(US$11.39 million)

4.      The objective of this component is to raise the quality of classroom service delivery at both the primary and junior
secondary school levels to help create a youth population with strong foundations in literacy, numeracy, and reasoning
skills.

Subcomponent 1a: Strengthening Primary School Teaching and Learning
          The World Bank                                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



5.     This subcomponent addresses the low levels of early grade numeracy and literacy and limited teacher content
knowledge and pedagogical skills in targeted schools through the provision of training to Grades 1–4 teachers, DRTs/other
support staff, and the provision of associated student learning resources.

Subcomponent 1b: Implementing a New Math and Science Curriculum and Assessment Support in Junior Secondary Schools

6.       This subcomponent assists with implementing of the new junior secondary math and science curriculum
developed by the MoET in the targeted junior secondary schools from 2017 to 2019. It will include the provision of training
to Grade 8–10 teachers and it will also provide the math and science textbooks related to the new curriculum. At the
secondary level, the support network includes experienced teachers at the same school or in clusters of other nearby
schools, subject heads, principals, subject advisors and inspectors, and Subject Associations. The schools will have
discretion to identify what support would be the most effective for their context. In addition, this subcomponent will
include the provision of training to support officers who will also receive supervision kits.

Subcomponent 1c: Demonstrating the Progressive Mathematics Initiative (PMI) and Progressive Science Initiative (PSI) and
Development of the New Lesotho model for Teaching Math and Science at Junior Secondary School Level

7.      This subcomponent improves the quality of math and science in targeted junior secondary schools through the
provision of training to math and science teachers and subject advisors in a new approach and the provision of related
learning resources. The MoET is demonstrating the PMI and PSI approaches developed by the New Jersey Center for
Teaching and Learning (NJCTL) in about 20 targeted junior secondary schools from 2017 to 2020.1

Component 2: Strengthening School Accountability for Student Learning and Retention in Targeted Schools (US$4.78
million)

8.      This component aims to empower key actors at the school level—school boards—to collectively deliberate on and
carry out actions that contribute to retaining students and enabling them to learn.

Subcomponent 2a: School Improvement Planning

9.      Each school, guided by a detailed Operations Manual (referred to as SIP Manual) developed at the start of project
implementation and with the support of a facilitator, are developing a SIP aimed at increasing school performance with
regard to quality, retention, and equity of access.

Subcomponent 2b: Provision of School Grants.

10.     Upon submission of the SIP and its approval by the Inspectorate, the school receives 50 percent of a grant of about
US$3,500–US$4,5002 to finance eligible activities.3 These activities, to be carried out over three years, include among
others, short-term training for principals in school management (human resources and financial management [FM] in
particular), minor repairs to physical assets of the school, and purchase of materials to enrich student learning.

Subcomponent 2c: Strengthening the Capacity for Reporting, Monitoring of Results, and Oversight Mechanisms


1
  The 20 targeted schools include combined schools which have primary schools attached to them.
2
  Small primary schools (with fewer than 300 students) will receive a grant amount of US$3,500; large primary schools (with 300 to
800 students) will receive US$4,500; and junior secondary schools will receive US$4,500.
3
  The SIP Manual will include guidelines for schools regarding the amount of the grant and the eligible uses of the grants.
            The World Bank                                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



11.     The provision of school grants for financing the SIPs will be accompanied by strengthened mechanisms at the
school level to monitor school performance in general and the progress on SIP implementation in particular. For this
purpose, support will be provided for the development of a reporting tool—a school report card—that promotes
transparency, timely collection of information, and the use of information to facilitate both participatory school
management as well as enhanced oversight by district education officers, DRTs, and inspectors.

Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Project Management (US$4.50 million)

12.     This component focuses on strengthening and developing the capacity of the MoET, particularly the Department
of Planning (DoP), to deliver its agenda, support project implementation activities, and for project management.
Specifically, this component will include analytical work to support quality education service delivery at the national and
decentralized levels, project coordination, procurement, FM, and monitoring and evaluation activities. Essential capacity
building and technical and advisory support related to the Government’s education strategy, especially in NFE and for
school construction, will be provided. The project will also support a series of studies; TA for the MoET, specifically key
implementing departments; and support for the project management.

Component 4 School Construction – US $4.334 million, - NEW COMPONENT

13.      This new component will address urgent education access demands through construction of minimum
infrastructure including furnished classrooms, separate latrines, and low-cost multi-purpose playgrounds in the schools
targeted by this project. Out of a prioritized list of 63 schools in project target areas, 20 schools have been identified as
part of the first group of schools to be constructed. Each one of the 20 schools will be provided with furnished additional
2 to 4 classrooms accessible to children with limited mobility, separated latrines for boys (3 blocks), girls (5 blocks) and
teachers (2 blocks, male and female). A total of 63 disability friendly classrooms and 57 gender and disability friendly
latrine blocks will be constructed as additional project activities.4 In addition, the following combined 5 schools; Mosiroe,
Mokhoro, Masaleng, Makintane and Amohelang shall each be provided with low cost multipurpose playgrounds to
support improving school retention at both primary and junior secondary in few combined schools. The playground could
include soccer basketball, netball, and volleyball. The number of facilities currently proposed are based on the cost
estimates of schools constructed by contractors. There is an expectation of savings using community construction as
opposed to working with contractors. The Environmental and Safeguard category is changed from C to B.

2. INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS


14.     Implementation. The overall organization of the project implementation and monitoring comprises a
Coordination Committee, the ministerial departments including the DoP, and the PFU. The Coordination Committee,
chaired by the Principal Secretary (PS), will provide overall guidance for effective project implementation, facilitate
coordination of activities, and review progress reports. The DoP, under the leadership of the director of planning (DP), will
oversee the activities of the project in general with the support of the PFU.

15.     Under the supervision of the DP, the PFU will be responsible for day-to-day coordination of project activities and
reporting on the project performance. Each component (or subcomponent) will be implemented by the MoET
departments as follows: (a) Component 1: Curriculum and Assessment (specifically National Curriculum Development
Center [NCDC], Examinations Council of Lesotho [ECoL], and School Supply Unit [SSU]), and Inspectorate, led by the CEO,
Curriculum and Assessment; (b) Component 2: Inspectorate, Teaching Services, and Planning, led by the CEO,

4
    The distribution of classrooms and latrines per school may change based on the actual need during the on-the site assessment.
         The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



Inspectorate; (c) Component 3: Planning, the EMIS, Education Facility Unit (EFU), Curriculum and Assessment including
the HIV and AIDS Coordination Unit, Teaching Services, Inspectorate, and Technical and Vocational Department (TVD), led
by the DP; (d) Component 4: Education Facility Unit (EFU), Planning, community construction committees at school level,
led by EFU (Cf. Section below). These departments will lead the activities with close support from the PFU. This
arrangement will continue enhancing the capacity of the MoET in project management, implementation, and
planning/monitoring. The existing Project Implementation Manual that clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the parties
involved in project implementation will be updated to include the additional activities on school construction under
Component 4.

16.      Overall coordination. The project activities will be reviewed on at least a six-month basis by a Coordination
Committee chaired by the PS and attended by the Chief Education Officers (CEOs) of the ministry, with participation from
the Ministry of Finance (MoF), and the Ministry of Development Planning (MDP). The DP will present the progress of the
project in a report prepared by the PFU highlighting performance and issues to be tackled, and corrective actions will be
decided as appropriate. The Project Implementation Manual clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the Coordination
Committee, CEOs, DP, and PFU and the form of reporting to the committee.

17.      Additional implementation arrangement. Additional implementation arrangements are needed to support the
addition of the new activities under school construction. Since this is a new component and also a new of managing
construction through the community based approach, the following activities need to happen before construction begins:
(i) recruitment of a technical firm to review, update and improve the designs, drawings and specifications for classrooms,
latrines and other associated works, surveying school sites and producing site specific topographic and building drawings,
undertake site surveys and supervise construction, develop a construction manual; (ii) development of financial and
procurement manuals to guide the rollout of this component; (iii) capacitating school boards that must be trained on both
financial management and procurement aspects of community based construction; (iv) study tours to capacitate
implementing agencies like EFU, Department of Planning, Procurement Unit, and Inspectorate to manage the new the
community approach. The following units/teams will also be established and empowered to manage the new component:

        (a) The Education Facilities Unit (EFU)

18.    The EFU shall be responsible for managing the new component and supervising the construction activities with
support from the technical firm.

        (b) Community Construction Committee (CCC)

19.     The Community Construction Committee shall be established and will be responsible for confirming the proposed
school needs (e.g. number of classrooms, number of latrine blocks, and playgrounds) and availability of land for construction
purposes, identifying and assembling members of the Community Construction Team (CCT), sign individual contracts with
the members of the CCT , mobilize the CCT for commencement of construction works and appoint a Foreman among them
and monitor CCT through the foreman and with the assistance of the consultant’s clerk of works. All these activities would
be conducted under the guidance of a site supervisor who will be provided by the consultant. The committee shall be the
School Board established under Education Act of 2010 as the school governing body. It is constituted as follows: 1) Two (2)
Proprietor Representatives (One of them as Chairperson) 2) Three (3) Parents Representatives (One of them as Deputy
Chairperson) 3) School Principal (Secretary), 4) Teachers’ Representative, 5) Village Chief and 6) Councilor.
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)




          (c) Community Construction Team (CCT)

20.     A team of artisans and laborers shall be identified and appointed by the CCC with the assistance of EFU and the
Consultant for each site. As a minimum, the team shall consist of: bricklayer, steel-fixer, carpenter and laborers. The
required caliber and numbers per each category per site shall be prescribed by the Consultant and approved by EFU.
Generally, the responsibility of the CCT shall be to carry out construction works in accordance with the approved drawings
and specifications.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The LEQEP restructuring will be implemented in approximately 20 beneficiary schools, these schools are
    located in already existing school premises. Lesotho is predominantly mountainous, with the highlands and
    mountain zones covering approximately 59% of the total land area. This land is mostly characterized by steep
    slopes with fragile soil formations which are extensively degraded. The highlands cover approximately 15%
    of the country, while the lowlands and Senqu (Orange) River Valley make up approximately 17% and 9% of
    the country, respectively. In terms of physical characteristics, the topography of the beneficiary schools is
    mainly mountainous, inaccessible and remote. The proposed sports facilities, toilets, addition/expansion of
    classrooms will likely increase enrollment and student retention. The additional facilities are expected to be
    built within the existing beneficiary of schools, within existing school perimeters, where land is already
    allocated to the school and there is no encroachment. The envisaged construction activities are however,
    expected to have minimal environmental and social impacts that are site specific, limited in scope, and can
    be readily addressed through mitigation measures contained in the prepared ESMP. The ESMP was prepared
    in line with the World Bank policy on environmental assessment OP4.01. The ESMP includes impacts,
    mitigations and monitoring measures, cost implications, capacity needs, and training requirements
    associated with the planned civil works. The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) was not triggered
    for this project, owing to the fact that the rehabilitations and refurbishments will be within the perimeters
    already set as under the ownership of schools and it has been determined that land is not being used or
    occupied and that there are no encroachers. For this reason, a separate Resettlement Policy Framework is
    not required.



    2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Kisa Mfalila, Environmental Specialist
    M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong, Social Specialist
    Mantsebo Moipone Amelia Ndlovu, Social Specialist
    Ntaoleng Celestina Mochaba, Environmental Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered              Explanation
                                                                  There will be construction of additional classrooms
                                                                  and or latrines and/or sport fields in about 20
                                                                  existing targeted schools under the proposed
                                                                  restructuring. The Project’s Operational Manual
                                                                  will be updated to include the construction sub-
                                                                  component.
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                  Due to the anticipated potential environmental and
                                                                  social impacts that may result form the
                                                                  implementation of the above project activities,
                                                                  OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. An Environmental and
                                                                  Social Management Plan (ESMP)           has been
                                                                  developed.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                  The project will not finance activities in or in vicinity
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                     of natural habitats and no impacts are foreseen on
                                                                  natural habitats as a result of this project.
                                                                  The civil works of the project are within the existing
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                     primary and lower secondary schools and will not
                                                                  affect forests.
                                                                  The project will not finance activities involving the
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                                  purchase, storage or use of pesticides.
                                                                  The project activities will not be carried out in
                                                                  historical areas or areas with Physical Cultural
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                  Resources. However, the ESMP will include Chance
                                                                  Find Procedures for construction contracts.
                                                                  The are no indigenous people in the project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                                  implementation areas.
                                                                  The project activities will be implemented on
                                                                  existing primary and lower secondary schools on
                                                                  land that is owned by school owners. It has been
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No                     determined that land is not being used or occupied
                                                                  and that there are no encroachers.Therefore, the
                                                                  project activities will not entail land acquisition or
                                                                  involuntary resettlement of people.
                                                                  The project will not support the construction of
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                                  new dams or entail rehabilitation of existing dams.
                                                                  The project will not support activities located on
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                          international waterways or that entail withdrawal
                                           No
(BP 7.50)                                                         of substantial quantity of water or affect the quality
                                                                  of such waterways.
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     The project is not located in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      With the proposed restructuring, there will be some minimal environmental and social impacts resulting from the
      construction activities.The proposed works will be minor, and it is anticipated that the impacts will be temporary, site
      specific and can be managed through preparation of a generic Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
      Therefore, an ESMP has been developed to address these risks and will focus on mitigation measures, monitoring
      frameworks, training & capacity building, management, and contingency planning.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      Given the nature of activities under the project, the team does not expect any potential indirect and/or long term
      impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
      It was determined that the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the Environmental and Social
      Management Plan (ESMP) will adequately address any potential negative impacts of future rehabilitation activities,
      and therefore, project alternatives did not have to be considered.


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      To address the safeguards issues identified under the project, the government has prepared an Environmental and
      Social Management Plan (ESMP). Implementation of the ESMP will be the responsibility of MoET which through its
      Project facilitation unit and the EFU will ensure that relevant program staff is given adequate training on safeguards
      issues. The borrower has the capacity to plan and implement the measures described in the ESMP. The Department
      of EFU coordinates and monitors the school construction including the social and environmental safeguard aspects.
      The unit is supported by a firm which will provide technical assistance to the communities throughout the
      implementation stage. In addition, the team is supported by an M&E expert who is also the focal person for all social
      and environmental safeguard related issues. The M&E expert has been trained on the Bank's safeguards policies.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      Key stakeholders are the implementing entities within the MoET and local community at school level. The project will
      involve the staff of MoET in relevant training and awareness-raising. The ESMP has been prepared in consultation
      with the relevant stakeholders, government relevant ministries, NGOs, communities and the general public.
      Consultations with the local communities will continue throughout the project implementation. They welcomed the
      proposed rehabilitation activities as these would contribute to a better learning environment and thus attract more
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



      students. The ESMP would be disclosed in Lesotho on March 29, 2019 and at the Bank’s external website on April 5,
      2019.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
19-Mar-2019                                                    29-Mar-2019
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 Lesotho                                                          29-Mar-2019
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                  Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                    Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
 disclosure?
            The World Bank                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (P156001)



    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups           No
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                             Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                             Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                             Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                             Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Harisoa Danielle Rasolonjatovo Andriamihamina


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
