The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2019| Report No: ISDSR26441




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                             Practice Manager:     Senait Assefa (Acting)
                            Task Team Leader:      Kennan Rapp
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and
    P155978
                                                                  Local Communities in LAC Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Kennan W. Rapp                                                Latin America
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    19-May-2016
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU04

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                            Total Financing
    399,480.00                                                    399,480.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                          Amount
    Trust Funds                                                                                            399,480.00
    Total                                                                                                  399,480.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen: (i) the knowledge of targeted civil society €organizations and
    local communities of REDD+ Readiness at the national level, and (ii) €Žrelated knowledge €Žexchange at the regional level
    in eligible FCPF countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.



.
            The World Bank                                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    The development objective of the FCPF Capacity Building Program on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in
    LAC project (P155978, TF0A2339) is to strengthen: (i) the knowledge of targeted civil society organizations and local
    communities of REDD+ Readiness at the national level, and (ii) related knowledge exchange at the regional level in Latin
    America and the Caribbean. It is financed under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Capacity Building Program
    (CBP) in its 2nd phase, which was set up to ensure the active engagement and participation of REDD+ relevant
    stakeholders, including civil society organizations (CSOs) and local communities (LCs) from FCPF participating countries
    in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), sub-Sahara Africa and Asia-Pacific regions. The two-year (2016-2018)
    project is financed by a Small Recipient Executed Trust Fund (SRETF) grant of US$399,480. The beneficiaries of this
    project are CSOs and LCs in the 17 FCPF countries in LAC (Argentina, Belize, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican
    Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname and
    Uruguay), which are eligible to participate in REDD+ related regional learning and exchange activities under Component
    2.1 Of the 17 countries, CSOs and LC from 11 countries (Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
    Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Suriname and Uruguay) have also been eligible to participate in national-
    level REDD+ capacity building activities through a competitive sub-project mechanism under Component 1. The project
    is being implemented by the Central America Indigenous and Peasant Coordination Association for Community
    Agroforestry (ACICAFOC), which is located in San José, Costa Rica.

    A recent assessment carried out by the World Bank and the leadership of ACICAFOC determined that the project had
    achieved all of its objectives by the grant’s original closing date of June 30, 2018. On December 21, 2018, the RVP gave
    retroactive approval to the extension of the Closing Date for the project, to June 30, 2020. A scale-up of activities is now
    being sought by adding a handful of newly eligible countries, modifying the Results Framework slightly and updating the
    project’s implementation schedule. Additional Financing in the amount of US$984,211 is also being sought. Up to now,
    safeguards performance in the project has been fully satisfactory. As has been the case up to now, the restructured
    project does not trigger any safeguard policies, nor will it involve physical investments resulting in on-the-ground
    impacts. The project’s EA category, at “C?, has not changed.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Capacity building activities under the project are being carried out in specific FCPF member countries
    throughout Latin America & the Caribbean, as well as at the regional level.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Kimberly Vilar, Social Specialist
    Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Environmental Specialist



1REDD+ stands for countries’ efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, while promoting conservation, sustainable
management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered           Explanation
                                                               Given that no physical footprint is associated with
                                                               the project, no environmental impacts are
                                                               expected, hence the explanation that is usually
                                                               provided about the application of screening and
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No
                                                               follow-up procedures for the management of
                                                               potential environmental impacts is not required in
                                                               this case. The project is categorized as "C", EA not
                                                               required.
                                                               Since there are no activities that will directly impact
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                  natural habitats, screening and follow up
                                                               procedures are not required.
                                                               Since there are no direct and/or physical impacts on
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                  forests, no screening and follow up procedures are
                                                               required.
                                                               None of the activities that would be supported by
                                                               the project are expected to involve the
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                  procurement or a substantial increase in the use of
                                                               pesticides. This would be specified in an exclusion
                                                               list.
                                                               This policy is not triggered because the project is
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                  not expected to support any activities having an
                                                               adverse impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                               OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered given that the direct
                                                               beneficiaries of the project will explicitly be non-
                                                               indigenous rural/peasant communities and
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                               organizations, in order to complement the grant
                                                               that is being funded in parallel for the benefit of
                                                               indigenous peoples.
                                                               None of the activities that would be supported by
                                                               the project are expected to involve physical
                                                               displacement and resettlement. They are also not
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No                  expected to involve the involuntary restriction of
                                                               community access to natural resources in legally
                                                               designated parks or protected areas. This would be
                                                               specified in an exclusion list.
                                                               None of the activities that would be supported
                                                               by the project are expected to involve the
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                               construction or operation of new or existing
                                                               dams.
                                                               This policy is not triggered because the project is
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                       not expected to support any activities having
                                           No
(BP 7.50)                                                      adverse impacts on the efficient utilization and
                                                               protection of international waterways.
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)



                                                                         This policy is not triggered because the project
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                         will not support activities in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      This project provides for the delivery of the simplest and most benign form of TA imaginable (training workshops,
      dialogues/ meetings, and learning-oriented studies), and does not have any physical footprint. Moreover, it is being
      coordinated by a regional CSO for the benefit of in-country CSOs and forest-dependent local communities (LC) that
      are looking to have their capacities enhanced in relation to REDD+, and thereby focuses on rural populations that will
      not be covered by the project’s sister grant, which focuses exclusively on indigenous peoples organizations. As in the
      original project, no environmental or social safeguard polies apply in the restructured project.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

      None.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

      None.


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      As the project involves on-granting at a very modest level to in-country CSOs and LC organizations, ACICAFOC as the
      Recipient Organization applies an exclusion or "negative" list to all sub-project proposals received, to ensure that they
      do not run afoul of any WB safeguard policy provisions. Members of the project secretariat in ACICAFOC have received
      basic training in WB safeguard policies and procedures.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      The beneficiaries of this project are CSOs and LCs in the 17 FCPF member countries in LAC, all of which are eligible to
      participate in REDD+-related regional learning and exchange activities under the project's Component 2. Of these 17
      countries, CSOs and LCs from 11 countries have also been eligible to participate in national-level REDD+ capacity
      building activities through a competitive sub-project mechanism under the project's Component 1. As part of the
      restructured project, organizations from four additional countries--Argentina, Belize, Panama and Paraguay--will also
      be eligible for support under Component 1.

      While preparing its proposal for the restructured project, ACICAFOC has reached out to like CSOs and LC organizations
      throughout the region, to solicit insights and ideas for the restructured project, while making clear that the basic
               The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
               FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)



          purpose of the restructuring would be to allow it to support a greater number of organizations in a greater number
          of REDD+ countries (i.e. to scale up existing project activities). This outreach has been accomplished via multiple
          means: e-mails, phone calls, Skype calls and face-to-face meetings.




    COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     B.    COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                         NA
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                       NA
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                         NA
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                         NA
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                         NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                         NA
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                        Kennan W. Rapp


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
FCPF Capacity Building on REDD+ for Civil Society and Local Communities in LAC Project (P155978)
