The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jan-2017| Report No: ISDSR21094




                        Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                               Country Director:    Asad Alam
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Erik Magnus Fernstrom
                             Task Team Leader:      Sameh I. Mobarek
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P146007                                                        EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Sameh I. Mobarek                                               Egypt, Arab Republic of
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
24-Jul-2014                                                    Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEE05

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
1,473,900,000.00                                               1,473,900,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                 799,000,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                        500,000,000.00
Parallel Financing                                                                                  174,900,000.00
Total                                                                                             1,473,900,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to assist the Arab Republic of Egypt to increase household access to reliable, lower
    cost, grid connected natural gas supply.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AFD                     Agence Française de Développement (French Development Agency)
EGAS                    Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company
ESIAF                   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework
ESMMF                   Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Framework
ESMP                    Environmental and Social Management Plan
EU                      European Union
HSE                     Health, Safety, and Environment
IBRD                    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
LDC                     Local Distribution Company
LPG                     Liquefied Petroleum Gas
PMU                     Project Management Unit
PRS                     Pressure Reduction Station
RAP                     Resettlement Action Plan
RPF                     Resettlement Policy Framework

1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component (1) - Gas Network Expansion and Household Connections (Estimated Cost US$ – 1,120 million, of
which IBRD US$ 500 million, AFD €70 million and EU €10 million): This component is designed to finance
goods, works, and non-consulting services needed to install pressure reductions stations, expand low
pressure networks, and establish customer service centers in 11 governorates (Giza, Ismailia, Alexandria,
Qalubia, Menufia, Daqahlia, Qena, Gharbia, Aswan, Sohag, and Marsa Matrouh) to provide for 1.5 million
new household gas connections. Disbursements from these loans are done on a pari passu basis, with IBRD
loan covering 84 percent of a withdrawal request under this Component and AFD/EU funds covering the
balance of 16 percent. The balance of this component’s fu nding (US$473 million) is provided by the
Government through other sources and is focused on covering taxes, customs duties, construction and civil
works costs involved in the network upgrades and new connections. The Government of Egypt (GoE) has
requested an expansion of the scope of Component one to include 800,000 additional connections in new
cities within the existing scope and 9 new governorates. GoE also requested extension of the Project’s
Closing Date from June 30, 2019, to June 30, 2021 to complete the work needed for these additional
connections.
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




Component (2) - Targeted Financial Support to Poor Households for the payment of Gas Connection Fees
(Estimated Cost: €45 million, financed by an EU Grant and administered by AFD): This component foc uses on
establishing a social safety net fund to subsidy a portion of the gas connection costs to poor households.

Component (3) - Institutional Strengthening (Estimated Cost: €13 million financed by an EU Grant and
administered by AFD): This component n) is focused on technical assistance and capacity building for the
natural gas sector.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The geographical spread of the project over twenty governorates (including nine newly added governorates),
from the Southern Governorates (Aswan, Luxor, Fayoum, Benisweif, Menia, Assiout, Qena, and Sohag) to the
Northern (Alexandria and Beheira) and from Eastern Governorates (Ismailia and Damietta) to the Western
(Matrouh), yields a diverse array of baseline conditions for the different project areas. The NG is processed
and injected into the high pressure lines of the national grid (70 Bar) for transmission and distribution (7
Bar). Pressure Reduction Stations (PRS) are established to reduce the pressure from 70 Bar to 7 Bar. An
odorant is added to the NG at the PRSs feeding distribution networks to residential areas in order to facilitate
leak detection. Regulators are used to further lower the pressure to 100 mbar in the local networks, before
finally lowering the pressure to 20 mbar for domestic use within the households. In addition to excavation
and pipe laying, key activities of the construction phase also include installation of pipes on buildings,
internal connections in households, and conversion of appliance nozzles to accommodate the switch from
LPG to NG.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM

Ehab Mohamed Mohamed Shaalan, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                        Triggered              Explanation


                                                                    In the original ongoing project, which covers 11
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     Governorates (out of all 27 Governorates in
                                                                    Egypt), the policy was triggered due to the
The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



                                                         potential multi-dimensional environmental and
                                                         social concerns that could be sensitive, diverse or
                                                         unprecedented. In this restructuring activity, the
                                                         same activities will take place but in a wider
                                                         geographic scope covering an additional 9
                                                         Governorates. The key environmental aspects are
                                                         air and dust emissions during construction from
                                                         excavation and construction equipment, noise,
                                                         solid and hazardous waste generation,
                                                         consumption of water resources and discharge of
                                                         liquid wastes from construction site offices.
                                                         Disruption of ecosystems or sensitive habitats may
                                                         occur especially during construction of high
                                                         pressure gas pipelines. Therefore, this policy
                                                         (OP4.01) should continue to be triggered to take
                                                         into consideration the potential negative
                                                         environmental and social impacts in the original 11
                                                         governorates in addition to the newly added 9
                                                         governorates, which include, but are not limited
                                                         to, including but not limited to: the loss of assets,
                                                         risks to the heath and safety of workers and local
                                                         community members, traffic congestion and loss
                                                         of access due to excavation and installation works,
                                                         air emissions, elevated noise levels, structural
                                                         effects on cultural sites and antiquities, potential
                                                         risk to weak structures, damage to underground
                                                         utilities during excavations, possible disruption or
                                                         displacement of ecological systems and solid and
                                                         liquid waste disposal.
                                                         These negative impacts are detailed along with
                                                         their mitigation measures in the ESIAF
                                                         (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                         Framework), which provides a framework for
                                                         determining the negative environmental and
                                                         social impacts and overall approaches for their
                                                         mitigation. In addition, management and
                                                         monitoring framework is also included as part of
                                                         the ESIAF. WBG EHS Guidelines for Gas
                                                         Distribution systems are also referred to in the
                                                         ESIAF.
                                                         Given the lack of clarity on the exact locations for
                                                         project implementation within the newly added 9
                                                         Governorates, the scope of the prepared ESIAF
                                                         was recently updated to include the new
                                                         geographic scope. Once the locations are
                                                         determined, site specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be
                                                         prepared, cleared and disclosed locally and in the
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



                                                                InfoShop.



                                                                The project avoids any activities in protected areas
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No                    and will not pass through any sensitive habitats.
                                                                Therefore, this policy is not triggered.

                                                                The project will not include any forest related
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                                activities. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.

                                                                The project will not include any activities involving
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No                    pest management. Therefore, this policy is not
                                                                triggered.
                                                                Many areas in Egypt are famous for historical sites
                                                                and culturally variable resources. Due to wide
                                                                geographical coverage of the project and the
                                                                excavation activities which will take place in 20
                                                                Governorates, chances of affecting physical
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                                cultural resources exist. Therefore, this policy is
                                                                triggered. screening and mitigation measures for
                                                                PCR issues are handled under the ESIAF
                                                                (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                Framework).

                                                                No indigenous people are identified in the project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                                areas.

                                                                The main components that will entail need for
                                                                land and may trigger the policy are the
                                                                establishment of pressure reduction stations
                                                                (PRSs) and laying down high pressure gas
                                                                pipelines. The common practice of EGAS is to
                                                                obtain the PRSs land through willing buyer willing
                                                                seller and no land expropriation or eminent
                                                                domain decree is issued for this purpose. EGAS will
                                                                be following a diligent process that align with the
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                   principles of the willing buyer willing seller to
                                                                emphasize the voluntary nature of the transaction
                                                                and ensure that market price and full replacement
                                                                cost are paid to purchase the land. In some cases,
                                                                the high pressure pipelines will pass through
                                                                privately owned agricultural lands which may
                                                                result in temporary disruption for the agriculture
                                                                business and potential damages on crops, trees or
                                                                privately owned assets. No displacement of people
                                                                is anticipated however access to amenities and
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



                                                                 livelihoods may be negatively affected. Therefore,
                                                                 OP 4.12 is triggered. To date, only one due
                                                                 diligence resettlement report for a pipeline that is
                                                                 financed by the Government and is considered an
                                                                 associated facility was prepared under the parent
                                                                 project. No more RAPs were prepared for the
                                                                 parent project.
                                                                 For the newly added 9 governorates, the
                                                                 developed and approved RPF for the parent
                                                                 project was updated to include the new
                                                                 geographic scope. Once the exact locations of the
                                                                 PRSs and the routes of the high pressure pipelines
                                                                 are identified, RAPs will be prepared in case any
                                                                 involuntary resettlement will be involved.
                                                                 No activities or investments will affect, or depend
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No                   on the performance of existing dams in this
                                                                 project. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                                                 No activities on international waterways are
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                            No                   included in this project. Therefore, this policy is
(BP 7.50)
                                                                 not triggered.
                                                                 No disputed areas are identified within the
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No                   boundaries of this project. Therefore, this policy is
                                                                 not triggered.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The following safeguard issues and potential negative impacts associated with the project. All the impacts listed
   below are largely of moderate significance. The anticipated impacts are limited to the specific construction sites,
   associated mainly with construction activities which are of short period of time. None of the listed impacts is
   considered irreversible or of potential large scale as described below.
   During Construction
   •    Air emissions from heavy machinery and generators;
   •    Dust generation from excavation activities and open storage of materials and excavated soils;
   •    Noise emissions from heavy machinery and asphalt breaking; as well as other construction/demolition for
   extending NG piping into households;
   •    Improper management of solid, liquid, and hazardous wastes and contamination of soils;
   •    Water consumption in construction activities;
   •    Improper disposal of wastewater from site offices;
   •    Dewatering of subsurface waters and improper disposal of the resulting wastewater;
   •    Potential impacts on culturally valuable sites and antiquities due to excavation activities;
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



  •     Traffic congestion and blockage of access due to excavation and installation works;
  •     Damage of crops and negative impacts on livelihoods due to laying down high pressure pipelines especially in
  privately owned agricultural lands;
  •     Permeant land requirements to establish Pressure Reduction Stations;
  •     Temporary land requirements for mobilization of machinery and other construction works processes;
  •     Risk of damage/breakage of underground utility lines and piping (drinking water, wastewater, electricity
  cables, telephone lines) during excavations;
  •     Inconveniences and complains by local dwellers especially concerning street restoration and re-pavement due
  to lack of coordination between the various implementing parties and permitting authorities.
  •     Worker health and safety concerns especially if local subcontractors are utilized in excavation works and daily
  casual activities with no culture of using personal protection equipment
  During Operation
  Potential negative impacts during operations mainly include:
  -     noise from the operations of the PRSs;
  -     Solid, liquid and hazardous wastes from the PRS operations
  -     Potential gas leakages and fire or explosion risks;
  -     Odorant emissions from the PRS causing nuisance to nearby residential areas;
  -     Workers health and safety during operation of the PRSs;
  -     Household user health and safety;
  -     Overall integrity of the gas network and risk of rupture or damage by any future unplanned excavation works
  causing fire risks or gas emissions.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The updated Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment Framework (ESIAF) considered several alternatives,
  including not undertaking the project. The No-Project alternative is not favored as it simply deprives the Egyptian
  Public and the Government of Egypt from the social, economic and environmental advantages associated with the
  proposed project such as reduced expenditure on LPG importation and subsidies, significantly lower leakage and
  fire risk compared to LPG and constantly available fuel for home use.

  Energy alternatives such as expanding LPG usage, or converting home appliances to operate on electricity or were
  also discussed and proved to be economically unfeasible compared to the use of natural gas. Piping material
  alternatives in the use of copper or steel was evaluated. Several considerations support the use of steel piping such
  strength, cost, and some aspects of public attitudes (copper is known in Egypt as an attractive target for theft due to
  its high value. Aside from the aspect of minimizing corrosion (and therefore risk of leakage), selection of one of the
  piping materials over the other does not seem to offer contrasts in the environmental and social impacts (except a
  marginally lower pressure loss with copper piping). Therefore, as long as precautions and safety margins are
  respected steel seems to be the more practical and safe choice.

  Alternatives to the sequencing of constructions were also considered. Progressing with constructing the high
  pressure gas transmission pipelines and distribution networks in the various project areas could be achieved
    The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
    EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



through two alternatives:
•    Alternative 1: complete the construction of the networks in more than one area simultaneously
•    Alternative 2: complete networks in sequence area by area

The advantages of Alternative 1 over Alternative 2 are: (i) shorter implementation schedule; and
(ii) utilization of economies of scale in lower cost for the additional equipment and components procured to cover
multiple areas simultaneously.
The advantages of Alternative 2 over Alternative 1 are: (i) less resources and capital investments required; and (ii)
less management and coordination resources required. Overall, the key contrast between the two alternatives is
related to available assets and human resources, while paying attention to coordination of sequential work outputs
of the parallel teams. The main advantage of working in parallel would be to minimize project implementation time.

Routing alternatives apply to transmission mains, distribution mains and connection mains. Deciding on routing
alternatives for the distribution and connection network is premature at this stage. However, selecting optimum
routes for these networks is crucial to avoid as much environmental and social impacts as possible. It is very
important to avoid as many sensitive sites as possible to minimize environmental and social impacts.

Excavation Technique alternatives: For the concerned project activities, excavation may proceed through using the
“Open Cut? technique. Alternatively, borings may be excavated using hydraulic drive, and finally Horizontal
Directional Drilling (HDD) technique. HDD is the method that shall be used in crossing the major urban roads and
railways (if intercepted).

One of the main impact avoidance measures which is determined it that no pipeline crossing of the Nile or any of its
tributaries will take place during the execution of this project. Existing high pressure mains on the East and West of
the Nile will be utilized instead of crossing the Nile in order to avoid any potential negative environmental impacts
on the water quality or the aquatic environment.

The potential adverse social impacts are mainly related to the permanent land occupation and temporary land use
for construction of 36 PRSs and of the temporary land acquisition for laying down high pressure gas pipeline. It is
estimated that the project will need about 5-6 hectare (1 hectare = 10,000 square meters) of permanent land
occupation. Since the exact locations of PRSs and alignment of gas pipeline cannot be finally determined at this
stage, an updated resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared to set the key principles for mitigating
the potential resettlement impacts as per OP 4.12. The updated RPF establishes the principles for resettlement
impact mitigation and the organizational arrangements for preparation and implementation of resettlement action
plans (RAPs) which may be needed during project implementation.
In the meantime, other potential social impacts should be carefully examined through the social assessment part of
the ESIAF at this stage and later during the preparation of the ESIAs. The social impacts assessment should be also
examining the social risk that could result from the project, including the risk related to labor influx in case it applies
to the project construction sites.

To address demand side aspects of the service delivery, EGAS already has a continuous Citizen Engagement plan in
place to build and maintain a productive relationship over time with the project hosting communities. This process
extends throughout the life of the project and encompasses a range of activities and approaches, from information
sharing and consultation to ensure that the project beneficiaries are fully engaged during the various stages of the
project.

The proposed project will build on this Citizen Engagement focus. It will support the development of a framework
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



 for household gas service delivery performance improvement and monitoring and develop a monitoring system to
 develop a Key Product Indicator. As a relevant tool for citizen engagement, EGAS and the participating LDCs will be
 strengthening the role of the customers’ service centers (CSC’s) to a more engaging role with citizens. Initially prior
 to the implementation of the proposed project, the Bank will also support a safety awareness campaign geared
 toward the more rural areas, where concerns on the safety of usage of natural gas connections and appliance were
 raised during the social consultations. Once the project is moved to implementation this will be sustained by the
 Social Development Officers hired by the project.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Given that routing of the high pressure pipelines and exact locations of the PRSs was not known with certainty
 neither at the appraisal time of the original project nor expected to be known at the appraisal of the restructured
 project (additional 9 governorates), an ESIAF)and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were selected to be the
 safeguard instruments used to address OP 4.01 and OP 4.12 respectively. The ESIAF and the RPF have been updated
 to reflect the changes in the geographical scope and baseline conditions of the original project expanding its
 boundaries from 11 governorates to 20 governorates.
 The mitigation measures to address potential negative environmental and social impacts are well presented and
 detailed in the Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Framework (ESMMF) contained in the
 updated ESIAF. The ESIAF has been updated, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
 external web site on June 18th and July 06th respectively.

 The objective of the ESMMF is to outline a mechanism for minimizing or eliminating potential negative impacts and
 for monitoring the application and performance of the mitigation measures. The ESMMF identifies roles and
 responsibilities for different stakeholders for implementation and monitoring of mitigations, and whenever
 applicable, the ESMMF is designed to accommodate alternative context-specific mitigation and monitoring
 measures. The ESMMF for this project is prepared in accordance with the World Bank Group’s Environmental,
 Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for Gas Distribution Systems.
 Once the PRS locations and pipeline routes are identified, site specific ESIAs/ESMPs will be prepared to include
 mitigation measures which are specific to these locations and routes. The site specific ESIAs/ESMPs will be prepared
 following the principles and procedures set forth in the updated ESIAF. Clear measures for handling health and
 safety issues, managing the impacts of labor influx and compensating resettlement impacts will be set forth clearly
 in the ESMP or further associated tool (e.g. the RAPs). The site specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared,
 cleared and disclosed prior to the commencement of any construction works. A reputable national consulting firm
 will be contracted by Egyptian Gas Holding Company (EGAS) - “the implementing agency? - to prepare the site
 specific ESIAs/ESMPs which will be reviewed by the Bank safeguards task team before final review and clearance by
 the Bank.
 In terms of implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures, all contracts for construction will
 include site specific ESMPs which will be mandatory to implement. EGAS environmental and social officers will
 ensure the implementation of the ESMP requirements. In addition, Bank supervision missions will ensure
 compliance with the ESMP measures.
 Over the past decade, EGAS has developed strong knowledge and competence in implementing Bank safeguard
 requirements, especially ESMPs and RAPs, since its engagement with the Bank in the execution of the EG-Natural
 Gas Connections Project (P095392) in the period from 2008 to 2014 and the implementation of the ongoing
 Households Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007) since 2014. In addition, EGAS will ensure, through its
 contractual arrangements with the contactors, that all ESMP/RAP requirements will be embedded in these
 contracts and will be binding for all contractors.
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




 However, due to the expansion of the project geographic scope to cover 20 governorates all over Egypt, the
 capacity of EGAS for close supervision of the ESMP/RAP implementation will need strengthening and further
 development. With assistance from the Bank safeguards task team members, a capacity development and
 strengthening plan is being prepared to ensure that EGAS will be able to secure sufficient human, technical and
 financial resources to implement the ESMP/RAP requirements. In addition, capacity assessment of the contractors
 who will be mandated to execute the project on the ground will be conducted and gaps will be identified. The Bank
 safeguards task team will ensure that both EGAS and its contractors have sufficient resources and competency to
 implement the safeguards requirements. This may include the possibility of utilizing external consultants to support
 EGAS and its contractors at least for a transition period until the internal capacities of EGAS/Contractors are
 strengthened.

 As for health and safety concerns, EGAS and its contractors have dedicated health, safety and environment (HSE)
 departments with well-trained and competent staff who are familiar with implementing health and safety measures
 in the gas sector. In the capacity assessment which will be conducted, adequacy of human resources allocated for
 health and safety in EGAS and contractors will be assessed and additional resources may be recommended
 especially at the contractors’ level.

 EGAS Environmental staff have received training on environmental auditing, EIAs preparation and review for
 industrial establishments and environmental legislation. The social teams have received comprehensive training,
 through the Bank Task Team environmental and social specialists on number of topics that include but are not
 limited to environmental assessment, OP4.01, social impacts assessment, OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement,
 establishing and operating grievance redress mechanism. Furthermore, the environmental departments in EGAS
 contractors (such as Egypt Gas and Town Gas) have gained experience through the implementation of the Natural
 Gas Connections Project (P095392) and the ongoing Households Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007). The
 ESMMF within the updated ESIAF has recommended some additional training and capacity building for EGAS
 contractors and for EGAS and the LDCs environmental and social officers. A capacity needs assessment for the LDCs
 and EGAS has been prepared by an independent consultant. The assessment laid out the specific needs of the LDCs
 and EGAS to implement and supervise the prepared ESMPs.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 Consultations are being carried out with key stakeholders across the various stages of the project. The original ESIAF
 and RPF were consulted upon twice in 2014 during the preparation of the Households Natural Gas Connection
 Project (P146007) as required for category A projects. These were very well advertised and attended in the 11
 governorates. Tools used included focus group discussions, individual interviews, group meetings and public
 consultation.    Consultation      activities  (scoping,    interviews,    focus     group     discussions,     public
 hearing/consultations/scoping sessions) were held with various stakeholders and community members in host
 communities in the 11 Governorates. These consultations were in compliance with World Bank policies related to
 disclosure and public consultation and Egyptian regulations related to public consultation (Law 4/1994 modified by
 Law 9/2009). Throughout the various consultation and engagement activities, the work teams experienced and
 recorded overwhelming public acceptance, by the communities and the governmental stakeholders towards the
 proposed project. Aside from limited concerns regarding arrangements for the Natural Gas installation payments
 and street restoration, all participants expressed their eagerness for commencement of project implementation
 without much delay and many others requested the extension of the project to additional areas.

 For the updated ESIAF/RPF to include the additional Governorates, a public consultation session was held in
                      The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)



                  October 10th, 2016 in Cairo. The invitation to the session was publicized in widely spread national newspaper. In
                  addition, EGAS invited key stakeholders from the addition 9 Governorates to attend the consultation session and
                  provided dedicated transportation to all participants. Several NGOs representing the civil society in the 9
                  governorates actively participated in the discussions and provided comments on the Draft ESIAF/RPF. The NGO
                  representatives determined their concerns regarding potential negative environmental and/or social impacts which
                  may affect some people in their respective governorates especially farmers whose agricultural lands will be affected
                  by the gas pipelines. In addition, concerns about restoration of street conditions after completion of works and
                  extending the gas networks to deprived areas were flagged.

                  The session was well attended and documented by EGAS where all comments and discussions were included and
                  addressed in the updated ESIAF/RPF.

                  The preparation of the updated ESIAF/RPF was closely supported by the Bank safeguards task team, reviewed and
                  cleared by the Bank on April 17th, 2017. The Final updated ESIAF and RPF were disclosed locally on EGAS website on
                  June 18th and on the Bank’s external web site on July 06th. In addition, the updated ESIAF and RPF will be available
                  at each Governorate electronically and in hard copies upon request from any concerned party.

                  Further public consultation sessions and complementary consultation activities (e.g. scoping, interviews and focus
                  group discussions) are being and will continue to be held as part of the preparation of the site specific
                  ESIAs/ESMPs/RAPs and the same established system for arranging consultations, engaging stakeholders, addressing
                  their concerns in the safeguards instruments are being followed.

            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
        17-Apr-2017                                                       06-Jul-2017
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            Egypt, Arab Republic of                                         18-Jun-2017
            Comments
            The link to the website is
            http://www.egas.com.eg/Corporate_Overview/ExtensionOfNaturalGasConnectionsProject.aspx


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
17-Apr-2017                                                   06-Jul-2017
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                       Date of Disclosure
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                                       18-Jun-2017
 Comments
 The link to the website is
 http://www.egas.com.eg/Corporate_Overview/ExtensionOfNaturalGasConnectionsProject.aspx
 COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                  Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                  Yes
 credit/loan?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                              Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                  Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            framework/process
                                                                                                  Yes
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                                  Yes
 Manager review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                                    No

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
                                                                                                  TBD
 leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)
          The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)




PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                 Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                 Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                 Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                                 Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                             Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Sameh I. Mobarek


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                    Nina Chee                                28-Aug-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
