The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Feb-2018| Report No: ISDSR24218




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Lilia Burunciuc
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Juergen Voegele
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Julian A. Lampietti
                            Task Team Leader:      David Tuchschneider
              The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P155412                                                       Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    David Tuchschneider                                           Kyrgyz Republic
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    29-Nov-2016                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GFA03


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                                5.12
    Total Financing                                                                                                   5.12
    Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                     5.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                   2.75
         IDA Grant                                                                                                    2.25
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                             0.12
         LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES                                                                                         0.12
            The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality on beneficiary farms.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

       Changes are proposed for all components, as described in the following.

       (a) Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector. Component 1 will be refocused on strengthening
       service delivery systems to support small farmers’ achievement of market quality standards for milk and creation and
       consolidation of farmer linkages with selected dairy processor companies. To achieve this, the sub-components will
       be modified as follows:

           (i) Sub-component 1A will be renamed “Quality Platform for the Milk Value Chain?. The focus will move from
               establishing a general platform for public-private sector dialogue to: designing and implementing a digital
               platform for milk collection and the provision of equipment for milk collection, cooling, quality testing, and
               data entry in milk collection points. The equipment will be provided to milk collection point operators
               including milk-processing companies, independent operators or farmer groups, under terms and conditions
               which will be described in detail in the Project Operational Manual including, inter alia, selection and eligibility
               criteria for beneficiaries, the types of eligible goods, the beneficiary’s obligation to adopt and use the digital
               milk quality platform, as well as the recipient’s compliance with sanitary requirements. Up to 130 collection
               points would be expected to join the platform.

           (i) Sub-Component 1B will be renamed “Support to the Regional Centers for Veterinary Diagnostics?. It was
               originally envisaged that the project would support the government’s initiative of cattle identification and
               registration, but this activity will be excluded since it has already been financed by GoK. Funding will be
               directed instead to: upgrading veterinary control and surveillance capacity, by providing resources for two
               newly built regional laboratories in the selected Project area (Karakol and Balykchi). Funding for this activity
               will encompass: (i) equipment; (ii) start-up consumables; and (iii) technical and managerial assistance for
               capacity building.

           (ii) Sub-Component 1C, procurement of high quality semen straws to ensure early breeding improvement in the
                Project area, will include the means to deliver the service to beneficiaries.

           (iii) Sub-component 1D, Establishment of up to three veterinary check points, will be eliminated as investment in
                 physical infrastructure for veterinary check-points is deemed premature to achieve disease-free status.
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)



       (b) On-farm productivity enhancement. Component 2 envisages a large-scale training and capacity building program
       for small dairy farmers with the objective of delivering the basic knowledge and skillset for improved dairy cattle
       productivity and milk quality. While this continues to be an important and relevant project activity, this restructuring
       will reduce the component’s target from 12,000 to 6,000 households in order to re -allocate funds to the Revolving
       Fund in Component 3. The component will include (i) a contract with a local Consulting and Training Company that
       will develop and carry out the training, and (ii) procurement of goods and works for demonstration farms and
       trainees. The component will focus on the following specific outputs: (i) training delivered for 240 farmer groups
       (farmer field schools), and (ii) farmer technical assistance in marketing to help farmer groups establish linkages with
       dairy processors. Each training program will include 7 technical modules and marketing support and will be delivered
       over a period of 8 months.

       (c) Farm-level investments. Component 3 will be expanded to include a larger number of Sub-financing recipients,
       raising the target from 1,500 to 2,000 beneficiaries. In addition, the ceiling amount per beneficiary will be raised from
       US$ 1,000 to US$ 1,200.

       (d) Project management. Component 4 will be re-enforced to: (i) increase the project’s footprint in Issyk Kul; (ii)
       incorporate on-line, real-time systems for monitoring and evaluation; and (iii) link the M&E systems to the milk
       processors’ dairy procurement system.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Issyk-kul Oblast has been selected as the project area based on the results of a feasibility study carried out in
    February 2015. The study concluded that Issyk-kul Oblast is suitable for dairy value chain development
    considering its geographical setting (it is surrounded by mountain ranges, which is a natural barrier for
    restricting animal movement); the abundance of pastures; farmers’ willingness to adapt and adopt new
    technologies; the support of the Oblast’s Governor’s office and local authorities; the existence of a direct
    milk collection system from farmers; suitable level of competitiveness between buyers; good milk production
    growth rates; and closeness to Kazakhstan. The Oblasts covers about 80,000 households (rural population of
    330,000 people) and 106,000 dairy cows (cattle population of about 220,000).



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    John Bryant Collier, Environmental Specialist
    Kristine Schwebach, Social Specialist
    Volodymyr Tykhyy, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                             Triggered            Explanation
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)



                                                                  This OP is triggered as a series of proposed project
                                                                  activities (upgrading of the veterinary laboratories;
                                                                  investments for improving the animal herd; inputs
                                                                  for pasture improvements; small agricultural
                                                                  equipment; farm infrastructure improvement
                                                                  including animal housing, waste management,
                                                                  purchasing of inputs and machinery for feed and
                                                                  fodder production; agro-processing and milk
                                                                  collection and cooling equipment; silage
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                      production; etc.) might generate various
                                                                  environmental and social impacts. All these impacts
                                                                  are expected to be typical for small scale
                                                                  construction/rehabilitation works or for various
                                                                  agricultural processing activities, temporary by
                                                                  nature and site-specific and can be easily mitigated
                                                                  by applying best construction and/or agro-
                                                                  processing practices and relevant mitigation
                                                                  measures. None of the described activities has
                                                                  been executed prior to this restructuring.
                                                                  Implementing Agencies for the project are the
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                             No                   Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                  Melioration and the Ministry of Finance.
                                                                  Project activities will be carried out in settlements
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             No
                                                                  and on agricultural lands far from natural habitats.
                                                                  Project activities will be carried out in settlements
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      No
                                                                  and on agricultural lands without forests.
                                                                  The project will not support purchasing and use of
                                                                  pesticides, but within the trainings the issues of
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   Yes                  integrated pest management and safe usage of the
                                                                  pesticides and acaricides will be covered, thus
                                                                  raising public and farmers awareness.
                                                                  Two veterinary laboratories which will be upgraded
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                  are not on the list of cultural resources.
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No                   N/A
                                                                  The project will not support any sub-projects where
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No
                                                                  involuntary resettlement might be required
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No                   N/A
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No                   N/A
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No                   N/A
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)




A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The proposed project activities (upgrading equipment for veterinary analytical laboratories; investments in improving
     the animal heard; purchasing of inputs and machinery for feed and fodder production; animal shelter improvement;
     agro-processing and milk collection and cooling equipment; etc.) might generate a series of various adverse
     environmental and social impacts. These impacts would be associated with noise, dust, air and water pollution, health
     hazards and labor safety issues, etc. All of them are expected to be typical for small scale construction/rehabilitation
     works or for various agricultural processing activities, temporary by nature and site specific and can be easily
     mitigated by applying best construction and/or agro-processing practices and relevant mitigation measures. The
     grants and sub-projects to be implemented under the on farm investments will also generate some direct and indirect
     positive economic and social impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased milk production, which
     would result in creation of new jobs and increased income. Indirect positive impacts will relate to overall improving
     of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural diary technologies and techniques, contribution to
     poverty reduction and food safety.

     The project will not support any activities that would trigger the OP on Natural Habitats. The project will be
     implemented in non-afforested areas and thus no impacts on the forests' status are expected. Although the project
     will not support purchasing and use of pesticides, the farmers routinely use them while producing animal fodder as
     well as acaricides to control ticks and other ectoparasites and thus OP on Pest Management is triggered. To ensure
     the safe usage of chemicals the ESMF specifies the project will support TA activities in this aspect, providing public
     awareness and training for farmers.

     The project will not finance any activities that might trigger involuntary resettlement issues. Any infrastructure
     constructed under the project will be: (a) located on land already owned by participants and, (b) will be screened to
     ensure that it is free of legal encumbrance, or informal use or occupation by others who lack formal title.

     Due to effectiveness delays, financing of activities has not been executed prior to this restructuring.The project
     restructuring encompasses refocusing of project activities, reallocation of funds between components, a minor
     adjustment of the institutional implementation arrangements and simplification of the Results Framework. This minor
     restructuring does not include triggering new safeguards. The ESMF has been updated by the Client to reflect the
     changes in project design.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
     As specified above the long term impacts are positive and associated with the improving of business environment,
     introduction of advanced agricultural diary technologies and techniques, contribution to poverty reduction and food
     safety.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

     N/A
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)




4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To address potential project impacts the client prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) which is aimed at specifying the set of mitigation, monitoring, and institutional measures to be taken during
  the project implementation to eliminate adverse environmental and social impacts, offset or reduce them to
  acceptable levels. The document provides the World Bank’s and national rules and procedures for project
  Environmental Impacts Assessment (EIA), identify potential environmental impacts of the project (both positive and
  negative), and outlines rules and procedure for the sub-project environmental screening, specifying appropriate
  preventive actions and mitigation measures (including appropriate monitoring plan) to prevent, eliminate or minimize
  any anticipated adverse impacts on the environment. The ESMF also suggests a series of environmental issues to be
  included in the proposed project TA activities - training, preparing and disseminating guidebooks and implementing
  demonstration activities on the following: (a) education of veterinary specialists on managing sector environmental
  and social impacts; (b); sound manure management; (c) practicing silage production and measures to ensure
  appropriate handling and disposal of the "silage liquor"; and (d) promoting Integrated Pest Management while
  producing fodder and usage of acaricides in livestock production.

  The ESMF contains also a section on Environmental Guidelines which provides rules and procedures for EA of selected
  grants and sub-projects, based on which an EMP Checklist will be prepared, disclosed and consulted in the selected
  localities. The ESMF and EMPs provisions will form part of the design documents for the project, and will be included
  in contracts for proposed activities, both into specifications and bills of quantities. Respectively the Contractors will
  be required to include the cost of EMP requirements in their financial bids and required to comply with them while
  implementing the project activities.

  Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration and the Ministry of Finance will be the Implementing Agencies for the project.
  The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) and the Credit Line Management Unit (CLMU) of the Ministry of
  Finance will be responsible for implementation of the technical assistance and credit line activities, respectively. The
  ABCC and CLMU have prior extensive experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. Similar to the previous
  projects, CLMU will be responsible for project-related procurement activities, financial management as well as for
  sub-projects and grants Environmental Assessment. The evaluation of the EA institutional capacity has shown that
  although CLMU has basic capacities to perform its duties concerning EA and enforcing the ESMF provisions, there is
  need for additional capacity building activities, especially for the new Environmental Specialist as well as for
  commercial banks who will participate in the project implementation. In this regard the Project will support additional
  training activities to ensure the environmental requirements and the ESMF provisions would be fully implemented.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  ABCC and CLMU disseminated the draft summary ESMF in Russian and Kyrgyz language in its institutions and to other
  relevant ministries and agencies for review and comments on February 10 and 16, 2016, also posting it for wide public
  on the web-page of the MoF. On February 26, 2016, they conducted a public briefing and consultation on this
  document. Overall the meeting concluded that the draft ESMF document covered practically all potential impacts and
  possible mitigation measures. The draft ESMF was revised after the meeting taking into account inputs from the
  consultation. The final version of the EMF was disclosed in the country and in the WB Infoshop and will be used by
  the government agencies during the project implementation.
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
26-Oct-2018                                                    06-Nov-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 Kyrgyz Republic                                                  12-Nov-2018
 Comments
 Ministry of Finance website disclosed November 7, 2018:
 http://minfin.kg/userfiles/ufiles/2018/kppms_rdesu_06.11.2018.pdf
 Russian version of ESMF disclosed November 12, 2018:
 http://www.agroprod.kg/index.php?aux_page=aux4


PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure

02-Mar-2016                                                     08-Mar-2016
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Kyrgyz Republic                                                 26-Feb-2016
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
         The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)



OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                     Yes
and approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



PM_TABLE
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                           Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                          No

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project        NA
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
 and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                     Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                     Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                     Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)




                                           David Tuchschneider
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Artavazd Hakobyan

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
