The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2018| Report No: ISDSR24882




                       Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                              Country Director:    Paul Noumba Um
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Wendy E. Hughes
                            Task Team Leader:      Reynold Duncan
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P116410                                                     Eskom Investment Support Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Reynold Duncan                                              South Africa
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    08-Apr-2010                                                 Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE08


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                        23,701.28
    Total Financing                                                                                           23,701.28
    Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 3,750.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                      16,338.83
         Borrower                                                                                              16,338.83
      Other Sources                                                                                                3,262.45
         African Development Bank                                                                                   865.71
         Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified)                                                           930.00
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



         Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                                                             63.74
         Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                                         1,403.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective (PDO) of the Eskom Investment Support Project for South Africa is to enhance its power
    supply andenergy security in an efficient and sustainable manner so as to support both economic growth objectives and
    South Africa's longterm carbon mitigation strategy.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The project consists of the following components under implemented and one proposed components. All component
are/ will be implemented by Eskom:
Component A consists of Medupi coal-fired power station (4800 MW, based on supercritical technology) and is expected
to cost about US$ 14 billion, of which IBRD will provide financing of about US$ 1.9 billion. This loan is being provided
against supply and install and civil construction contracts for the power plant and associated facilities (including
transmission lines).
Component B consists of investments in renewable energy (100 MW Sere Wind project and 100 MW Concentrating
Solar Power project, later changed to Kiwano CSP). The component was estimated to cost US$1.198 billion). Sere Wind is
now operational but Eskom has decided not to continue with Kiwano CSP and replace it with Battery Storage (of energy
from Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) sources like solar and wind. The estimated total of the Battery Storage Program,
excluding generation (already provided through REIPPP) is US$764 million, compared to about US$800 million for
Kiwano CSP. BSP costs and results will be as shown in the table below:
    Scope of Work                 Distributed battery           Distributed Battery           Cost (US$ million)
                                  storage -December 2019        storage with distributed
                                                                PV- December 2021

    Capacity                      40MW at Sere (160MWh) –       60MW of distributed PV
                                  existing wind

    Energy storage per annum      800 MWh                       640 MWh
    Location                      Sere wind farm in Western     Several distribution sites
                                  Cape                                                        764 million
                                  Several distribution
                                  substations in Northern,
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



                                 Eastern, Western Cape and
                                 KZN



Component C consists of both sector investments and technical assistance to support lowering of Eskom’s carbon
intensity through energy efficiency. The Majuba Rail project (shift in transportation of coal from road to rail) and
technical assistance for assessing opportunities for coal-fired power plant efficiency improvements were envisaged
under this component. The Majuba Rail project is progressing well and nearing completion. Eskom funded studies for
improving power plant efficiency from internal resources. Eskom would now like to use the loan amount for studies on
the creation of collector stations for energy generated by renewable energy plant under the REIPP program for
distribution locally in South Africa and well as regionally to neighboring countries. The studies would also consider
stability issues arising from the increase of VRE on the network. This component is estimated to cost US$ 538 million of
which US$440 million will be financed by IBRD.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Medupi Power Plant is located in Lephalale town which is sparsely populated and characterized by the
    presence of another similar power plant and coal mines. Majuba railway line is in Majuba district of
    Mpumalanga, which is also sparsely populated. Eskom power investments under the Renewable Energy
    component include wind and Battery Storage, which is the subject of the restructuring. Sere Wind Power
    Station is north of Western Cape in an area that is sparsely populated. Battery Storage will support
    installation of container-encased battery storage facilities at forty-two sites located adjacent or within
    existing electrical sub-stations in Northern, Eastern and Western Cape Provinces. These sites and
    surrounding areas are sparsely populated and characterized by semi-arid or arid landscapes that are
    predominantly used for grazing sheep or cattle. In determining the appropriate sites for the battery storage
    facilities, a high level environmental screening was carried out to ensure that the selected sites are not close
    to water bodies or critical biological areas. The Battery Storage project sites in the Northern Cape Province
    are largely characterized by flat, sparsely vegetated land in proximity to the Kalahari Desert. None of the
    sites is within sensitive/critical ecosystems, and the site are already disturbed by livestock grazing and the
    construction and operation of the existing electrical sub-stations. The social assessment will establish the
    nature and extent of social impacts. The SDR confirmed that Eskom, and the environmental regulatory
    agencies, had the institutional capacity, requisite procedures and track record to meet the acceptability
    criteria of OP 4.00 with respect to all applicable Bank safeguard policies. At the time it was not anticipated
    that Indigenous Peoples would be present in, or have collective attachment to a project location and
    therefore no due diligence regarding Indigenous communities, or reviews of South African laws pertaining to
    IPs, was conducted as part of the SDR. The proposed restructuring, to include the Battery Storage
    component, includes a project site identified as Rietfontein in the town of Andriesvale in a relatively remote
    Kalahari location in the Northern Cape province of South Africa. The site is home to the Khomani San who
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



are considered an Indigenous people. In order to proceed with the restructuring, the project is required to
comply with comply with OP4.10 in light of the presence of IPs.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Kisa Mfalila, Environmental Specialist
Abdelaziz Lagnaoui, Environmental Specialist
M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong, Social Specialist
Gina Cosentino, Social Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered        Explanation
                                                              OP 4.00 on the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                              Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues applies
                                                              to the project. A Safeguards Diagnostics Review
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No                   (SDR) was carried out in 2008 and found the South
                                                              Africa environmental and social management
                                                              system to be equivalent and acceptable to the
                                                              requirements of OP 4.01.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                             No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              OP 4.00 on the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                              Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues applies
                                                              to the project. A Safeguards Diagnostics Review
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             No               (SDR) was carried out in 2008 and found the South
                                                              Africa environmental and social management
                                                              system to be equivalent and acceptable to the
                                                              requirements of OP 4.04.
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      No

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No
                                                              OP 4.00 on the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                              Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues applies
                                                              to the project. A Safeguards Diagnostics Review
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                (SDR) was carried out in 2008 and found the South
                                                              Africa environmental and social management
                                                              system to be equivalent and acceptable to the
                                                              requirements of OP 4.11.
                                                              As part of the project restructuring, OP4.10 is
                                                              triggered, and financing for the Rietfontein site will
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes
                                                              be provided once the IPP and SIA are finalized and
                                                              approved by the Bank. Prior to that, and as part of
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



                                                                       the restructuring, the Bank has requested receipt of
                                                                       a satisfactory ToR for the IPP and the SIA
                                                                       OP 4.00 on the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                                       Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues applies
                                                                       to the project. A Safeguards Diagnostics Review
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)        No                     (SDR) was carried out in 2008 and found the South
                                                                       Africa environmental and social management
                                                                       system to be equivalent and acceptable to the
                                                                       requirements of OP 4.12.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No
                                                                       Water for operating the Medupi Power Plant is
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                              sourced from the Mokolo and Crocodile Rivers
                                                Yes
 (BP 7.50)                                                             which are tributaries to an International Waterway
                                                                       - the Limpopo River.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The proposed level 2 restructuring will involve changing one of the Renewable Energy sub-components from
      Concentrated Solar Power technology to Battery Storage Facilities.

      The project was approved by the Board in 2008 for the "Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and
      Social Safeguard Issues" according to OP 4.00. However, at the time of carrying out the Safeguards Diagnostic Review,
      Indigenous Peoples were not anticipated to be present in any of project sites. Consequently, OP 4.10 was not included
      in the review. One of the new sites under the restructured project is Rietfotein, located in the town of Andriesvale,
      and home to a Khomani San community. The community meets the OP4.10 definition of Indigenous Peoples. As part
      of the project restructuring, OP4.10 is triggered and financing for the Rietfontein site will be provided once the
      Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and the Social Assessment are finalized and approved by the Bank. Prior to that, and as
      part of the restructuring, the Bank has requested receipt of a satisfactory Terms of Reference (TORs) for the IPP and
      the Social Assessment.

      Recent census data is unavailable, however, today the population is estimated at approximately 800 individuals with
      approximately 400 to 500 residing in the Andriesvale area. The Khomani San community is marginalized, underserved,
      and has high rates of poverty and food scarcity. In addition, the community has low levels of formal educational
      participation and attainment due to lack of access to education; low access to basic services including water, health,
      electricity, and limited employment and traditional livelihood opportunities. They are also dependent on Government
      handouts to supplement their income.

      Informal consultations with some community members revealed that the provisioning of electricity is welcome;
      however the community is uncertain if electricity will be affordable and what are additional project benefits and the
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



  social and environmental impacts. As per OP4.10, Eskom financing for this sub-project is contingent upon Eskom
  engaging in a process of free, prior and informed consultations resulting in broad community support to the project.

  Eskom has continued to satisfactorily follow the South African legislation to regularly ensure compliance and
  management of various environment and social aspects of the Project. Eskom also has substantial capacity to conduct
  Environmental Assessment (EA), through independent consultants (as required by the Environmental Impact
  Assessment (EIA) regulations); to prepare and implement Environmental Management Plans; and to pro-actively
  engage the affected public and NGOs in informed consultation through transparent public disclosure of projects and
  alternative siting and mitigation strategies. However, a lack of familiarity with social issues and aspects as they relate
  to Indigenous Peoples and a lack of familiarity with OP 4.10 require continued diligence and capacity assistance by
  the Bank.

  The Battery Storage component entails installation of container-encased battery storage facilities (approximately 8m
  high) consisting of grid-scale electrochemical batteries on 42 project sites along the power grids and within the vicinity
  of renewable energy power plants (wind or solar) sites. The facilities will store electricity from the power plants and
  evacuate the power when needed. Potential negative impacts of electricity storage depend on the type and efficiency
  of storage technology. If not disposed of or recycled property, the raw material used in the battery will likely lead to
  generation of hazardous waste with negative impacts to the environment. Initial environmental assessment carrying
  out by Eskom, concluded that likely hazardous waste to be generated from the technology will not be or exceed 500
  cubic meters to require a full Environmental Impact Assessment in line with the South Africa EIA laws and regulations.

  Other potential negative environmental impacts from the Restructured Project are low to moderate, limited to the
  sites where the containers housing the batteries will be installed, largely occurring from clearing vegetation during
  site preparation, construction of access/haul roads, undertaking of excavation works for anchoring the containers,
  maneuvering and operating cranes for unloading and installation of equipment. Decommissioning activities may
  include removal of the temporary project infrastructure and site rehabilitation.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Among critical environmental issue for the Medupi current being handled at the stage of restructuring is a delay in
  implementing Flue Gas Desulphurization (FGD) and non-compliance with new air emission standards, especially
  relating to spiking of Sulphur Dioxide emissions above the stipulated standard. These issues are being resolved in
  consultation with the Bank team and in accordance with South Africa's Country Systems.

  The battery storage systems will be containerized and the containers installed in already disturbed areas within
  existing electrical sub-stations, generating low environmental impacts. Additionally, the operation and maintenance
  of the facilities will be carried out remotely. Therefore, no potential indirect or long term environmental impacts are
  expected from the project. However, the ESIA for the Rietfontein site at Andriesvale site has not yet been completed
  so it is unknown if there are enduring social and environmental impacts. However, should access to electricity services
  be improved in the project areas, the Project will have a multiplier effect on the local economy through development
  of small businesses and tourism.

  The battery storage technology is currently being piloted in South Africa. Should the technology prove successful,
  there is a potential of scaling up similar technology to allow increased capacity in energy storage from future wind
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



  and solar powered projects. This, in turn, will lead to increased access to energy in other geographical areas of South
  Africa. Electricity storage can also be used to help integrate more renewable energy into the electricity grid. Electricity
  storage can also help generation facilities operate at optimal levels, and reduce use of less efficient generating units
  that would otherwise run only at peak times. Further, the added capacity provided by electricity storage can delay or
  avoid the need to build additional power plants or transmission and distribution infrastructure.

  Other long-term impacts include reduction in Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions with increased adoption of solar and
  wind powered electricity generation.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The only additional risk that comes with the new component regards the application of OP4.10, on Indigenous
  Peoples, as this is a requirement outside Use of Country Systems. Eskom is in the process of preparing an Indigenous
  Peoples Plan as is required under the policy.

  Eskom follows due diligence procedures including an analyses of alternatives to avoid and minimize any adverse
  environmental and social impacts, as part of their corporate procedures while establishing techno-economic
  feasibility.

  Alternative sites were examined during planning of the battery storage facilities to ensure that the selected project
  sites are not within the proximity to sensitive ecosystems such as water bodies and critical habitats.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Department of Environment Affairs (DEA) is the lead agency for all issues involving environmental management,
  including approval of EIAs; drafting of legislation and issuance of regulations affecting the environment; and
  monitoring environmental impacts, emissions and effluents from point sources, including electrical generation and
  transmission facilities. Eskom has a corporate department which along with the environmental units at the sub project
  locations has developed very good capacity and a robust system to address all critical environment and social risks
  and impacts. Eskom undertakes regular monitoring of environmental performance including an independent
  assessment of compliance with the local environmental laws by a third party.

  Since 2016, Eskom has tested thoroughly the main battery system technologies, in its Research center in Pretoria.
  These tests included security and environment aspects during operation in South Africa's conditions. Testing results
  have been extrapolated to estimate the expected lifetime of the future battery systems, and follow up discussions
  with manufacturers included safeguards for the construction and recycling conditions. The Technical Advisor hired by
  Eskom will refine specifications in tender documents, to include requirements for suppliers to provide adequate offers
  in terms of training of Eskom technical staff, maintenance and disposal of the battery systems.

  Eskom has adequate technical capacity and knowledgeable on the operation and maintenance of battery storage
  technology including management of environmental aspects associated with battery storage system. OP 4.00 applies
  to the project. As such, Eskom is using "Borrower Systems in Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues"
  in the project. Fourty-two (42) sites have been selected for the installation of the battery storage facilities. According
  to the South Africa EIA law, a full EIA is required if the volume of hazardous waste generate from a facility is above
  500 liters. Based on a high-level environmental analysis carried out by the Eskom environmental team, each battery
  storage facility will not generate hazardous waste at a volume greater that 500 liters. As such, a Basic Environmental
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



  Impact Assessment is currently being carried out for each individual site by third party international consultants
  overseen by four (4) Eskom Environmental managers located at the provincial level and reporting to Environmental
  Manager located at the Headquarters. Given that most the project sites are located in the Western Cape province,
  six (6) EIA consultants have been appointed for the sites in this province while one (1) EIA consultant has been
  appointed for the project sites located in the Eastern, Northern Cape and Kwazulu Natal provinces. The Department
  of Environment Affairs (DEA), as the competent authority, will review and issue EIA licenses for each individual sites
  before construction commences.

  Overall, Eskom anticipates that the entire environmental approvals process timeframe is 6 months per site (which
  will be carried out in parallel). A full EIA will also be carried out for Eskom financed distributed solar PV sites (which
  could take up to 18 months, but will include the battery storage component).

  Eskom does not have experience in the application of OP4.10. As a result the company does not have the requisite
  in-house capacity for interpreting and implementing the policy and will need to rely on outside expertise. A consultant
  has been hired to prepare the SIA and one will be hired for the IPP for the project site. The Bank has review and clear
  the ToR’s for the IPP and SIA. In addition, the Bank will clear the finalized IPP and the SIA prior to the commencement
  of works and will closely support and supervise the IP aspects.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Eskom set up an Environmental Monitoring Committee (EMC) in 2012 with an independent Chairperson to monitor
  compliance with various environmental and social requirements for the Medupi project, as well as to provide a
  platform for interested and affected parties to regularly raise their concerns. The EMC’s role with its 12 members has
  evolved to facilitate communication and cooperation among local stakeholders, Eskom, local municipal authority,
  Department of Environment Affairs, Department of Water and Sanitation and other local government agencies
  represented through local counsellor and village chief.

  For the battery storage systems, key stakeholders include (i) national institutions that will provide authorization to
  build and operate the battery storage systems (DEA, NERSA); (ii) the private operators who will own and operate the
  wind and solar plants linked with the Eskom storage systems; and (iii) the local communities in the decentralized areas
  where Eskom plans to install energy storage along with its decentralized photovoltaic new generation capacity.

  OP 4.10 will apply for the Rietfontein site. Eskom held one consultation with the community (September 28, 2018).
  Prior to this time, Eskom has only met with the Community Property Association whose membership consists of some
  members of the community. The Community Property Associations are landholding institutions established under the
  Communal Property Associations Act No. 28 of 1996 (the CPA Act) for use of communities who have received
  restituted land. The CPA Act provides for government registration of CPAs and also government oversight. Going
  forward, the main mechanism for consultation with the community will be through community consultation meetings
  to ensure that free, prior and informed consultations leading to broad community support is obtained and the
  community is inclusively engaged           throughout this project. Additional stakeholders include traditional
  representatives, women and youth who will be part of the broader consultation meeting but will have additional
  focus group discussions to ensure their views are reflected in the project. As the ESIA is not yet complete, it is unclear
  what the extent of labor influx will be.
                            The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
26-Nov-2018                                                                 22-Nov-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            South Africa                                                    22-Nov-2018
            Comments
            TOR acceptable to the Bank received on for the IPP and SIA have been received on 27-Nov-2018



       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                Yes
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                                Yes
            review the plan?

            If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                                Yes
            approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



           PIW_TABLE
           OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
           Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                               NA

            If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
            has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP                            NA
            prepared and sent?

            Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                             NA



           PDI_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Eskom Investment Support Project (P116410)



    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Reynold Duncan
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Frederic Verdol

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
