          The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)




                                 Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                             Restructuring Stage


                 Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2018| Report No: ISDSR24848




                                 Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                                        Country Director:    Louise J. Cord
                          Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                             Practice Manager/Manager:       Charles Joseph Cormier
                                      Task Team Leaders:     Chris Trimble, Manuel Jose Milan Sanchez




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION
              The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)




    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                       Project Name
    P152659                                                          Gambia Electricity Support Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                              Country
    Christopher Philip Trimble                                       Gambia, The
    Approval Date                                                    Environmental Category
    10-May-2016                                                      Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                    Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE07


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                                    18.50
    Total Financing                                                                                                       18.50
    Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                         18.50
          IDA Credit                                                                                                       12.50
          IDA Grant                                                                                                          6.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply for existing customers.



.

    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



The Gambia Electricity Sector Support Project (P152659) is comprised of an original IDA credit (57870) of US$12.46
million equivalent and an original IDA grant (D1140) of US$6.04 million approved on May 10, 2016. The project
development objective is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply for existing customers.

The project consists of three components:
  (i)    Increase electricity supply ($16.3 million): investments in this component aim to improve generation capacity
         and have included both improvements in the generation produced within The Gambia and infrastructure to
         provide access to imports from Senegal.
  (ii)   Reduction of technical and commercial losses in the Greater Banjul Area ($1.2 million): investments under this
         component enabled the procurement and installation of 23,000 prepayment meters and 300 smart meters
         which will not only reduce overall losses but also contribute to improving billing process for the utility.
  (iii)  Project implementation support ($1 million): activities include the recruitment of key personnel to support
         project implementation as well as the acquisition of essential equipment, software and supplies.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Greater Banjul Area and the Northern Bank.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Ruma Tavorath, Environmental Specialist
    Gina Cosentino, Social Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                     The implementation of the project activities will
                                                                     have both positive and negative environmental and
                                                                     social impacts. Potential risks and possible negative
                                                                     impacts are associated with construction of the
                                                                     power lines and transmission towers; occupational
                                                                     risks and safety or workers and community during
                                                                     construction phase; increased air, water and house
                                                                     pollution during operation of the power plants;
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                     mishandling and poor disposal of sludge and
                                                                     transformer fluids

                                                                     The project’s original ESMP was reviewed and
                                                                     validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country and
                                                                     at the Infoshop on August 6, 2015. A revised ESMP
                                                                     for the new activities in sub-component 1.5 was
                                                                     prepared as part of this restructuring. It has been
                                                                     reviewed and validated by the Bank and disclosed
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



                                                                        in-country and on the World Bank website on
                                                                        August 17 2017.

 Performance Standards for Private Sector                               The project will not support activities related to
                                                  No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03                                                  Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities
                                                                        The project activities will not be implemented in
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)                  No
                                                                        areas with natural habitats.
                                                                        The project will not support activities related to
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                           No
                                                                        forest exploitation or management.
                                                                        The project will not finance pesticides and none of
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                        No                    the supported activities will indirectly induce use of
                                                                        pesticides.
                                                                        The exploitation of quarries and borrow pits may
                                                                        affect or involve physical cultural resources, while
                                                                        the delineation and clearing of the right-off-way of
                                                                        the transmission lines may affect sacred sites. The
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                        ESMP provides information on such risks and
                                                                        include proposed mitigation measures. The chance
                                                                        find procedure will be integrated in the contract of
                                                                        the enterprises and monitored.
                                                                        There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)                No
                                                                        intervention areas.
                                                                        The policy was not triggered with the original
                                                                        project design and proposed activities. Though
                                                                        there is no land acquisition expected leading to
                                                                        involuntary resettlement, project implementation
                                                                        has noted that there are minor impacts to
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)          Yes
                                                                        individual and community assets. The project is
                                                                        now triggering this policy to ensure that these
                                                                        impacts are documented and ARAPs are prepared
                                                                        to provide appropriate compensation for lost or
                                                                        damaged assets such as trees and fences.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                    No                    The project will not finance any dams.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                               No activity of the project is implementing in
                                                  No
 (BP 7.50)                                                              watershed or is affecting any water course.
                                                                        There is no dispute on the potential locations of the
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No
                                                                        project intervention.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



  The activities to be financed consist of construction of new Medium Voltage lines; equipment rehabilitation and
  maintenance; fuel purchase, upgrading of existing substations, transmission and distribution within existing networks
  and the installation of new transformers. The potential negative environmental impacts are expected to be moderate,
  site-specific and can be managed through adequate mitigation measures. Potential negative impacts include
  increased pollution of land and waterways due to poor disposal of construction waste, sludge and transformer fluids;
  Occupational health and safety of workers and community such as falls, electrocution, and burns; air pollution during
  operation of the generators; impacts on habitats and trees during construction of transmission towers; poorly located
  towers etc. Proposed mitigation measures include preparation of Environmental Management Plans which include
  among others sludge management plan; waste management plan; occupational and community health and safety
  plan; environmental monitoring of air quality and water pollution; etc.

  In terms of social impacts, the proposed transmission network should not require land acquisition yet potential minor
  social related impacts may occur such as temporary lack of access during construction, some impact on community
  and individual property assets, such as damages to fences, cutting or pruning of trees etc. The project recognizes that
  while these impacts may be minor, there is need to document, manage and provide appropriate compensation to
  affected individuals through ARAPs. Therefore OP4.12 is now being triggered. Environmental and social impacts
  discovered post-construction led to the preparation of an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) which is in
  process of being implemented. The Project Affected People (PAPs) have been consulted, over 90 percent have been
  compensated, and those remaining to be paid are delayed at no fault of NAWEC’s, with the monies deposited into a
  bank account. The Grievance Redress Mechanism was activated prior to implementation of the ARAP.

  Consultations with stakeholders were held to: (1) provide information about the project and to collect stakeholder
  information on key environmental and social baseline information in the project area; (2) to provide an opportunity
  to stakeholders to discuss and receive feedback about their views and concerns about the project; and (3) to inform
  stakeholders about the process to develop appropriate management measures and institutional arrangements for
  effective implementation of the project. The key stakeholders are the communities around the identified routes of
  the transmission lines, community leaders, various relevant Government agencies including National Environment
  Agency, Forests Department and others.

  During the preparation of the ARAP, consultations were undertaken with all the project affected persons, including
  vulnerable and marginalized groups and individuals such as women. A Grievance Redress Mechanism has been put in
  place for implementation for the remaining period of the project.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  There are no foreseen potential indirect and/or long term impacts linked to project activities.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  N/A


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



       The Borrower has prepared an ESMP to address potential negative impacts and propose mitigation measures. The
       ESMP was reviewed and validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on August 6, 2015. An
       ESMP for the new activities in sub-component 1.5 has reviewed and validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country
       and on the World Bank website on August 17 2017.

       The Borrower has already prepared, consulted and disclosed a site-specific ARAP (for the Karang-Amdulai line to
       compensate individuals and communities whose assets (trees, fences) were damaged. The ARAP was disclosed on
       May 4, in country and on World Bank Infoshop. It has been implemented and a grievance redress mechanism was
       made operational prior to its implementation.

       The Project Management Team (PMT) includes an environmental and social specialist who are monitoring compliance
       with World Bank safeguards procedures. The specialists have been trained by Bank specialists on safeguards
       implementation and monitoring. They have also attended international training on OP4.12 and there are plans for
       more indepth training over the course of the project. An international consultant has also been hired by NAWEC to
       provide on-the job training



     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Consultations with stakeholders (relevant institutional personnel and community heads) were held to (1) provide
       information about the project and to tap stakeholder information on key environmental and social baseline
       information in the project area; (2) to provide opportunities to stakeholders to discuss their opinions and concerns;
       and (3) to inform the process of developing appropriate management measures as well as institutional arrangements
       for effective implementation of the project. The key stakeholders are the communities around the identified routes
       of the transmission lines; community leaders; the various Government agencies including National Environment
       Agency; Forests Department etc
       During the preparation of the ARAP, consultations were undertaken with all the project affected persons - individuals
       and communities. Women were also included in these consultations. A Grievance Redressal Mechanism has been put
       in place for implementation for the remaining period of the project.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
05-Aug-2015                                                     06-Aug-2015
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure
                         The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            Gambia, The                                                     05-Aug-2015
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
19-Apr-2018                                                               03-May-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
          Gambia, The                                                       03-May-2018
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                            Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                              Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                              Yes
            (as appropriate) been prepared?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                              Yes
            review the plan?

            Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                                     No
            The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



    Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                        Yes
    to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

    Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  103



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                        Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                        Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                        Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                        Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                        Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Christopher Philip Trimble
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Manuel Jose Millan Sanchez

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
