The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Aug-2019| Report No: ISDSR23340




                       Regional Vice President:   Victoria Kwakwa
                             Country Director:    Martin Raiser
                             Regional Director:   Ranjit J. Lamech
                   Practice Manager/Manager:      Binyam Reja
                            Task Team Leader:     Weimin Zhou
              The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation
    P133114
                                                                System
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Weimin Zhou                                                 China
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    28-Mar-2014                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    IEAT2


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                         431.00
    Total Financing                                                                                            431.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                              200.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                       231.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                     231.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to upgrade the quality and efficiency of public transport services in selected
    public transport corridors of the project cities.



.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    The US$200 million IBRD loan for the Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation Project was approved on
    March 28, 2014 and became effective on August 18, 2014; the closing date of the loan is June 30, 2020. The objective of
    the project is to upgrade the quality and efficiency of public transport services in selected public transport corridors of
    the project cities. The project includes two project cities, Harbin City and Mudanjiang City, and consists of five main
    components: (i) Public Transport Corridor Improvement; (ii) Public Transport Infrastructure Improvement; (iii) Traffic
    Management and Safety Improvement; (iv) Emergency Response and Road Maintenance; and (v) Capacity Building.

    Based on the discussion with two PMOs and the restructuring request from MoF, the following changes are proposed:
    (a)    Harbin: Drop two public transport corridors: Hongqi Ave and Youyi Road from Component 1, and replace with
    two new public transport corridors: Nanzhi Road and Changjiang Road;
    (b)    Mudanjiang: Drop (i) Xisantiao Road from Component 1; (ii) Jiangnan public transport interchange; (iii) Bada bus
    terminal; (iv) Fujiang bus terminal; and (v) traffic safety education center from Component 2; and
    (c)    Create disbursement categories: (1)(e) and (2)(c), to allocate the undisbursed amount of the loan for Harbin and
    Mudanjiang to these two categories respectively with 100% disbursement percentage for “Civil Works, goods,
    consultant’s services, Incremental Operating Costs, Training and Workshops?, and to apply the change retroactively
    from September 20, 2017.

    Among the two project cities, only Harbin is required to update the safeguard documents. In Harbin, two new public
    transport corridors (Nanzhi Road and Changjiang Road) are proposed to be added. Changjiang Road and Nanzhi Road
    are existing roads within the urban area of Harbin, and the improvement is limited to the rehabilitation of these roads,
    such as the repair and re-pavement of road surface, bicycle lanes, bus lanes, sidewalks, bus stops, road markings and
    signs, and ITS facilities, within the existing right-of-way. In order to analyze the potential impacts and prepare proper
    mitigation measures of the new proposed activities: Changjiang Road and Nanzhi Road public transport corridors, the
    EA, EMP, and SA of Harbin components have been updated and disclosed.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The proposed project will support public transport improvements in two cities in Heilongjiang Province,
    namely Harbin and Mudanjiang. Heilongjiang Province is located in northeastern China and has a population
    of 38 million. Harbin is the capital city of Heilongjiang, and the largest city in northeast China. In 2011, Harbin
    Municipality had a population of 10.6 million (6 million urban population only), making Harbin the tenth
    most populous city in China. It is located in the central plains by Songhuajiang River, the third longest river in
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



China Mudanjiang is a much smaller city than Harbin. It is a prefecture-level city located in the southeast of
Heilongjiang, bisected by Mudanjiang River, the second largest tributary of Songhuajiang River. In 2011,
Mudanjiang Municipality had a population of 2.8 million (960,000 urban population only). Both Harbin and
Mudanjiang are located above 45 degrees latitude and both cities have dry and extremely cold winter.
Annual precipitation around 580 mm and snowing season from November to January. The temperature in
Harbin averages around 3.6 ºC annually and in the coldest month (January) ranges from -13 ºC to -24 ºC,
whereas those for Mudanjiang are slightly higher.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Zhefu Liu, Social Specialist
Yongli Wang, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered             Explanation
                                                                To date, the implementation of the EMP is rated as
                                                                MS. Minor drawbacks existed in the traffic
                                                                management during the implementation of the
                                                                Xinyang Road. Improvement had been made by the
                                                                Harbin PMO. The lessons and experience have been
                                                                considered in the impact assessment and
                                                                mitigation measures in the updated EIA and EMP of
                                                                this restructuring package.

                                                                As required by the legal agreements of the project,
                                                                the PMOs prepared and submitted the bi-annual
                                                                EMP implementation report timely to the WBG,
                                                                and these reports were found comprehensively and
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                satisfactorily reflect the status of the
                                                                implementation. The site visits by the task team
                                                                confirmed the above conclusions.

                                                                For the proposed works under the restructuring
                                                                package in Harbin, the PMO will continue to keep
                                                                its strong commitment to the environmental
                                                                management.

                                                                The proposed works on the two existing urban
                                                                roads under the restructuring stage are well aligned
                                                                with the objective of the project. Most of the
                                                                adverse environmental impacts are related to
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



                                                               construction activities, such as nuisance of dust and
                                                               noise, wastewater, solid waste, disturbance to local
                                                               traffic and local communities. During operations,
                                                               adverse impacts include vehicle noise and
                                                               emission, solid waste and wastewater, road safety,
                                                               etc. However, the works are expected to bring
                                                               about great positive environmental benefits in
                                                               terms of reduced vehicular emission and traffic
                                                               noise, and traffic safety improvement.

                                                               These potential adverse impacts are moderate and
                                                               site-specific. The EA concludes that these potential
                                                               adverse impacts and risks can be mitigated with the
                                                               engineering       design,    good      construction
                                                               management practice, and the proposed mitigation
                                                               measures.

                                                               EIA and EMP have been prepared for the new works
                                                               which contain the measures for noise, dust, solid
                                                               waste, traffic management, and noise and ambient
                                                               air monitoring plan, etc.

                                                               Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                               have been conducted in line with the OP 4.01. And
                                                               the EIA and EMP for the restructuring was disclosed
                                                               locally in Harbin on 27 March 2019.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No                  Not applicable
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               The project will take place in built-up area in both
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                  cities with no natural habitats in the vicinity of any
                                                               project sites.
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                  Not applicable

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                  Not applicable
                                                               There are three historical buildings alongside one
                                                               proposed project (Youyi Road) corridor in Harbin
                                                               during the appraisal stage.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 The restructuring proposes to replace two bus
                                                               corridors in Harbin. Youyi Road was dropped. And
                                                               the two proposed bus corridors (Nanzhi Road and
                                                               Changjiang Road) are not located within or in
                                                               vicinity of any physical cultural resources.
      The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



                                                              The project activities are located within developed
                                                              areas of Mudanjiang and Harbin. According to the
                                                              social assessment carried out in the project areas,
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No                  the task team concluded that there are no ethnic
                                                              minorities are in or present in the project areas.
                                                              Therefore, the project does not trigger OP 4.10,
                                                              Indigenous Peoples.
                                                              The project will involve civil works, such as
                                                              construction of bus terminals and depots; and
                                                              install or make available overpasses and passage
                                                              tunnels along the proposed corridors. For some of
                                                              these works, permanent and temporary acquisition
                                                              of state-owned land will be required. As a result, OP
                                                              4.12 is triggered.

                                                              To date, the implementation of the RAP is rated as
                                                              MS, mainly due to the delayed transferring of state-
                                                              owned land to project owner in Mudanjiang. For
                                                              the proposed project restructuring, social
                                                              assessment as a screening tool to identify any
                                                              resettlement impacts was conducted in Harbin. The
                                                              proposed project restructuring will support
                                                              facilities in right-of-way in the proposed bus
                                                              corridors. No resettlement caused by the project
                                                              restructuring were identified. The RAP for this
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                              restructuring does not need to be updated.

                                                              As required by the legal agreements of the project,
                                                              Harbin PMO prepared and submitted the latest bi-
                                                              annual report timely to the WBG as well as an
                                                              updated SIA report, and these reports were found
                                                              comprehensively and satisfactorily reflect the
                                                              status of the implementation. The site visits by the
                                                              task team confirmed the above conclusions.

                                                              For the proposed works under the restructuring
                                                              package in Harbin, the civil works of the two
                                                              proposed corridors (Changjiang Road and Nanzhi
                                                              Road) will be within the existing road widths and
                                                              only temporary land acquisition for construction
                                                              might happen.the PMO will continue to keep its
                                                              strong commitment to the social management.
          The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



                                                                      The proposed works on the two bus corridors under
                                                                      the restructuring stage are well aligned with the
                                                                      objective of the project. The works are expected to
                                                                      bring about great positive social benefits in terms
                                                                      of providing better public transport services to
                                                                      people in Harbin. The sampled public consultation
                                                                      of the updated SA also proved the solid social
                                                                      support to the project.

                                                                      The updated SA for this restructuring was disclosed
                                                                      locally on Harbin Daily on 27 March 2019.


 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                 No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                               No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)     No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     As an urban transport project without building new roads or widening but rehabilitating existing roads and
     building/rehabilitating transit terminals/hubs and bus stops, the adverse environmental impacts during construction
     are moderate and mostly temporary in nature. The environmental impacts during operation mainly include air
     pollution, noise, road safety and sewage from bus hubs and terminals, but these would be offset by the environmental
     improvement of reduced air pollution that would result from improved bus speed and lower congestion. Overall, net
     positive impact on the environment is expected. From the social safeguard side, with in-depth analysis on and
     extensive consultation with various stakeholders, including transport service users, affected citizens by land use and
     construction, officials and academics, It is concluded that the project will improve the public transportation system
     in both cities and provide direct benefit to the citizens in their daily life. In addition, the social assessment also
     recommended several measures to maximize the social benefits of the project by pursuing a user-friendly design.

     The proposed changes of this restructuring in Mudanjiang city only include dropping of several civil works activities,
     which would not generate additional impacts compared to the original EIA, EMP, SA, RPF and RAP of Mudanjiang city
     during the appraisal stage. Therefore, the additional impacts from this restructuring mainly come from the change of
     bus corridors in Harbin city.

     The proposed bus corridor works proposed in Harbin for this restructuring are limited to the rehabilitation of two
     existing urban roads city, such as the repair and re-pavement of road surface, bus stops, bus lanes, bicycle lanes,
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



  sidewalks, road marking and signs, and ITS facilities, without widening or building new road sections. Most of the
  adverse environmental impacts are related to construction activities, such as nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater,
  solid waste, disturbance to local traffic and local communities. During operations, adverse impacts include vehicle
  noise and emission, solid waste and wastewater, and road safety. These new works will not trigger new safeguard
  policies and these potential adverse environmental impacts are moderate and site specific, and readily mitigated by
  good engineering design and mitigation measures.

  Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): The new works proposed in Harbin under the restructuring will not involve any
  physical cultural resources.

  For the proposed project restructuring in Harbin, a social assessment (SA) as a screening tool to identify any
  resettlement impact on land acquisition and resettlement was conducted. The task team concluded that all civil works
  related to the project restructuring in Harbin will be on the right-of-way to improve bus corridors; therefore, there
  will not be resettlement impacts to be incurred. The RAP of Harbin does not need to be updated.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Long term impacts occur mainly during operations, such as air pollution and noise from traffic, waste and wastewater
  from bus hubs and depots, passenger and vehicle safety etc., particularly in cold and snowing season. However, the
  works are expected to bring about great positive environmental benefits for the long term, in terms of reduced
  vehicular emission and traffic noise, and traffic safety improvement. Measures to address these impacts are specified
  in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) developed for each city of the project. In addition, by design, the
  project will contribute to the reduction of negative environmental and safety impacts from transport.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Alternative analysis of different design options was undertaken as part of the EA process, including a “without project
  scenario?, to avoid or minimize negative impacts from the project. Different lane configurations for the proposed
  corridors, access to bus stops via overpass/underpass versus ground level crossing at cross-roads, different layout of
  ground floor of bus terminals and hubs, different floor materials for bus terminals and hubs, and inside buses were
  compared. Alternatives that can better shelter passengers from the cold, wind and snow and can provide safety (e.g.
  non-slippery floor material) and comfort thus more user friendly, especially in cold weather, were recommended and
  included in the project design.

  Different heat sources and technologies for heating terminals that are not connected to district heating network were
  analyzed with the one that can meet relevant emission standard yet economically viable being recommended. These
  recommendations from the EAs have been incorporated in the feasibility studies (FS) or annexed to the FSs so as to
  be taken into account during design phase.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environment
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



Capacity building of the clients in Harbin and Mudanjiang has been an integral part of the project preparation process
to address environmental safeguard issues. To ensure the EMP implementation, a budgeted training plan is included
in the EMP. The EMP is the result of close collaboration between the PMOs and the EA consultants. This ensures the
EMP’s ownership by the project entities which in turn helps guarantee its effective implementation.

The EMP specifies supervising mechanism and institutional arrangement to foster its implementation. During
construction, supervision engineers will be primarily responsible for daily supervision of EMP measures. The PMOs,
assisted by environmental experts, will carry out random inspection. The EMP will be referred to in bidding documents
and contracts with contractors and supervisors to ensure its implementation. During operation, responsibility to
implement the EMP will largely be shifted to relevant public transport operators and government agencies.
Component 5 of the project includes activities to enhance operators’ skills and project management.

The institutional capacity of the Harbin PMO is being strengthened by implementing the EMP, particularly the training
program and the institutional setup, with adequate input of resources. For the proposed works under the
restructuring package in Harbin, the PMO will continue to keep its strong commitment to the environmental
management. The EMP specifies environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangement, capacity building
activities, and the budget for the EMP implementation.

Social Aspects

For Harbin, the Public Transport Corridor (Component 1) is not expected to require land acquisitions as the
improvements are within the right of way. However, during detailed design work, there may be a need to acquire
small piece of land to make changes to alignment as needed. Because of this uncertainty, an RPF has been prepared,
reviewed and agreed with the Bank. The Public Transport Infrastructure component will need land for the
construction of three bus terminals, depot, and management centers. All the identified land is state-owned and have
already been designated for the project. The RPF carried out due diligence review for the public infrastructure land
and concluded that the three sites will utilize 5.2 ha state-owned land that have been allocated to the project and do
not involve resettlement.

For Mudanjiang sub-project, the Public Transport Infrastructure (Component 2) requires land acquisition for the five
terminals/depots/management centers originally proposed. Among the five sites, three of them will need to acquire
land from three villages, while the other two sites already have the land. Therefore, a RAP was prepared for the three
sites and a due diligence review was done for the two sites.

The two project cities have prepared RPF/RAPs, which provided details on resettlement policy procedures and
requirements, compensation rates, measures to restore livelihoods, and institutional and monitoring arrangements.

Gender Issues. The SA and the RPF/RAP cover gender-disaggregated analysis including women’s unique demand to
explore measures to ensure women benefit from the new transport facilities. Women participated in the consultation
meetings and the social assessment process. The women-related demand and proposed measures have been
included in the FSR, which include the need to (i) monitor service quality at bus stops and inside buses; (ii) provide
street lighting along project roads; and, (iii) provide cross bridges with cover.
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



  Consultations and Participation. The SA and the RPF/RAP were carried out through extensive consultation and
  participation in the preparation process. Users’ and other stakeholders’ concerns and needs were integrated into the
  project design and the resettlement planning. In Mudanjiang city 32 specific recommendations were generated in SA
  participation process, and of which 23 have been included in the FSR to be included in the project design for
  implementation; while in Harbin 46 specific recommendations were generated and 39 are included in the FSR.

  Grievance Redress. A grievance redress mechanism is included in the RAP, which provides a process and a grievance
  record table, in which grievances can be filed both orally and in writing. The grievance process starts with affected
  people filing complaint at village and neighborhood committee level. If resolution is not obtained, the complaint can
  be elevated to county/district, municipality level. Affected people can also file their complaints in court if not satisfied
  with the resolution by the project authority at the different levels. All grievances and their resolution will be recorded.
  The grievance filing mechanism has been disclosed to the local population and will be further disseminated through
  the Resettlement Information Booklet, which is attached to the RPF/RAP.

  Implementation Arrangement. The SA and RPF/RAP were well prepared by the client, reviewed by the Bank, and are
  compliant with the Bank requirements. A resettlement management arrangement with proper staff and resources in
  each city has been agreed up on and detailed in the RAP. Dedicated safeguard staff will be responsible for carrying
  out resettlement activities in each project cities. An experienced external resettlement monitor will be engaged
  according to the RAP to ensure regular monitoring and reporting. Training plan is included in the RPF/RAP, and will
  be provided to the PMO staff, related agencies, and affected people before and during resettlement activities.

  Monitoring & Evaluation. Internal and external resettlement monitoring arrangement is included in the RPF/RAP,
  which covers the monitoring indicators, frequency, agency qualification and their roles. The PMOs will provide
  resettlement progress monitoring report to the Bank semiannually.




5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Public consultation has been undertaken following public disclosure of EA/EMPs. The primary objective was to collect
  the public opinion about the project, the EA findings and the sufficiency of mitigation measures. These consultations
  took various forms, mainly through questionnaires, interviews and meetings with the public and experts. Altogether,
  944 people with a wide range of background were surveyed in Harbin and more than 1200 people in Mudanjiang.
  Major concerns include dust and social disturbance during construction, and emissions and noise during operation
  phase. The EAs and EMPs provided feedback and counter measures to address these concerns, which were included
  in the Feasibility Study Report (FSR) and considered during engineering design.

  Information disclosures were undertaken during the EA preparation and investigation. The draft EA/EMP for Harbin
  was disclosed on the website of the Harbin Transportation Bureau on July 2, 2013, with a notice published on a local
  newspaper, Harbin Daily on July 15, 2013. The revised Harbin EA/EMP was re-disclosed on November 8, 2013. The
  hard copy of is available at the city PMO office and EA institute for public reading. For Mudanjiang, the draft EA/EMP
  was disclosed on the government website July 11, 2013. with a notice published in local newspaper on July 20, 2013.
  The revised Mudanjiang EA/EMP was re-disclosed on government website November 23, 2013. The hardcopy is also
  available at the city PMO office and the EA institute for public reading. The Chinese and English versions of the Harbin
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



     and Mudanjiang EA/EMP documents were disclosed on the World Bank’s InfoShop on October 28, 2013. After
     incorporating comments from Bank safeguard review, the revised documents were re-disclosed on InfoShop on
     December 9, 2013.

     For the bus corridor works in Harbin proposed for the restructuring, the information disclosure and public
     consultation were conducted for the EA. Local communities and relevant government departments, eg. transport
     bureau, were consulted. The EIA and EMP has been disclosed at local government website and the affected
     communities, with the advertisements published on local prime newspaper on March 27, 2019. A updated version of
     the EIA and EMP for the restructuring works have been disclosed on the World Bank's ImageBank on June 13, 2019.

     On social side, the SA and the RPF/RAP recorded the conducted extensive consultation and participation in the
     preparation process, as well as a plan for next steps. Users’ and other stakeholders’ concerns and needs were
     integrated into the project plan and integrated into the project design, and the resettlement planning. In Mudanjiang,
     32 specific recommendations were proposed through the participation process, of which 23 were accepted and
     included in the FSR project design; while in Harbin 46 specific recommendations were generated, of which 39 have
     been accepted and included in the FSR.

     Information Disclosure. Information about the project was distributed to local communities during the SA and
     RPF/RAP preparation. The SA and RPF/RAP were disclosed in Mudanjiang on Oct 10, 2013, and in Harbin on Oct 16,
     2013 through government websites, as well as through making announcements on local newspapers. The hard copies
     of the safeguard documents are also available in the PMO offices. The Chinese and English versions of the documents
     were disclosed on the World Bank’s InfoShop on October 28, 2013. After incorporating comments from Bank
     safeguard review, the revised documents were re-disclosed on InfoShop on December 8, 2013. For this restructuring,
     the updated SA report of Harbin was disclosed on March 27, 2019 on Harbin Daily, and was disclosed on the World
     Bank's ImageBank on June 13, 2019.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
29-May-2019                                                    13-Jun-2019
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure


 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 China                                                            27-Mar-2019
                         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



            Comments
            The updated EIA and EMP were disclosed in Harbin reflecting the change in the restructuring.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
30-May-2019                                                                 13-Jun-2019
“In country? Disclosure


          Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
          China                                                              27-Mar-2019
           Comments
           The updated SA was disclosed in Harbin reflecting the change in the restructuring.
        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                             Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                               Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                 Yes

            Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                               Yes
            impacts on cultural property?



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                               Yes
            (as appropriate) been prepared?
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)



    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                      Yes
    review the plan?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Weimin Zhou


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Binyam Reja                               14-Aug-2019

.
