The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


      Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-March-2018| Report No: ISDSR23513




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Abhas Kumar Jha
                            Task Team Leader:      Guangming Yan
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P133069                                                     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Guangming Yan                                               China
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    25-Sep-2014                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU08

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    256,900,000.00                                              256,900,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                              106,900,000.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                     150,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                            256,900,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



    Current Project Development Objective
    To improve the infrastructure and service delivery in selected small and medium towns in Shaanxi Province



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

      The original project consists of 2 components. A summary of the proposed components is presented below.


      Component 1: Infrastructure and Services Upgrading (Base Cost: RMB 1,265.4 million; US$206.3million). The
      component includes two subcomponents: (i) Infrastructure Improvement, including new construction and
      upgrading of urban roads and missing links in project counties/districts; and (ii) Infrastructure Rehabilitation,
      including rehabilitation and expansion of water supply source development and distribution networks;
      wastewater collection networks; storm drainage networks; and associated road pavement improvements.

      Component 2: Town Management Improvement and Implementation Support (Base Cost: RMB18.4 million;
      US$3.0 million). This component includes three subcomponents: (i) town management improvements in
      project counties/ districts through introduction of asset management practices comprising: improved O&M
      plans and budgets, infrastructure mapping, preparation of asset registers, and provision of training, study
      tours and office equipment; (ii) carrying out of policy advisory studies and provision of advice to Shaanxi
      Province in order to strengthen institutional policies and planning practices, focusing on balanced
      development, efficient growth, poverty reduction, sustainable infrastructure service provision, and
      improved environmental quality in small towns; and (iii) implementation support for project management,
      design reviews, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting, etc.


      The Project Development Objective remains unchanged and all new project activities will continue to
      improve infrastructure and service delivery in selected small and medium towns in Shaanxi Province. The
      proposed new project activities in Chengcheng county, Xunyi county, Hanyin county and Liquan county
      (newly added project county) were added under Component 1: Infrastructure and Services Upgrading. These
      activities include: (1) Drainage improvement for mitigating urban flooding risks in old urban area of
      Chengcheng County; (2) Drainage improvement for mitigating urban flooding risks in old urban area of Xunyi
      County; (3) construction of 3.1 km roads with associated drainage and water supply pipelines in Hanyin
      County; and (4) Infrastructure rehabilitation including rehabilitation and expansion of wastewater collection
      networks, storm drainage networks and associated road pavement improvements in Liquan County. Some
      activities under Yanliang District including construction of Hongyao road and infrastructure improvement in
      Wutun town were dropped as per the client’s request of shifting implementation them to non -Bank
      financing. Project activities in Component 2 are remained unchanged.
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    An inland province along the middle reaches of the Yellow River and a gateway to northwest China, Shaanxi
    links the west with the east and connects the north with the south. It borders Ningxia, Inner Mongolia,
    Shanxi, Henan, Hubei, Sichuan and Gansu provinces, covering an area of 205,600 sq km. Total population is
    about 37 million. The province has three distinctive landforms from north to south. The Loess Plateau in the
    north (Shaanbei Region) has an elevation of 800-1,300 meters, and accounts for 45% of the total area of the
    province. The Central Shaanxi Plain (Guanzhong Region) in the middle averages an elevation of 520 meters.
    The Qinling and Daba mountainous areas in the south (Shaannan Region) include the Qinling Mountains,
    Daba Mountains, and Hanjiang River Valley, accounting for 36% of the total area of the province. The Qinling
    Mountains and the Daba Mountains in the southernmost of the province measure 1,000-3,000 meters and
    1,500-2,000 meters in elevation, respectively. The proposed components would support 12 county seats
    and/or key towns (average population about 35,000 and built-up area around 3-5 km2) in nine project
    counties/districts across seven municipalities: Xi’an, Xianyang, Baoji, Tongchuan, Weinan, Hanzhong and
    Ankang. Geographically, Yanliang District (District Seat and Wutun Town), Chengcheng County ( County Seat),
    Wugong County (Wugong Town), Chunhua County (Run Town), Xunyi County (County Seat and Zhitian
    Town), Chencang District (District Seat) and Yintai District (District Seat and Chenlu Town) are within the
    Guanzhong-Tianshui Economic Zone, and Hanyin County (County Seat) and Hantai District (Pu Town) locate
    in Shaannan Region (southern part of Shannxi).



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Zhefu Liu, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Feng Ji, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                            Triggered          Explanation

     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes

     Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)               No

     Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                        No

     Pest Management (OP 4.09)                     No
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes

 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)               No

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         Yes

 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Social safeguards:
      The project has significant social benefits. It supports the improvement of infrastructure service delivery in selected
      small and medium towns in 9 counties/districts of 7 municipalities in Shaanxi Province by addressing accumulated
      maintenance backlog, completing service coverage, upgrading and construction of urban infrastructure. The Bank
      Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared. The RAP
      provided details on compensation rates, mitigation measures, and institutional and monitoring arrangements, which
      was approved by the Bank and disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on March 3, 2014.
      Throughout implementation, the Project had been implemented in compliance with the triggered policies. No
      complaints by project affected people or other parties had been issued. The Project involves permanent acquisition
      of 94 ha of land areas in nine counties/districts, affecting 482 households. Along with land acquisition, about 80,691
      square meters of structures are subject to demolition, causing relocation of 359 households. Most land acquisition
      and house demolition are concentrated in five counties/districts, where new urban roads have been constructed.
      According to the recent resettlement monitoring report, the total land acquisition was reduced to 61 ha due to
      improvement of project design (Yintai, and Chunhua) and readjustment of key components (Yanliang and Chencang).
      Among them, about 37 ha had completed land acquisition and all compensation had been paid to affected villagers.
      In terms of physical relocation, due to change of project design (Chunhua, Chencang and Hantai) and readjustment
      of certain components (Yanliang), the total relocated households was reduced to 251 households. Among them, 116
      households have signed compensation agreements, and most of them have either been resettled into new
      apartments or provided with new housing plots so that much better quality of new houses could be constructed. The
      adopted compensations for land acquisition and house demolition are in consistence with the RAP.

      The resettlement works were approached by certain procedures, such as; identifying the impacts and those impacts
      must be confirmed by municipal land department, village committee and previous land user; the affected family
      agreed to the land acquisition, resettlement relocation if had, and received their compensation prior to the start of
      civil works. Those procedures ensured the resettlement activities in consistence to the RAP. Nevertheless, due to
      various reasons, resettlement implementation progressed slowly in several counties, which caused delay among
      several civil contracts. In Hanyin, the delay was mainly caused slow progress of relocation in one village due to
     The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



connection with other two project resettlement. In Chencheng and Yintai Counties, lack of adequate funding is the
main reason for slow land acquisition and resettlement. In Hantai District, the change of project design caused the
delay of land acquisition and resettlement for the two remaining road subprojects. After extensive discussions, it was
agreed that more concrete measures will be taken by relevant county implementation agencies to speed land
acquisition and resettlement. In Hanyin County, it is agreed that more resources will be mobilized to consult with
affected people and complete compensation agreements with remaining 19 relocated households. In Hantai District,
for Lianhua Road, land acquisition is expected to be completed by the end of year, and house demolition by the end
of March 2018. In Chencheng County, with confirmation of new bank lending for slum upgrading, the remaining 10
households are expected to be completed by Feb. 2018. To ensure these targets are met, more efforts also need to
be made by provincial PMO and external monitoring institute in terms of monitoring and supervision.

For the proposed new activities under four counties, most of them do not involve any land acquisition. Only two road
improvement projects in Hanyin County involve acquisition of 224 mu of farmland and relocation of 28 households.
By the end of October 2017, all affected households had signed compensation agreements for land acquisition and
house demolition. In spite of such process, the approval procedures for land acquisition has not yet been fully
completed, and the rehabilitation for affected people, particularly the rehabilitation for relocated households have
not yet been completed. For such impacts, it is agreed that a due diligence review based on survey among affected
households would be carried out by experienced monitoring agency. The due diligence review was completed in
March 2018, which concluded that implemented land acquisition and resettlement were in compliance with the RAP
and all compensations had been paid to affected households. For relocated households, their replacement housing
will be completed by 2019. The resettlement monitoring for the Project will include the impacts by two new roads
and ensure full rehabilitation by relocated households.

Environmental Safeguards
Environmental Assessment: The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and the project has been
classified as Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an environmental management plan (EMP)
were carried out to determine the key environmental impacts, the mitigation measures and environmental
monitoring program and necessary institutional arrangement as well as capacity building development. The
documents have been prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection,
master plans and environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies and Bank group’s Environment,
Health and Safety Guidelines.
Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale, significant and/or
irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components, following benefits are expected:
improve key infrastructure, including road network, water supply and increase/improve wastewater collection and
drainage systems in the selected project towns.
In the PCN stage ISDS, safeguard policies of OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources were indicated as TBD. Through the
EA process, it was determined that the policy was triggered as there is a Chenghuang Temple (provincial level relics)
right next to the proposed road component in Wugong Town where is used as a venue for important events and
activities by local residents. Therefore, it is confirmed that OP 4.11is triggered. "Chance-Find" procedure therefore
has been proposed in the EMP. And the chance-find procedure and relevant clauses described in the EMP (in the
Generic Environmental Codes of Practice) will be included in the bidding documents and contracts.
During project restructuring, some more activities (e.g. construction and rehabilitation of roads, water and storm
water pipelines, sewers) which are similar to the ones under the original project are supported by the project. The
new activities will not substantially change the overall project risks or requires any modification of the original
environmental categorization (Category B) of the project, just a scaling-up of activities to enhance the project’s impact
and development effectiveness. No new safeguards policies are being triggered. A supplementary EMP has been
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



  prepared for the newly added activities in compliance with applicable Chinese regulations and standards, as well as
  the safeguard policies of the World Bank.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  As designed, the proposed project will improve key infrastructure and public utility facilities in the project areas,
  including road network, water supply, and increased/improved wastewater collection and drainage systems.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Social: Alternative study was considered at the resettlement action plan, e.g. narrow down partial road alignment
  and technical options to the project component selections. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with
  consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental and social factors.

  Environmental: Alternatives were considered during the project feasibility study and EIA preparation for more
  technical details, e.g., technical options, and with and without project analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were
  analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental and social factors.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Social: The provincial PMO contracted experienced social institute to guide the social safeguards documentation and
  set up resettlement implementation offices in the engaged counties/districts. The relevant agencies to be engaged
  into the project implementation participated into the project preparation. The staffs from the PMOs and agencies are
  getting familiar to the Bank requirement, specific to the safeguards requirement.

  A RAP covering the key resettlement information in project counties/districts was approached. The social consultants
  worked with the design institute in charge of project feasibility study on the selections of the subproject locations.
  The analytical works were undertaken and the project negative impacts were minimized, and the mitigation measures
  were developed according to the Bank requirement.

  Public consultation was the key element to inform the public and receive their feedbacks. The public consultations
  were undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the project counties/districts to address the
  importance of the safeguards policy based on the stages of the project preparation. The project preparation was a
  well-done process to disseminate the Bank requirement on social safeguards and incorporated people’s concerns into
  the RAPs and also an important process to provide on-job training courses to the engaged agencies in project
  counties/districts.

  An experienced monitoring consulting firm, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, will be contracted to
  monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed by the Bank twice a year as
  requested.

  Environmental:

  The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly addressed the potential environmental
  and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize,
  mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts. The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



  national laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety
  (EHS) guidelines.

  The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project construction phase,
  including dust, noise, traffic interruption, etc. A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA
  report. The EMP summarized the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and
  supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan, and budget
  estimates of EMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for contractors, which
  will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Social: The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the projects and the adjacent areas.
  The project stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the engaged counties and districts. The affected
  people considered the project will give them opportunities to have better living environment and develop their
  businesses.

  During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations were conducted and
  will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the engaged counties and districts and also the independent
  monitoring agency, and the project information were disseminated to the displaced families for refining the project
  design, selections of the subprojects and the locations of the subprojects.

  The RAP, resettlement policy framework in the engaged counties/districts were disclosed and sent to Infoshop on
  March 3, 2014.

  For new activities under the Project, due diligence review was conducted by monitoring agency based on
  consultations with affected people and key stakeholders and review of relevant documents. The due diligence review
  concluded that completed land acquisition for one county was in compliance with the RAP and all compensations had
  been paid affected people. The rehabilitation housing for relocated households will be completed by 2019. To ensure
  full rehabilitation, resettlement monitoring will include resettlement housing construction new component.

  Environmental:

  Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The technique used for the public
  consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused group discussions, public meetings with
  key stakeholders and interviews with some project affected persons. The issues raised during these consultations
  have been incorporated in the EIA and EMP. Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns and issues collected in public
  consultation have been provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and EMP documents
  and other project related documents have been disclosed locally through various means (e.g., websites, newspapers,
  etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies. The English language EIA and EMP have been disclosed through
  Bank’s InfoShop on Feb 27, 2014.

  A supplementary EMP has been prepared for the newly added activities in compliance with applicable Chinese
  regulations and standards, as well as the safeguard policies of the World Bank. It was disclosed locally on February
  28, 2018 and on the Bank’s internal website on March 8, 2018.
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
        29-Jan-2014                                                        27-Feb-2014
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            China                                                                22-Nov-2013
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
29-Jan-2014                                                                     03-Mar-2014
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                                Date of Disclosure
          China                                                                  28-Feb-2014
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                              Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                Yes
           and approve the EA report?
        The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                  Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                     Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                     Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                     Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                     Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                     Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
           The World Bank                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)



    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                  Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                    Guangming Yan


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
