The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2016| Report No: ISDSR20427




                       Regional Vice President:     Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:     Satu Kristiina J. Kahkonen
                Senior Global Practice Director:    Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi
                   Practice Manager/Manager:        Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza
                            Task Team Leader:       Tigran Shmis
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P148181                                                     Belarus Education Modernization Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Tigran Shmis                                                Belarus
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    17-Sep-2015                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GED03

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    50,650,000.00                                               50,650,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                                   650,000.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                      50,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                             50,650,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The objectives of the proposed Project are to: (i) improve access to quality learning environment in selected general
    secondary schools; and (ii) strengthen student assessment and education management information systems of the
    Republic of Belarus.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project will be implemented country-wide. A preliminary list of beneficiary educational facilities from
    every region of the country has been developed on the basis of agreed selection criteria. The final selection
    of beneficiary facilities will be determined during project implementation.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Ruxandra Maria Floroiu, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Javaid Afzal, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Aimonchok Tashieva, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Oksana Rakovych, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      Component 1 of the proposed project includes
                                                                      activities to rehabilitate school facilities. The
                                                                      schools where the rehabilitation will take place and
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                      exact nature of rehabilitation needs in each school
                                                                      are defined on case-by-case basis, and may include
                                                                      work on external walls, roofs, windows, floors,
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)



                                                           basements, laboratories, gymnasiums, and heating
                                                           and sewer systems, among others. Works may also
                                                           include construction of building expansions and
                                                           annexes. These works are expected to have some
                                                           temporary negative impacts typical for civil works
                                                           and reconstruction/rehabilitation of small to
                                                           medium size constructions. The potential negative
                                                           impacts are perceived to be relatively minor and
                                                           can be readily mitigated with standard procedures.
                                                           Due to the expected environmental impact of these
                                                           activities, OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is
                                                           triggered. Based on the safeguards policy and given
                                                           the expected nature of the works, the proposed
                                                           Project is classified as Category B.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No

Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                           All project works are anticipated to occur within the
                                                           existing school sites and it is unlikely that any of the
                                                           school buildings selected for the rehabilitation will
                                                           have a historic value and/or have present physical
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No              cultural resources. As such, OP/BP 4.11 Physical
                                                           Cultural Resources is not triggered. Nevertheless,
                                                           the EMF includes procedures for addressing
                                                           physical cultural resources encountered during
                                                           implementation ("chance finds").
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                           Works under the project may include construction
                                                           of school building expansions and annexes with the
                                                           provision that: (i) these works are conducted at the
                                                           existing land plot of the school and no land
                                                           acquisition is required, and (ii) the increase of the
                                                           expanded building along with the increased
                                                           capacity and related facilities (utilities, road, etc.)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   No               would allow to provide all necessary outdoor
                                                           education and sports needs of children as defined
                                                           in Belarus regulations (sanitary and fire safety). The
                                                           Republic of Belarus enjoys a well-enforced
                                                           regulatory framework that prohibits squatters and
                                                           vendors within the territory of the school
                                                           compound, thus permanent or temporary physical
                                                           or economic displacement as the result of the
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)



                                                                       project is not expected and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
                                                                       Resettlement is not triggered by the project.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The proposed project would support the rehabilitation of school facilities (may also include construction of building
      expansions and annexes), which are expected to have some temporary negative impacts typical for civil works and
      reconstruction/rehabilitation of small to medium size constructions. The potential negative impacts are perceived to
      be relatively minor and can be readily mitigated with standard procedures.

      The project is not expected to have negative impacts on the population residing in the areas of sub-projects or change
      the situation in environmentally important regions. In most cases, the proposed measures can substantially mitigate
      the negative impacts. No new secondary education institutions will be built as part of the project.

      The expected negative environmental impacts can mainly materialize in the process of construction work (i.e. the
      major environmental impact is associated with creation of construction waste) and use of laboratory equipment at
      school classrooms, computer labs, and canteens, and possible entry of spent laboratory reagents into wastewater.
      However, with the proposed measures in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) aimed at
      mitigating the negative impacts properly implemented, the project will have mostly positive effects for the
      environment and human health owing to the modernization and strengthening of the physical infrastructure of
      secondary education institutions, introduction of new information technologies to school education.

      In addition to the mitigation measures in the ESMF, site-specific measures will be developed for each school covered
      by the project. The Environmental Management Plan (or ESMP-Checklist for smaller sub-projects) that will be
      prepared for each school will reflect the risks associated with construction work and subsequent operation of
      facilities, as well as mitigation measures and mechanisms to monitor the mitigation plan implementation.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      No irreversible long-term impacts are expected as a result of the proposed project activities. Short-term
      environmental impacts resulting from school rehabilitation activities are expected to be mitigated through the
      application of site-specific Environmental Management Plans, which will be developed in line with the Environmental
      Management Framework.
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)



     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
       Due to the nature of civil works activities, some minor negative impacts are to be expected during the implementation
       of construction activities. However, an important principle for selecting buildings for rehabilitation and preparing
       design documents will be to screen them for revealing any structural damage and instability to address these faults.
       The screening will include potential environmental issues, such as asbestos-containing materials, lead-based paint
       and adequate waste water disposal.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has appointed one staff member to be in charge of safeguards compliance.
       PIU also employs an expertise on environmental consultant. In the early stages of project implementation PIU staff
       has received guidance and on-the-job training on the subject of the World Bank safeguards policies. PIU is showing
       good progress in fulfilling its supporting and supervising role towards sub-projects implementers. PIU holds semi-
       annual capacity building seminars for sub-project developers and implementers.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       An Environmental and Social Management Framework has been updated to reflect on recent changes in the project
       description, documents templates, monitoring requirements, etc. The draft document (in Russian) was disclosed on
       the website of the Ministry of Education (http://edu.gov.by/) on November 21, 2017, and public consultations have
       been carried out in 84 districts throughout the country. The final version of the ESMF in Russian was disclosed on the
       website of the Ministry of Education on April 27, 2018 and in English in the World Bank’s InfoShop on April 27, 2018.
       Individual sub-project ESMPs/Checklists will be disclosed and consulted locally. During the course of project
       implementation, citizen engagement mechanisms will assess beneficiaries' satisfaction with the project activities and
       any grievances arising will be addressed at the project level.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
13-Apr-2018                                                      25-Apr-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
 Belarus                                                            26-Apr-2018
 Comments
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)



 The draft ESMF was disclosed (in Russian) on the website of the Ministry of Education (http://edu.gov.by/) on
 November 21, 2017, and public consultations have been carried out in 84 districts throughout the country. The final
 version of the ESMF in Russian was disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Education on April 26, 2018.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                   Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                   Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                   Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                   Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                   Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)




    Task Team Leader(s)                   Tigran Shmis


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
