The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2017| Report No: ISDSR21467




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Binyam Reja
                             Task Team Leader:      Arturo Ardila Gomez
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P112838                                                        China Wuhan Second Urban Transport
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Arturo Ardila Gomez                                            China
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
30-Mar-2010                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GTI10

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
1,173,300,000.00                                               1,173,300,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                               1,073,300,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                        100,000,000.00
Total                                                                                             1,173,300,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower's Municipality of Wuhan to enhance mobility for passenger trips
    within and to the central area of Wuhan in an environmentally sustainable, integrated and safe manner.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

“Part A: Public Transport

        Strengthening public transport route rationalization and operations, including providing on-street priority to buses
        on selected road corridors in Wuhan Municipality, including Heping Avenue (in Wuchang County) and Hanyang
        Avenue (in Hanyang County).

        Construction of public transport transfer terminals/interchanges in Wuhan Municipality to facilitate transfer from
        private to public transport modes and park and ride for non-motorized vehicles and cars, including at San Jin Tan
        and Tian Shun Yuan.

Part B: Road Safety

          Improving traffic management, safety and mobility through, inter alia, traffic enforcement, education campaigns
          and engineering measures, including installation of additional traffic signals for vehicles and mid-block traffic
          signals for pedestrians, facilities for pedestrians and cyclists, and signs and markings in selected road corridors in
          Wuhan Municipality, including Heping Avenue (in Wuchang), Xudong Dajie/No.2 Yangtze Bridge, Hanyang
          Avenue (in Hanyang County) and Baishazhou Avenue, and the area within the Second Ring Road.?


Part C: Road Improvement

          Carrying out rehabilitation, upgrading, and construction of three key links of the urban road network of Wuhan
          Municipality, including: (i) rehabilitation of a selected section of Jiefang Dadao road and construction of an
          extension of said road; (ii) rehabilitation of ground roads along the Shuidong Section of the Second Ring Road
          and the concurrent ground road section under the approach bridge of the Erqi Yangtze River Bridge in Wuchang;
          and (iii) new construction of the elevated Shuidong Section of the Second Ring Road from Heping Dadao to
          Zhongbei Lu Extension.



Part D: Travel Demand Management
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)



           Carrying out a program for improving travel demand management through, inter alia, procuring equipment, and
           carrying out studies, training and capacity building measures for URBMC.


Part E: Institutional Development

           Carrying out of studies and a comprehensive plan for strengthening the institutional capacity of Wuhan
           Municipality in developing an urban transport strategy, with particular focus on non-motorized transport, public
           transport integration, and transport issues related to intelligent transport feasibility and sustainability.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
Wuhan, Hubei Province, PR China.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Zhefu Liu (GSU02), Peishen Wang (GEN2A)
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                         Triggered              Explanation

                                                                      The project includes physical works of
                                                                      construction of new roads, rehabilitation and
                                                                      expansion of existing urban roads, construction of
                                                                      parking lot etc. Most impacts are localized along
                                                                      project sites and alignment, and can be dealt
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                      through proper engineering design and
                                                                      construction practices, and therefore the project
                                                                      merits a B category for environmental purposes.
                                                                      An EIA and EMP have been prepared and
                                                                      approved for the project.

    Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                       No



Pest Management (OP 4.09)                    No



Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No


                                                                    No ethnic minority communities were located or
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)            No                     present in the project areas and an IPDP was not
                                                                    requested.
                                                                    The project required collective land and private
                                                                    structures. A RAP was prepared prior to project
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)      Yes
                                                                    appraisal and an updated RAP was disclosed on a
                                                                    local website for public consultation.

Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No


Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No
(BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The project is a straightforward urban transport infrastructure project, and will have positive environmental and
   social impacts by improving the road network and promoting public transport, which in turn will reduce
   environmental pollution related to vehicle emissions. Given the urban context and common types of civil works
   involved, the project is classified as Category B due to its low environmental sensitivity. The project’s major negative
   impacts will be common environmental issues related to construction activities, i.e., land acquisition, construction
   noise, airborne dust, loss of surface vegetation, water pollution and soil erosion, solid waste/soil disposal, and
   disturbance to traffic and social activities of the local community during the construction period. Traffic noise,
   safety and community severance will be the main issues during operation. These environmental and social impacts
   are well understood and can be readily mitigated with good construction management and mitigation measures
   developed in the EMP. No large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts are envisioned under the project.
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




  At the time of this restructuring, two public transport terminals—Gandu Garden and Jinyintan Park & Ride—were
  dropped from the project. The construction of these two terminals is covered in the original EIA and EMP. The
  dropping of these two terminals will reduce the project’s overall environmental impact, and will not cause any
  additional environmental impacts.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The proposed project components are highly consistent with the Wuhan Urban Transport Strategy and part of the
  most urgently needed priorities identified by this Strategy. The full Implementation of these priorities will further
  improve urban traffic conditions and promote public transport development in Wuhan, thus contributing to overall
  urban development.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The overall Urban Master Plan determined road alignment and location of bus-terminal/transfer and parking sites.
  Relevant road/public transport plans were taken as a given. However, as part of the ongoing Wuhan Urban
  Transport Project, Wuhan conducted an environmental assessment of its Urban Transport Strategy. This assessment
  helped to identify environmentally sensitive sites and terrains and confirmed that the larger transport plan was
  consistent with sound environmental principles. During the project feasibility and design stages, analyses of
  alternatives mainly focused on technical configurations for roads, interchanges and the parking site. Comprehensive
  comparisons have been conducted for environmental, social, technical and financial factors, and final selection is
  based on overall optimum consideration. Jiefang Avenue: the existing road was developed as a high-speed urban
  express road with no pedestrian facilities. At the same time this is the road along which the LRT is being extended.
  Furthermore, although very limited pedestrian and NMV facilities were envisioned, this was not congruous with the
  surrounding land use which is being developed as heavily commercial and residential. Key constraints for road
  network development in northeastern Hankou were the limited options to cross rail lines at Baibuting. The project
  preparation process included a rigorous analysis of alternatives with two goals: (i) to generate alternative options to
  create additional capacity in this corridor which could reduce some of the traffic pressures on Jiefang Avenue; and
  (ii) to optimize the design for this route to facilitate a safer and more people-centric solution integrated with the
  LRT. Because of this analysis, (a) Jiefang Avenue was downgraded from Expressway Standard to Primary Distributor
  and redesigned to reduce its attractiveness for through-traffic, improve pedestrian-crossing facilities, and improve
  the integration with and access to public transport. The width of some sections was reduced from the original eight
  lanes to six lanes to minimize resettlement impact; and (b) adjustments were also made in the adjacent road
  network to provide alternative routes.

  Design of the Shuidong Section (section of the Second Ring Road from Heping Avenue to Zhongbei Lu, length: 3.3
  km, width: 50 to 130 m depending on section). Two alternatives were developed for this section of the Second Ring
  Road: an elevated and an at-grade roadway. The Design Institute conducted a detailed cost analysis of both
  alternatives. Because of higher resettlement costs and delays associated with the construction of the at-grade
  roadway, the elevated alternative was preferred.

  Safety Corridors. A variety of different levels of treatment were considered for the road safety corridors at
  preparation stage. Considering Chinese and international experience, a final decision was made to favor physical
  channelization over road markings, and mid-block signals over unsignalized zebra crossings, to achieve the PDOs in
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)



 terms of enhanced safety.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Social Safeguards:

 This is the project’s second extension of the closing date. For the resettlement progress review in g eneral, a
 Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared prior to September 2009. Public consultation and participatory
 approaches were used to prepare mitigation measures for people and facilities affected by the project. The RAP
 incorporated these measures and has been under implementation for nearly seven years.

 The Bank task team conducted mid-term reviews of the project and concluded that the resettlement works on
 Shuidong Road in downtown Wuchang were completed satisfactorily. A total of 349 families, comprising 1,347
 persons, were settled and 23 hectares of collective land were required. All the displaced families have moved into
 their new apartments. The three affected village committees participated in Wuhan’s municipal programs known as
 “village-inside-city improvement projects? and played important roles in the resettlement activities. The
 resettlement policies conducted by the village committees were consistent with those in the RAP. Most of the
 displaced families were eligible to receive three sets of apartments, some more. All the displaced families also
 received their bonuses from the village development project, not included in RAP policies.

 Resettlement on the Jiefang Avenue Rehabilitation was conducted successfully: 42 displaced families, comprising
 143 persons, were settled; 8.2 hectares of collective land were required; and 97 businesses/shops were
 compensated. Resettlement on Jiefang Avenue and on the Jiefang Avenue Extension (JAE) was to be completed
 prior to the first extension of the closing date. However, the resettlement on the JAE was not completed and most
 of the families in Nanhu village remained in rental apartments.

 For the second extension of the closing date, the resettlement works will continue to focus on Nanhu village. Based
 on the updated RAP, 399 families, comprising 1,596 persons, will be relocated and six hectares of collective land will
 be required. These 399 families will be re-categorized as 681 families to receive more resettlement apartments and
 more benefits from project development. The displaced families will be treated as urban citizens to share more
 social security policies and pensions, medical insurance and bonuses from their village development. The
 resettlement policies will be developed in accordance with the original and updated RAPs. All displaced families may
 receive more benefits beyond those in the RAP. According to the resettlement plan, two centralized resettlement
 apartment sites will be constructed. One of these was completed and the other is under construction. All displaced
 families are expected to be relocated in resettlement apartments by December 2018.

 Two elements of the project’s Public Transport component—the Gangdu Garden bus depot and Jinyintan Park &
 Ride—will be dropped from the second project extension. There was no resettlement in these two subprojects, as
 identified prior to project appraisal and confirmed by the Bank’s task team during its supervision missions.
 Regarding the Gangdu Garden bus depot, it is a piece of Wuhan municipal land and land-use planning authorities
 approved this land to be used solely for public transport purposes, such as bus storage. Regarding the Jinyintan Park
 & Ride, this piece of land is fenced and used for temporary storage of construction tools and materials. There was
 an agreement signed by both the current user and local municipal agency that this piece of the land will be returned
 to Wuhan Municipality if the Park & Ride is to be constructed. The WMG may build these two public transport
 facilities within five to seven years. Because the project will close by August 31, 2018, they are being dropped from
 the project. However, in case the WMG undertakes these two subprojects with counterpart funds prior to the new
        The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)



    closing date, then World Bank safeguards policies will apply and the task team will supervise these two subprojects.
    The results monitoring consultant will also report progress to the task team.

    Environmental Safeguards:

    The added activities under the first project restructuring (August 2015), included the installation of intelligent traffic
    management equipment such as traffic signals and monitoring equipment. These activities are the same activities
    found in the Public Transport and Road Safety components, thus did not trigger any new environmental issues that
    are not envisaged in the original EIA and
    EMP. The existing EMP is adequate to accommodate the project adjustment, and no new EA document was
    required.

    The second project restructuring in August 2017, includes the extension of project closing date and dropping of two
    bus terminals. This change will reduce the project activity and has no additional environmental impacts expected,
    therefore, no new environmental documents or update of existing EIA/EMP is needed.




  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
    with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders include local project-affected people and relevant local government agencies. Two rounds of
    public consultation were conducted during EA preparation. The first round was conducted from March 16 to 20,
    2009, through field interviews and questionnaire surveys among project-affected people, local village committees,
    schools and hospitals. A total of 210 participants were consulted. The main concerns raised by the public were
    noise/dust impacts, traffic disturbance, pedestrian crossing and esthetics during construction, and resettlement
    compensation. All these concerns were addressed in the project design, RAP, and EIA/EMPs. The second round of
    public consultation was conducted from May 25 to June 5, 2009 after the draft EIA report was prepared. Two public
    meetings were held in local communities and a total of 270 questionnaires were collected through individual
    interviews. The general public’s main concerns included traffic disturbance and noise/dust pollution during
    construction, for which proper mitigation measures were included in the EIA/EMPs and explained to the public. The
    draft EIA received broad support and satisfaction from the public consulted. As required by Chinese EIA regulations,
    the first-round information disclosure was carried out on March 13, 2009, in which brief project information and the
    commencement of the EIA were published in the Wuhan Evening News. The second round of disclosure was
    conducted on April 4, 2008, when the draft EIA report (simplified version) was disclosed on the Internet
    (www.crfsdi.com) with an announcement published in the Wuhan Evening News. The full EIA report was disclosed
    on the Internet on May 20, 2009. The Chinese and English EIA/EMPs were submitted to the Bank’s Infoshop for
    disclosure on August 11, 2009. For the project restructuring in August 2017, two public transport terminals—Gandu
    Garden and Jinyintan Park & Ride—were dropped from the project. This change does not require an update of the
    EIA and RAP. Therefore, no additional disclosure is needed. The task team will continue supervising these two
    subcomponents as agreed prior to the project extension by both the Bank task team and the Wuhan PMO because
    Bank OP 4.12 applies to them if the project has not closed.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
                        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                        China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)



         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
        21-Jul-2009                                                    11-Aug-2009
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            China                                                        20-May-2009
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
26-Aug-2009                                                             27-Aug-2009
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
          China                                                          04-Jul-2009
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                           Yes

            If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                             Yes
            and approve the EA report?

            Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                             Yes
            credit/loan?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             framework/process
                                                                                   Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                   Yes
Manager review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                      Yes

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                 3,100

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
                                                                                    No
leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                    Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS
          The World Bank                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China Wuhan Second Urban Transport (P112838)




    Task Team Leader(s)                   Arturo Ardila Gomez


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                    Peter Leonard         25-Aug-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
