                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
           Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                          Report No.: ISDSR21723

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             29-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                         Sri Lanka              Project ID:                  P122735
 Project Name:                    Metro Colombo Urban Development Project (P122735)
 Task Team Leader(s):             Yoonhee Kim, Shenhua Wang
 Estimated Board Date:            15-Mar-2012
 Managing Unit:                   GSU12
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                       No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:          320.60                      Total Bank Financing:         213.00
 Financing Gap:               0.00
   Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
   Borrower                                                                                                107.60
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                   213.00
   Total                                                                                                   320.60
 Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred            No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The project development objective (PDO) is to support the Borrower to (i) reduce flooding in the
 catchment of the Colombo Water Basin, and (ii) strengthen the capacity of local authorities in the
 Colombo Metropolitan Area (CMA) to rehabilitate, improve and maintain local infrastructure and
 services through selected demonstration investments.
 Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
 PDO remains unchanged.

 3. Project Description
The three project Components are:

Component 1: Flood and Drainage Management. This supports priority improvements to flood and
drainage management infrastructure in the Colombo water basin, as well as the development of an
integrated flood management system and complementary interventions to enhance the economic value
and aesthetic qualities of the water bodies.

Sub-Component 1.1 Enhancement of drainage capacity in Colombo water basin including
enhancement of runoff from the southeastern upper section of the basin, creation of lakes/retention
areas in the central section of the basin, removal of bottlenecks in the downstream reaches of the
canals, improvement of the outflow capacity and improvement/ construction of canal bank protections.

Sub-Component 1.2 Rehabilitation and upgrading of the micro-drainage systems in priority flood
prone areas under the jurisdiction of the Colombo Municipal Council.

Sub-Component 1.3 Development of an integrated flood management system for the Colombo
water basin, including carrying out selected investments to improve public usability of canals and lakes
and acquisition of maintenance machinery.

Sub-Component 1.4 Rehabilitation and construction of embankments and developing a linear park
along a selected segment of Beria Lake, and establishing a natural park around degraded wetlands in
Beddagana.

Component 2: Urban development, infrastructure rehabilitation, and capacity building for
Metro Colombo local and central authorities. This component aims to (i) support local authorities in
the CMA to rehabilitate and manage their streets and drainage infrastructure, and improve local public
facilities, solid waste collection, and other urban services, and (ii) strengthen strategic planning
processes at the metropolitan level.

Sub-Component 2.1 Enhancing the capacity of the PLAs to deliver sustainable, high quality local
services and to coordinate delivery of services at the metropolitan level through implementing select
high-priority infrastructure improvements in areas within the jurisdiction of the PLAs, including
rehabilitation and improvement of drainage and roads, upgrading of local public facilities, and
acquisition of equipment to improve local public services.

Sub-Component 2.2 (i) Strengthening the capacity of the PLAs in the areas of road asset management,
development and implementation of technical standards, preparation of road rehabilitation and
maintenance works (including quality control), solid waste collection and management; and the
operation of an integrated metro-level geographic information system platform and (ii) Supporting
metropolitan development strategies and planning, including preparation of a city development strategy
for the Colombo metropolitan region, an integrated master plan and a solid waste management
feasibility study and action plan for the CMA.

Component 3: Implementation Support. Strengthening the capacity of the Borrower to carry out
Project activities, including (i) provision of technical support and training to the PMU in the areas of
project management, monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management, and
environmental and social safeguards; (ii) public awareness and communications support regarding
Project interventions, public expectation, behavior changes and resettlement; (iii) provision of technical
support to the SLLRDC, UDA, and the PLAs in construction, supervision and compliance with
environmental and social safeguards; (iv) acquisition of vehicles, office furniture and IT equipment for
the PMU.
Project Restructuring. The proposed project restructuring includes: (i) extend the Project’s closing
date by thirty months from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2020; (ii) include support for a proposed
emergency solid waste management project following the April collapse of the Meethotamulla dump
site; (iii) change in implementing agency in line with the changes resulting from the August 2015
elections which created the Ministry of Megapolis & Western Development; (iv) revise the Results
Framework accordingly; (v) change the project description in the Loan Agreement; and (iv) change the
disbursement projections to realign the project. The revised ISDS addresses changes made to the
Project as a result of the inclusion of SWM and subsequent project restructuring, including the
addendum to the EMF and SMFs.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Project activities with respect to flood control, drainage and waterfront management will be
implemented in the Colombo Metropolitan Area which comprises of the Colombo Municipal Council
and the peripheral local authorities. The support to Local Authorities sub-component will be
implemented in the local authorities of Colombo Municipal Council (CMC), Sri Jayawardenapura
Kotte Municipal Council (SJKMC), Dehiwala Mount Lavinia Municipal Council (DMLMC) and
Kolonnawa Urban Council (KUC).

The stabilization and closure work of the Meethotamulla dump site will be conducted within the
existing footprint of the closed dump site, which is isolated from the surrounding area and on Urban
Development Authority land. The Meethotamulla dumpsite is in the KUC area in Colombo.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Bandita Sijapati (GSU06 )
Nadeera Rajapakse (GEN06 )
Mokshana Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes             Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
                                                            4.01) was triggered as the project
                                                            supports flood and drainage
                                                            improvement and municipal
                                                            infrastructure upgrading work that will
                                                            involve medium/large scale earth work,
                                                            civil construction work, road re-
                                                            surfacing, dredging, pond creation, canal
                                                            rehabilitation etc. The policy will remain
                                                            triggered for the restructuring and the
                                                            existing Environmental Management
                                                            Framework (EMF) will remain
                                                            applicable for the remaining period of
                                                            the project as the project interventions
                                                            under this purview will continue.

                                                            As a Category A project, the project has
                                                            a strong EMF which is under
                                   implementation. While the document
                                   includes guidance on soft interventions
                                   with regards to SWM it does not provide
                                   guidance on the management of impacts
                                   in relation to physical interventions for
                                   SWM implementation. No additional
                                   safeguards policies will need to be
                                   triggered as per these interventions.
                                   Based on the project interventions
                                   proposed, which will be predominantly
                                   environmentally beneficial as the
                                   activities focus on mitigating
                                   environmental risks associated with the
                                   dump site, the focus will be on
                                   mitigating potential risks associated with
                                   worker and public health and safety,
                                   sourcing, transport and storage of
                                   material for the ET covering process as
                                   well as other construction phase impacts
                                   associated to the physical interventions
                                   indicated in the previous section.

                                   The client has prepared an Addendum to
                                   the exiting EMF focused solely on the
                                   Environmental Closure of the
                                   Meethotamulla dumpsite. The addendum
                                   includes a baseline assessment,
                                   identification of risks and proposed
                                   mitigatory actions, including an
                                   Environmental Management Plan based
                                   on the World Bank Group’s General and
                                   SWM Sectoral Environmental Health
                                   and Safety Guidelines and international
                                   best practice in relation to the proposed
                                   activities, implementation arrangements
                                   and short and long term monitoring
                                   requirements. The addendum to the EMF
                                   has been disclosed both by the client and
                                   the Bank.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The policy will remain untriggered as the
                                   project will not involve the significant
                                   conversion or working in close
                                   proximity to critical natural habitats and
                                   protected areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   No activities in forests or in close
                                   proximity to forest areas are expected.
                                   The policy remains untriggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No   Not Applicable as no project
                                   interventions are made where significant
                                                 use of pesticides and other such
                                                 substances are utilized.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes     Physical and Cultural Resources
                                                 (OP/BP4.11) will remain triggered as the
                                                 project proposed to upgrade and restore
                                                 the historic flood management structures
                                                 at the end section of the Colombo Water
                                                 Basin, around the Beira Lake system.
                                                 Measures focused on PCR management
                                                 and procedures on safeguard chance
                                                 finds have been included as part of the
                                                 measures taken under Environmental
                                                 Assessment OP/BP 4.01 in the EMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No      There is no conclusive
                                                 evidence/information available that
                                                 establishes the presence of indigenous
                                                 people in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
                                                 will remain triggered. The World
                                                 Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                 Resettlement, and the GoSL’s policies
                                                 on land acquisition and resettlement,
                                                 namely the Land Acquisition Act No 9
                                                 of 1950, Land Acquisition Regulations
                                                 of 2008, and the National Involuntary
                                                 Resettlement Policy (NIRP) will be used
                                                 to guide the preparation and
                                                 implementation of the Social
                                                 Management Plan (SMP) or if required,
                                                 the Abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                 Plan (ARAP) developed for
                                                 Meethotamulla.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No      There will be no project interventions
                                                 focused on dams or rehabilitation of
                                                 existing dams, therefore the policy will
                                                 remain untriggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No     The proposed project activities do not
7.50                                             have any impacts on international
                                                 waterways and therefore this policy is
                                                 not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No      There are no disputed areas in Sri Lanka
                                                 and therefore this policy is not triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project triggered three safeguard policies as indicated above- OP 4.01: Environmental assessment,
OP 4.11: Physical Cultural proprieties and OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. OP/BP 4.10 has not
been triggered based on Social Assessment results.

Environment: Solid waste management (SWM) and water quality improvement in waterways in the
Metro Colombo area are two key complementary challenges linked to the project with implications on
the sustainability of project outcomes in the long-term. Haphazard disposal of garbage in the city that
gets washed into waterways and informal disposal of sewage are the main reasons contributing to poor
drainage and poor water quality in the city's canals and drains. The poor state of SWM in the country
reflects chronic underinvestment with regards to operations and maintenance and appropriate
technologies, inadequate information and community education and lack of environmentally
acceptable disposal facilities. While solutions to these challenges go beyond the scope of the MCUDP,
the Project will benefit from ongoing initiatives by the Solid Waste Management Center at the
Ministry of Local Authorities and Provincial Councils and by parallel programs by the Ministry of
Environment. The project will complement these on-going efforts by specifically investing in selected
physical interventions to help (i) improve the operational efficiency of waste collection in the project
area and (ii) intercept sewer discharges to Beira Lake, which are a main source of pollution to the
nutrient rich lake. The project will also support feasibility studies to find practical and economical
solutions for the treatment and disposal of municipal waste and sewerage which will pave the way for
potential follow-on projects on solid waste and sewerage management in the Metro Colombo area.

The Addendum to the EMF focuses on the Environmental Closure of the Meethotamulla dumpsite.
Steps towards the closure of Meethotamulla pursue the following objectives: Stabilization of the waste
mound; Minimization the risk of fires; Prevention of people and animals from scavenging; Control of
infiltration of rainwater/surface water and thus reducing leachate generation; Control of odor and gas
migration; Reduction of waste exposure to wind and vectors; The in-place closure cap system will
serve as a growth medium for vegetation and, also support suitable post-closure passive end-use
activities in the future. Thus, via project activities, the existing environmental impacts on site will be
mitigated. Impacts associated with the sub-project will be mostly focused during the reclamation
works and application of the cover, including the need for large quantities of material for earth works
and worker health and safety that needs to be stringently managed during the closure works.

The proposed project interventions have and will generate many positive environmental and public
health impacts through improved flood/drainage management and local services in the Colombo
metropolitan area. Achieving the desired outcomes and sustaining them in the long-term will depend
upon how the project addresses environmental risks and challenges when planning and implementing
sub-projects, which have been the focus of the safeguards documents prepared hitherto and include: an
(i) Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to which an addendum has been made capturing
the proposed expanded work scope under restructuring, (ii) Environmental Assessment (EA) and (iii)
environmental screening reports to supplement the EA

As revealed by the safeguards assessments and screening carried out so far, the environmental
footprint of a majority of investments are associated with construction impacts that include air
pollution, noise, debris disposal, public safety, inconvenience, restricted access, traffic congestion,
removal of vegetation in the work sites, extraction of construction material, etc. which would be
localized and temporary in nature and mitigatable with good construction, housekeeping, public safety
and debris disposal practices. Currently, the water quality in the canal network show high levels of
pollution, especially in the lower part of the basin which is slow-flowing and receives a considerable
load of wastewater and sewage from domestic and commercial establishments. Therefore, impacts on
water quality from canal rehabilitation work will be insignificant and temporary. Since drainage and
wastewater discharge are the main functions of the canal network there will be no impacts resulting
from restriction on other uses due to construction work. Improving water quality in the rehabilitated
canals and waterways will be considered part of the overall canal rehabilitation. However, given the
nature of technical, regulatory and institutional intervention and co-ordination required to address the
issue in its entirety, the project will only be able to provide support on a demonstration scale (e.g.
sewer collector line to capture informal sewerage discharges in the Beira Lake, improved solid waste
collection at municipal level) that would trigger longer-term water quality maintenance activities by
the implementing agencies. The terrain of the project area being flat, there will be no major concerns
of soil erosion and sedimentation. Of the project sites, the only ecologically important areas are the
remaining wetlands in the Colombo basin, which at present exists as several blocks of inter-connected
marshes covering an area of approximately 286 ha. Protecting these wetlands from further shrinking
has been identified as an absolute priority for effective flood management within the city and its
suburbs. In addition to flood detention, the wetlands offer great potential for nature conservation,
recreation, and education which the project seeks to optimize through investments such as the
Beddagana and Kotte Ramparts park. Other parts of the basin are highly modified and urbanized and
as such, there will be no serious ecological impacts.

As part of improving the macro-drainage network in the Colombo basin, dredging have been
undertaken in selected canals and lakes to increase the water conveyance and storage capacity. This
could give rise to the most potentially significant adverse environmental impact under the project in
case it is determined that the dredge material is contaminated with hazardous chemicals. Haphazard
disposal of potentially contaminated dredge material can lead to many irreversible environmental and
public health risks, and as such the project have adopted a cautious approach and undertaken adequate
assessment of sediment quality prior to the commencement of dredging activities. Given the level of
urban/industrial activity, the risk of pollution by hazardous elements could particularly be relevant in
lake/canal sediments in the lower part of the Colombo basin while the risk of contamination should
diminish from lower to upper catchment areas. In addition, the periodic cleaning and desilting carried
out by the Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation (SLLRDC) and Colombo
Municipality Council (CMC) on the main/secondary canal network and the storm water drainage
system reduces the likelihood of sediment contamination resulting from long-term accumulation of
chemical substances in these waterways.

Social: Under the proposed restructuring, the proposed project interventions for the stabilization and
closure of Meethotamulla are envisaged to be socially beneficial with its focus on mitigating safety
risks associated with further collapse of the dump site, reducing the potential for infectious diseases
and other hazards, improving the quality of living for communities, reducing public health risks, and
availing the area for reuse for commercial and recreational purposes in the future. As per the
conceptual proposal, the stabilization and closure is expected to follow the ‘in-place reclamation’
approach with construction works limited to the existing footprint of the dumpsite, and the existing
entry/exist points used for the access. Thus, the need for additional land taking is envisaged to be
minimal, if any. The in-place closure cap system is currently envisaged to serve as a growth medium
for vegetation and, also support suitable post-closure passive end-use activities such as a park.
However, there are other potential risks associated with acquisition of private land following the waste
spillage that has occurred in the aftermath of the collapse; possible permanent and/or temporary
relocation of private houses and other establishments for site preparation; worker and public health
and safety risks especially during sourcing, transport and storage of material for the covering process;
localized and temporary impacts relating to access and mobility; livelihoods impacts on waste
collectors, recyclers and scavengers; and construction phase impacts, remain. The nature and scope of
the precise impacts can only be ascertained after the exact design of the engineering work at the site
has been determined, and the social assessment conducted. The key social issues associated with this
Project, including after restructuring which are addressed in the Social Management Framework and
the Addendum to the Social Management Framework are: (i) assessing and mitigating social safeguard
risks due to land acquisition (LA) and involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and likely impact on
physical and cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11); (ii) promoting social inclusion and accountability to
enhance the implementation quality and outcomes; (iii) sustainable self-management of the multi-story
resettlement buildings and sites with effective and affordable estate management arrangements; (iv)
assessing and managing social issues and concerns relating to solid waste management interventions.

The Project includes flood control measures which may involve minimal land acquisition and some
involuntary resettlement impacts. However, the majority of the works, chiefly improvement of existing
infrastructure such as canals, micro/storm drainage, streets, recreation areas, and similar works will
have only temporary impacts relating to access, mobility, health, and safety. The key social risks and
issues identified for the project are associated with: (i) mitigating potential involuntary resettlement
(OP/BP 4.12) and any adverse impacts on physical and cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11), (ii) promoting
social inclusion and accountability, and (iii) supporting sustainable management for resettlement sites
developed to re-house displaced households. In fact, it is estimated that about 1,500 squatter
households living in underserved settlements (USSs) along the Beira Lake and canal banks will be
relocated to permanent housing. In addition, the Project authorities will resettle some 200 squatter
families earlier living on government plots identified for the construction of resettlement sites.

Key social risks and impacts associated with the activities have involved private land acquisition
required for infrastructure works and the resettlement of vulnerable households living in informal
settlements on low-lying lands, as part of the flood and drainage management investments under
Component 1. A few works proposed by the participating Local Authorities under Component 2 have
involved involuntary resettlement impacts on account of land acquisition or resumption of occupied
public lands in the Metro Colombo area. Land acquisition is now nearly complete for all sub-projects
and have affected residences and businesses in the area, especially those located in low lying areas,
community facilities and physical and cultural properties. The long-term impacts of relocation of
people from the low lying areas are expected to be positive. The positive impacts identified in the
Social Assessment are: prevention of loss of assets and economic activities due to flood risks,
avoidance of public inconvenience due to reduction in water logging in some residential areas,
improved mobility for the city dwellers due to rehabilitation of walkability infrastructure, provision of
formal ownership of house for squatters likely to be affected by the project, social recognition and
security associated with formal tenure, improvement in living conditions in new condominiums,
integration of the younger generation in the middleclass mainstream of the capital region, enhanced
credit-worthiness, and poverty alleviation.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Environment: The anticipated future activities would be very similar to current activities proposed to
be carried out by this project and related to urban upgrading, disaster management, improvement to
urban transportation, etc. As such, the net cumulative impact from better urban planning and disaster
risk mitigation is expected to be positive. The negative environmental impacts from these anticipated
future activities will be similar to this project and could be mitigated with early planning and
implementation of appropriate mitigation measures.
Social: The anticipated future activities will be mostly related to maintenance of infrastructure created
by this project. Expansion of activities of similar nature as proposed in this Project may involve long
term impacts including temporary impacts as in case of Stage-I investments and permanent impacts as
in case of Stage-II activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project implementation timeline has been prepared to allow adequate time for the preparation of
sub-projects that may trigger adverse impact, so that the necessary investigations, alternative analysis
and mitigation can be planned and completed in support of project implementation. Some of the other
measures taken to avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts include (i) use of the
existing right of way in case of rehabilitation/upgrading existing infrastructure; (ii) avoidance of
design alternatives that may affect heavily built up areas; and (iii) works along existing canal and
drainage paths with required section corrections.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Project Restructuring EMF and SMF Addendums: An Addendum to the project’s EMF has been
prepared by the borrower that includes an assessment of the likely environmental impacts of the
proposed scientific closure of the Meethotamulla open dumpsite and mitigation strategies to be
adopted. The Addendum also carries an EMP prepared based on the conceptual plan and rehabilitation
methodology, which will be updated and finalized once detail designs have been developed. The
addendum carries comprehensive guidelines focused on the environmental closure works. The
addendum includes a baseline assessment, identification of risks and proposed mitigatory actions,
including an Environmental Management Plan based on the World Bank Group’s General and SWM
Sectoral Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines and international best practice in relation to the
proposed activities, implementation arrangements and short and long term monitoring requirements.
Under the current restructuring, the client has prepared an addendum to the Social Management
Framework (SMF). The objective of the addendum is to provide guidance for the successful
implementation of social safeguards issues during the stabilization and closure of Meethotomulla
dump site to be supported immediately under the proposed project restructuring of MCUDP.
Specifically, the addendum is intended to ensure sufficient guidance to the implementation of social
safeguards within the context of the possible interventions at Meetotamulla to close the dump site.
Additionally, a comprehensive social assessment of the entire value chain of the municipal waste,
including the closure of Meethotamulla dumpsite, will be undertaken to evaluate the project’s potential
positive and adverse social impacts, and provide inputs on preparation of site specific social impacts
management plans, including resettlement action plans, if required.

Environmental: Sri Lanka has a comprehensive regulatory framework for the protection of its
environment and natural resources. By and large, it is consistent with the safeguards polices of the
World Bank. Under the NEA, the country’s basic national decree for environmental management, all
development projects that fall into prescribed categories are required to go through a comprehensive
environmental screening and mitigation planning process (EIA or IEE). The Central Environmental
Authority (CEA), which is the country’s key environmental regulatory agency, has demonstrated
technical expertise and a good track record of evaluating environmental impact assessments. It was
determined that the NEA will not apply to the list of 8 sub-projects which are ready for
implementation at project onset and is unlikely to apply to any of the sub-projects in the pipeline. As
such, the safeguards assessment and documentation carried out at project approval so far meets
primarily the requirements of OP/BP 4.01. In the event NEA becomes applicable for projects in the
pipeline, EIA requirements under the NEA and OP 4.01 will be harmonized. Although the CEA will
be little involved in the approval of sub-project, as a member of the project Steering Committee its
expertise and guidance is expected to be available. Furthermore, some of the key stakeholders of the
project such as the Urban Development Authority, Colombo Municipal Council have experience in
EIA related work required by GoSL regulations as well as those of multi-national donors.

Implementation Arrangements: The main responsibility of ensuring compliance with environmental
safeguards requirements of the project is borne by the PMU which is supported by a full-time
environmental specialist who is suitably qualified and experienced in managing urban environmental
issues. Among its key tasks, the PMU is responsible for providing the overall policy direction,
technical assistance, review and endorsement of screening reports, environmental assessment and
management plans, capacity building for effective safeguards management to the implementing
agencies, monitoring of environmental compliance and progress reporting to the World Bank. In
addition, the SLLRDC, UDA, CMC and the 3 local authorities have appointed an Environmental
Officer as the nodal point directly responsible for the day-today implementation and monitoring of the
safeguards at the agency level. While the SLLRDC and the UDA are regularly staffed with
Environmental Officers and the project is expected to benefit from the available expertise,
Environmental Officers have been appointed to assist the CMC and the other local authorities. They
are primarily responsible for sub-project screening, preparation of environmental assessments/plans,
ensuring EMPs are reflected in bid documents, implementation of EMPs at the site level together with
site engineer and the Environmental focal point of the contractor and progress reporting to the PMU.

In order to ensure safeguard procedures, instruments and monitoring needs of the MCUDP are well
understood by its implementing partners, the capacity of PMU and project units in the partner agency
were strengthened with resources available under the institutional capacity component. The PMU has
hired consultants to aid the implementing agencies in carrying out sub-project specific screening for
the first 5 sub-projects under each agency. The respective environmental officers of each agency
worked closely with the consultants in order to receive an on-the-job training. The technical assistance
thus provided ensured the necessary understanding, standards and capacity within the agencies to carry
out screening for subsequent sub-project independently. Where stand-alone Environmental
Assessments and Management Plans are required as screening outcomes, the PMU have hired
independent consultants. All screening reports, EAs and EMPs will be prior reviewed and cleared by
the PMU. In addition, screening reports, EAs and EMPs for all Category A type of sub-projects and a
sample of Category B type sub-projects will be prior reviewed by the World Bank.

For contracts such as dredging in sites proven to be contaminated and for the subsequent disposal of
such dredged material, the PMU hired specialist services who will prepare disposal plans, carry out
additional sampling (if needed) and site monitoring, conduct awareness for implementing agencies and
contractors of disposal plan, monitor compliance and ensure control measures are adequately
implemented. The project has also explored the possibility of building long-term capacity, especially
within the participating local authorities, on the management of urban environmental issues, with a
focus on solid waste management and environmental monitoring, through training programs and
procurement of necessary equipment.

Environmental Monitoring: The MCUDP will focus strongly on effective environmental monitoring.
While day-to-day monitoring will be largely confined to compliance monitoring based on a monitoring
checklist and is expected to take place through regular site supervision by the responsible officers,
monitoring of environmental parameters (such as air, water, salinity, sediment quality, etc.) will be
conducted based on the requirements specified in the EMPs. Most importantly, the project will support
independent environmental audits on an annual basis throughout project implementation.

Project Restructuring: There have been various challenges in implementing environmental
    safeguards under the project including ones that stem from inadequate staff capacity, however,
    procedures stipulated in the EMF have largely been complied with. Currently the PMU has an
    Environmental Specialist and two Environmental Officers supporting the remaining program. While
    the current capacity of the PMU is assessed to be adequate to provide safeguards support to the
    remaining works under MCUDP, it would be necessary to enhance the capacity to support the
    extended scope of work after restructuring. This is especially important given rehabilitation of an open
    dump site will require specialized expertise and understanding of the nature of safeguards risks. The
    capacity assessment conducted deduced that specific expertise on Environmental Engineering and
    Solid Waste Management does not exist within the current PMU to manage the interventions that will
    be specific to these specific sectors and require sound technical expertise. Thus, additional capacity
    will be brought in the form of a consultant Environmental Engineer, assignment to work in parallel to
    the existing PMU Environmental Specialist and team.

    Social: Policy and Regulatory Environment: The Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) has a well-
    developed Land Acquisition (LA) Act with latest administrative regulation of 2008 and a National
    Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP, 2001) to deal with land acquisition and involuntary
    resettlement risks. The NIRP (2001) provides for payment of compensation at replacement cost along
    with adequate resettlement and rehabilitation benefits. The LA Regulation of 2008 provides detailed
    guidelines for calculating land and structure value at replacement cost and current market value and
    compensation for damage and injurious affection as well as associated expenditures to the affected
    people. The government has managed several projects involving LA and IR applying safeguards
    policies acceptable to external donors such as ADB, JICA, and IDA/IBRD. The capacity and
    experience of application safeguard legislations and policies have been diverse across projects
    including some widely acknowledged best practices such as in case of the Lunawwa Project and the
    Southern Highway Project. Workshops on urban resettlement have been organized over the course of
    project preparation for the PMU and the stakeholder agencies to strengthen their understanding of
    social safeguards issues and build their capacity for safeguards management.

    The stabilization and closure of the Meethotamulla dump site does not require triggering additional
    World Bank’s operational policies. As per the Social Management Framework (SMF) developed for
    the MCUDP, the World Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and the GoSL’s policies on land
    acquisition and resettlement, namely the Land Acquisition Act No 9 of 1950, Land Acquisition
    Regulations of 2008, and the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) will be used to guide
    the preparation and implementation of the Social Management Plan (SMP) or if required, the
                                                        1
    Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) developed for Meethotamulla. There are also
    provisions for providing compensation and resettlement and rehabilitation assistance under the Land
    Acquisition and Payment of Compensation Regulations, 2013 that designated MCUDP as a ‘specified
    project’ to establish LARC system. The MCUDP can also provide resettlement assistance via
    Entitlement Assessment Committee (EAC) to mitigate non-land acquisition related resettlement
    impacts for persons affected by the project. Additionally, an addendum to the SMF has been prepared
    for Meethotamulla to provide guidance to the implementation of social safeguards within the context
    of interventions at Meetotamulla to close the dump site which among others could include livelihood
    impacts, particularly on vulnerable groups like the scavengers, rag pickers, informal recyclers, etc.

    Social Management Framework: The Social Management Framework was prepared with sample
    field survey and a two-stage consultations with the stakeholders including the people likely to be
    affected. The SMF was finalized through community, technical stakeholder, public consultation and

1
  The likelihood of more than 200 people being affected by the stabilization, closure and reclamation of the dumpsite
is not expected thus the need to prepare a full Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is not deemed necessary.
with the government approval and disclosed. The SMF sets out principles and procedures for: (i)
social screening and IR impact survey; (ii) procedure for preparing and implementing RAPs; (iii) legal
framework; (iv) entitlement matrix; (v) framework for stakeholder consultation and community
participation including of NGOs; and (vi) implementation arrangements (for paying compensation and
assistance, relocation and post-resettlement support, grievance resolution, coordination of LA and
R&R with civil work, monitoring and evaluation and indicative budget). The SMF also provides
guidelines for promoting social accountability/demand side governance measures in the
implementation process. The Entitlement Matrix provides the following entitlements: compensation at
replacement cost for land and structures, alternative houses to the displaced squatters, shops on lease
to relocated commercial units, rental allowance to the tenants, income restoration assistance to shops,
property owners, and residences losing employment or income, reconstruction of affected community
facilities and mitigation measures for temporary impacts.

Gender considerations have been taken into account both at the general level of project design and
specifically embedded in the proposed in the SMF. In particular, both women and children are
expected to greatly benefit particularly from subprojects of urban scale implemented in the CMC and
other local authorities aimed to deliver easy-to-access, open and safe public spaces and playgrounds,
with plenty of public lighting along highly frequented streets, parks and beach fronts. The public
convenience sub-project will provide separate facilities for women, benefitting especially working
women, students and visitors to the city from other parts of the country. Specific gender considerations
in the SMF include: (i) provision of title of the alternative house in the joint name of spouses, and in
the name of the mother in case of deceased husband; (ii) special attention to women headed
households with livelihood restoration support; (iii) equal provision of employment training
opportunities for male and female youths; and (iv) gender sensitive provision of facilities in
resettlement sites including women and day care centers; (v) and ensuring women’s participation in
condominium management process.

Resettlement Sites: The Government of Sri Lanka has been implementing a pro-poor housing
program, under which it has commissioned construction of new multi-story buildings with flats of
400sft. each in several locations in the Colombo area to re-house people living in USS. Of these, the
GoSL earmarked 1,500 flats and a proportional number of commercial units and social facilities to
meet the potential resettlement requirements for the MCUDP. The flats are available in
condominiums, in two government sites closest to the MCUDP project areas. The Bank oversight in
this regard shall be limited to the relocation of the project affected households in such condominiums.

Social Accountability and Inclusion: Specific guidelines for addressing social inclusion and
accountability in the resettlement process included information disclosure, consultation, grievance
redress, community civil society participation in R/R implementation, special support for displaced
vulnerable households to restore livelihoods (e.g. credit access and skill training support for youths
from vulnerable resettled families, continuation provision of government welfare poverty alleviation
schemes (samrudhi, old age pension) for eligible resettled families, extending housekeeping
assignments at resettlement sites and employment in project related works, and opportunity to avail of
a shop at the resettlement site on long term lease. Resettled families losing livelihood will receive cash
assistance to enable re-establishment of their income

Implementation Arrangements: The PMU has identified UDA as the nodal agency for coordinating
LA and R&R activities for the Project. The PMU appointed a senior officer of the UDA managing the
urban resettlement scheme as the director of its social unit. UDA has a large social survey team and
has established database management systems for planning and implementing the urban resettlement
scheme. In Sri Lanka, land acquisition is undertaken by Ministry of Land through their divisional
secretaries, and the PMU will appoint a special officer for coordinating LA activities. Each major PPA
such as the SLLRDC, CMC, and UDA has special land acquisition cells.

Key institutional arrangements for implementing SMF/RAP include: (i) establishment of Social
Management Cell at the PMU and, as necessary, and establishment of Land Acquisition and R&R
cells in each project partner agency (PPA) to carry out/coordinate social screening and impact survey;
(ii) prepare and implement RAPs for the Stage-II activities (with the help of external consultants if
needed); (iii) unified mechanism at UDA to address and monitor post-resettlement sustainability
issues; (iv) a multi-stage Grievance Resolution Mechanism; and (v) Independent Safeguard
Monitoring and Review Mechanisms. A Steering Committee of relevant government departments was
established to review progress and ensure implementation coordination at the highest level. These
bodies meet periodically, in which the designated officers or their representatives participate.

Specifically, the institutional arrangements for the closure activities at Meethotamulla will involve the
following: (i) Social Safeguard Unit of MCUDP will carry out preparation works of the SMP and/or
ARAP through external consultant. Internal and external monitoring will be done accordingly; (ii)
PMU of MCUDP will be responsible for implementation of the ARAP and any relevant provisions in
the SMF; (iii) contractor(s) will be responsible for the implementation of construction related issues in
the SMP/ARAP; and (iv) communications unit at the Ministry of Megapolis and Western
Development will be responsible for developing a communication and stakeholder engagement
strategy and implementing the same along with the PMU of MCUDP; Ministry of Megapolis and
Western Development will provide overall oversight for the project, review progress and ensure
implementation coordination at the highest level.

Key safeguards compliance arrangements will involve instituting systems and capacity for safeguards
management at the PMU and sub-project implementing agencies. This will include: the establishment
of an inclusive Land Acquisition and Resettlement Committee (LARC) for the Project, hiring social
development specialists for PMU and social development officers (SDOs) to assist implementing
agencies handling resettlement activities; mobilizing community development officers (CDO) from
the social welfare department field level operations and hiring Consultants for resettlement planning
and NGO for implementation support; and establishing Land Acquisition and R/R capacity in
implementing agencies. The PMU established mechanisms for independent monitoring and quality
audit of the safeguards management including land acquisition, R/R and EMP. For the purposes of
Meethotamulla closure, the PMU will hire an additional social development specialist to support the
implementation and monitoring of project interventions. The safeguards monitoring and review
consultants will provide quarterly implementation progress reports (QPR) and yearly Safeguard
Review Reports. Social accountability measures proposed include information disclosure, civil society
participation in planning and monitoring of the project; and grievance resolution mechanisms.

Linking Social Management Actions to Civil Works: Social Screening has been carried out for each
activity and based on the magnitude of impacts and scale of resettlement required, SIAs will be
commissioned through independent consultants or will be carried out by the Social Development
Specialists with the help of Social Development Officers. Based on the SIA, RAPs has been prepared
in consultation with the affected communities and disclosed. The eligibility lists will be disclosed at
the community and at the implementing agency level for objections before finalizing the same.
Eligibility will be determined on the basis of census survey and once the beneficiary list is finalized,
the affected families will be issued Family Identity Cards. The LA and R&R benefits will be provided
before handing over the site for civil work. The Chief Engineer from the concerned implementing
agency will certify that the necessary actions have been completed as per the RAP for handing over
encumbrance free land for civil work. The SMF provides for giving rental allowance to the affected
families till final relocation in permanent buildings in the case of emergency shifting.

A multi-stage Grievance Redress Mechanism has been established, with clear procedures for handling
PAP complaints at local, sub-project implementing agency, PMU, and department levels. SMF
requires holding consultations during resettlement planning and implementation to discuss risks,
entitlements, RAPs, and relocation and site handover schedules; and disclosure of relevant documents
on project website, in newspapers, and public project outreach centers established at the PMU and
implementing agency levels.
Monitoring and Evaluation: The PMU has hired external consultants/NGO for providing need-based
implementation support to the PPAs and for carrying out independent monitoring and quality
assurance. The Project has established a participative implementation monitoring system established at
the bottom, which will enable the local resettlement committee to participate in the implementation
process in planning and monitoring roles. The PMU has established quality monitoring reports with
yearly safeguard reviews. These has formed the basis for any improvements to be brought about in the
safeguard policy framework and implementation arrangements.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment: During preparation of the EMF, EA and screening reports for the 8 selected sub-
projects for implementation in year 1, the public/communities in project sites have been consulted to
hear their concerns about the projects’ environmental impacts and the outcomes have been
documented. In general, public opinion of the project from an environment perspective is largely
positive and welcomed. In addition, consultations with other primary stakeholders such as the
implementing partners (SLLRDC, UDA and the 4 LAs) and regulatory agencies (CEA) have been
carried out during this time and documented. Similarly, for all types of environmental analyses
conducted subsequently, affected communities have been consulted, process documented and account
taken of the results of consultation, including any actions agreed resulting from the consultation.
Public disclosure of the relevant safeguards documentation has been a pre-requisite for bidding of
works contracts. The contract documents for each contract package mandatorily includes the relevant
environmental mitigation provisions stipulated in the EMPs for the given sub-projects in order to
ensure contractor compliance with the safeguards requirements.

Project Restructuring: The addendum to the EMF and the original EMF has been disclosed by the
client August 4, 2017 and by the Bank on August 6, 2017.

Social: Primary stakeholders include the affected persons, the beneficiaries of the project, the host
population of the transit and resettlement sites, the project partner agencies such as SLLRDC, UDA,
LAs and more importantly the project proponent and the Ministry of Defence & Urban Development
(the original implementing agency) and Ministry of Finance. The secondary stakeholders are the
others who have an interest on the project such as the National Government, the political authority,
policy-makers, advocacy groups, NGOs and other private and public sectors which have indirect
involvements with the project.

Consultation and Disclosure: The SMF provides a framework for holding consultations during
planning and implementing the RAPs. Consultations will be carried out and documented while
preparing and designing the sub-projects to discuss alternatives, during Screening/SIA to discuss risks
and impacts, and while preparing the RAP to discuss entitlements, disseminate the implementation
process and time schedule for disbursement of compensation and benefits. During implementation,
consultations will be held to plan actual relocation to the condominiums and to help with income
restoration support. All the relevant safeguard documents will be disclosed at the Ministry of
Megapolis (the current implementing agency) website, and on the websites of the implementing
agencies, whereas key information will be disclosed through the newspapers depending on the
requirement. The eligibility lists, entitlements, implementation schedule, etc are disclosed at the level
of settlements affected by the project.

Project Restructuring: The addendum to the SMF and the original SMF has been disclosed by the
client on August 4, 2017 and at the World Bank’s Infoshop on August 8, 2017.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     11-Oct-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  16-Nov-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the      15-Feb-2012
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                                       16-Nov-2011
Comments: The addendum to the EMF has been disclosed in country on August 4, 2017 and by the
          Bank on August 6, 2017.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     04-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  16-Nov-2011
"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                                       16-Nov-2011
Comments: Project Restructuring: The addendum to the SMF and the original SMF has been
          disclosed by the client on August 4, 2017 and at the World Bank’s Infoshop on August 8,
          2017.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]        No [ ]       NA [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ ]         No [ ]       NA [ ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       NA [ ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]       No [ ]    NA [ ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [ ]      No [ ]    NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                        Yes [ x ]    No [ ]   TBD [ ]
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to      Yes [ x ]    No [ ]   TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]       No [ ]    NA [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]     No [ ]    NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    NA [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    NA [ ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):            Name: Yoonhee Kim, Shenhua Wang
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:             Name:                                     Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:       Name:                                     Date:
