The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2017| Report No: ISDSR23938




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Michel Kerf
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Iain G. Shuker
                            Task Team Leader:      Cary Anne Cadman
            The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                Project Name
                                                              Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum
    P131655
                                                              Fisheries Agency
    Task Team Leader(s)                                       Country
    Cary Anne Cadman                                          Pacific Islands
    Approval Date                                             Environmental Category
    22-Dec-2014                                               Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                             Is this a Repeater project?
    GEN2A

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                        Total Financing
    10,131,781.00                                             6,161,781.00
    Financing Gap
    3,970,000.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                    3,970,000.00
    Trust Funds                                                                                    2,191,781.00
    Total                                                                                          6,161,781.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the Project is to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic and coastal
    fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend.




.
          The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)




 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The restructured Forum Fisheries Agency Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (FFA PROP) Project is comprised of
four components, as follows:

Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries. The objective of this component is to help participating
Pacific Island countries strengthen management of the region’s purse seine and long-line tuna fisheries. Towards this
objective, activities supported under Component 1 include:

1.1 Strengthen the capacity of national and regional institutions to sustainably manage Pacific Island tuna fisheries

i.   Technical Assistance (TA) to countries to strengthen the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) for the purse seine fishery and
     expand this system to the long-line fisheries. Subcomponent activities will include provision of legal advice and
     execution of three workshops: two workshops on Persons of Interest and one workshop on Observer Insurance. In
     addition, this subcomponent will finance the annual Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI) verification process for two
     national PROP projects: Federated States of Micronesia and Tuvalu.

ii. TA to (i) identify surveillance and enforcement tasks and needs for countries to collaborate to ensure compliance with
    the VDS, and (ii) strengthen the network of compliance experts that support countries’ in this effort.

     This TA will include delivery of the following activities:

     a. Update regional and national fisheries compliance risk assessments.
     b. Provision of implementation support for national Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) activities.
     c. Training for fisheries MCS officers.
     d. Delivery of an annual course on Certificate IV in Fisheries Compliance and Enforcement delivered through the
        University of the South Pacific (USP).
     e. TA to review and improve the curriculum of current MCS training offerings at the USP.
     f. Delivery of a Dockside Boarding and Inspection workshop.
     g. Delivery of a Fisheries Officer Evidence and Investigation Course.
     h. Provision of observer training and training of observer trainers.

Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries. The objective of this component is to support participating
countries to sustainably manage defined coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased
benefits, i.e., coastal fisheries that can generate export earnings for the country and/or support livelihoods, food security
and dietary health. This is delivered through an ongoing three-year contract with the Pacific Community (SPC) to provide
TA to support the formation of a regional or subregional beche-de-mer (BDM) fishery group and provide ongoing technical
support to Pacific Island Countries (PICs) with BDM.

Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats. The objective of this component is
to help identify revenue streams to sustainably finance the conservation of critical habitats that underpin oceanic and
coastal fisheries in the region.

Towards this objective, activities supported under this component include:
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



3.1 Establish financing mechanisms to support large marine protected areas (MPAs)

i.     Assessment of existing and potential new regional sites for large scale marine protected areas;

ii. TA for the establishment of Pacific Marine Conservation Development Financing Mechanisms. Specifically, TA to assess
    a short list of potential ocean finance mechanisms and develop up to three viable ocean finance mechanisms for PICs;

iii. TA, training and exchange of lessons learned to individual PICs hosting large MPAs. Specifically, TA to strengthen
     regional capacity and facilitate knowledge transfer for ocean finance for PICs.

3.2 Establish a Regional Ocean Finance and Governance Program for Pacific Island Countries

i.     TA to develop ocean finance profiles for selected PICs;

ii. TA to deliver a Pacific Ocean Finance Fellowship Program to benefit PICs.

Component 4: Project Management. This component finances the operation and full staffing complement of the Project
Support Unit for project implementation and management, including in the areas of financial management, procurement,
safeguards and monitoring and evaluation of the FFA PROP Project.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
     The technical advisory components of the project will have benefits to oceanic fisheries in the Pacific, in the
     open waters and the exclusive economic zones of Pacific Island countries. Business plan development under
     Component 1 could influence downstream investments in dock, wharf and port facilities in Pacific Island
     countries which could have site specific impacts from construction and operation. Component 2 will support
     sustainable beche-de-mer management in coastal waters of Pacific Island countries. Component 3 technical
     advisory for sustainable financing of marine protected areas and ocean finance mechanisms could have long
     term positive impacts on near shore and oceanic ecosystems and biodiversity. These downstream activities
     could also potentially restrict access to resources.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Penelope Ruth Ferguson, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Ross James Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Joyce Onguglo, Social Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
      Safeguard Policies                         Triggered              Explanation
                                                                        The aim of the program is to help improve
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                        environmental and resource quality in the Pacific
The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



                                                       Islands Region in order to increase the economic
                                                       benefits generated by the goods and services from
                                                       healthy ocean ecosystems. As such, the overall
                                                       impact of the program is expected to be highly
                                                       positive and none of the eligible investments on the
                                                       menu of options include activities that would
                                                       generate significant risk or irreversible adverse
                                                       impacts in the coastal or oceans fisheries targeted
                                                       by the program. However, some investments under
                                                       Components 1 and 2 may generate minor to
                                                       moderate site specific and time bound adverse
                                                       environmental impacts that can be readily
                                                       mitigated through standard mitigation measures,
                                                       when screened properly. Under Component 1
                                                       Business Plans can influence downstream
                                                       investments in infrastructure at docks / ports in
                                                       Pacific Island countries. Site specific impacts could
                                                       result such as noise, waste, health and safety risks
                                                       for workers, and discharges to the marine
                                                       environment.

                                                       Additionally, Component 3 (Sustainable Financing
                                                       of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats)
                                                       might result in creation of the Marine Protected
                                                       Areas (MPAs), in which case any potential access
                                                       restrictions will be addressed through a detailed
                                                       Process Framework (Annex E of the ESMF).

                                                       The project also envisages TA for sustainable ocean
                                                       financing mechanisms, which may lead to potential
                                                       improvements in biodiversity management but also
                                                       the potential restriction of access to resources. The
                                                       Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                       Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed Projects
                                                       and TFs Administered by the Bank is applied.
                                                       Mechanism for administering safeguards in TA
                                                       activities will include integration of safeguard
                                                       policy requirements into the Terms of Reference of
                                                       studies. As such, the safeguard documentation
                                                       prepared for the project applies equally to the TA
                                                       component(s) and Terms of References for the TA
                                                       activities will be approved by the Bank to ensure
                                                       the consultancy outputs comply with the Bank
                                                       safeguard policies.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



                                                              The ESMF will also apply to the technical advisory
                                                              provided for the business plans.
                                                              Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                              (ESMF) has been prepared to guide investments
                                                              and technical advisory that may generate any
                                                              adverse environmental and social impacts.
                                                              Screening forms will be used to screen for
                                                              environmental and social impacts and determine
                                                              the appropriate instrument and mitigation
                                                              measures. The ESMF has been updated for the
                                                              restructuring, to address the changes in project
                                                              scope and implementation arrangements.

Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              Program activities will not involve significant loss or
                                                              degradation of natural habitats. Most of the
                                                              program activities will be in the marine areas
                                                              (coastal and ocean) of Pacific Islands which are
                                                              known sites rich in biodiversity. All program
                                                              activities are designed to enhance positive and
                                                              sustainable returns to these important habitats.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                              The Program level ESMF contains measures to
                                                              properly manage the risk of any unforeseen
                                                              adverse environmental impact on natural habitats,
                                                              including critical natural habitats, as well as
                                                              measures to enhance the program's positive
                                                              environmental outcomes.


                                                              The project will include technical assistance to
                                                              support development of Marine Protected Areas
                                                              could influence conservation incentives for coastal
                                                              communities to conserve the mangrove habitats.

                                                              The Blue Carbon finance instruments have been
                                                              dropped and Ocean Finance mechanisms included
                                                              in the restructured project. Such mechanisms
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes
                                                              could influence management of mangroves after
                                                              the project. Hence, the policy is triggered.

                                                              The program level ESMF includes a screening form
                                                              to ensure that the negative impacts on mangrove
                                                              forests of any downstream activities are addressed,
                                                              and any positive impacts are enhanced.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



                                                              TOR for the studies proposed under component 3
                                                              will integrate policy requirements of OP 4.36.



                                                              The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                              dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                                                              Given the small scale works involved, the policy is
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                 not triggered. A chance finds procedure is included
                                                              in the ESMF.
                                                              This policy has been triggered as the project has a
                                                              regional scope, and because specific sites and
                                                              activities were not identified at the project
                                                              preparation stage. It is possible that the project will
                                                              affect Indigenous Peoples to some extent. Given
                                                              the objectives of the project, and the extensive
                                                              consultations designed into the project, it is
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes                expected that any impact would be positive.
                                                              Notwithstanding, as the project beneficiaries are
                                                              expected to be overwhelmingly indigenous
                                                              peoples, the approach adopted will be to
                                                              incorporate the elements of an IPP into overall
                                                              project design. Guidance for incorporating
                                                              elements of the IPP into overall project design is
                                                              included in Annex B of the ESMF.
                                                              In case of downstream establishment of the MPAs
                                                              or Ocean Finance mechanisms, which could
                                                              potentially restrict access to resources, The IA will
                                                              select appropriate safeguard instrument(s)
                                                              according to the responsibilities defined in the
                                                              ESMF (and in particular the Annex on Process
                                                              Framework).
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                              To address potential restriction of access to
                                                              resources, a Process Framework (PF) has been
                                                              prepared in compliance with requirements stated
                                                              in OP 4.12 (See Annex E of the ESMF).


                                                              Neither this project nor the possible downstream
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No                 investments from project’s TA will involve building
                                                              dams nor depend on an existing dam.
                                                              Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA, it
                                                              was agreed that there will be no impacts from this
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           No                 project or its possible downstream investments on
(BP 7.50)
                                                              international waterways as described under OP
                                                              7.50.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



                                                                       Any project activities in areas which may be
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No                     disputed will be declared ineligible and not
                                                                       included in the project.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The nature and scale of projects to be delivered under the restructured project are broadly similar. Component 3.2
      has been changed and no pilot Blue Carbon projects will be funded, although the technical advisory work could
      influence downstream projects.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      Most long term impacts will benefit coastal and oceanic fisheries and biodiversity. However there is the potential
      that advisory funded by the project will lead to restriction of access to resources in the coastal areas.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      Borrower capacity to address safeguard policy issues has been limited to date. The Grievance Redress Mechanism
      (GRM) has not been in place throughout the project and understanding of the safeguards requirement needs
      attention. Development of a GRM is essential to be included as part of the monitoring and evaluation process of the
      project.

      The IA will recruit a part time consultant to manage the safeguards requirements of the Project, including application
      of the ESMF to technical advisory tasks and developing and implementing the GRM.




 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      Technical advisory work funded by this project will mostly be at the regional level, and the key stakeholders are
      primarily the fisheries management departments of participating governments in the PROP program. There has been
      ongoing dialogue with these stakeholders in the implementation of the PROP to date and this will continue. Where
      specific activities will affect the public and other government and non-government stakeholders, such as business
      plans under Component 1, they will be consulted as part of the implementation of the component as per the
      consultation guidelines in the ESMF.
                            The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)




DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        23-Sep-2014                                                         23-Oct-2014
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                                                   23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                                                    23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                 Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                   Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                      Yes



           NH_TABLE
        The World Bank                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                       No
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                       Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                       Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                          No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                       No
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups         Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
            The World Bank                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program Forum Fisheries Agency (P131655)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                           Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                           Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                           Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                           Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Cary Anne Cadman


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
