The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2018| Report No: ISDSR26144




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Michel Kerf
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Deborah L. Wetzel
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Fily Sissoko
                            Task Team Leader:      Virginia Ann Horscroft
              The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                       Project Name
                                                                     Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance
    P147005
                                                                     Management Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                              Country
    Virginia Ann Horscroft                                           Solomon Islands
    Approval Date                                                    Environmental Category
    29-Sep-2014
    Managing Unit                                                    Is this a Repeater project?
    GGOEP


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             3.08
    Total Financing                                                                                                3.08
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                   3.08
         East Asia and the Pacific Justice for the Poor Initiative                                                  3.08


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The development objective of the project is to strengthen community grievance management capabilities and enhance
    the effectiveness of linkages with government in targeted communities.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

     The changes under this Level 2 restructuring include the provision of additional financing of US$934,580 to fill the
     financing gap created by the slower than anticipated implementation progress and the limitation on the original grant,
     whereby its closing date could not be extended. With the original grant of US$3,080,000, the additional financing takes
     the total grant to US$4,014,580. The closing date of the additional financing is October 30, 2020. This will extend the
     project by 18 months to ensure that project activities are consolidated satisfactorily and the PDO is achieved. In addition,
     the grant disbursement estimates and the results framework are revised to take into account the extended period of
     implementation and additional financing.

     The project was designed to begin in two provinces, and be extended to a further two provinces by the end of the project
     as indicated in Table 1 below. The additional two provinces would be selected by the implementing agency, the Ministry
     of Provincial Government and Institutional Strengthening (MPGIS), based on agreed criteria including capacity (staffing
     and the ability to meet recurrent allowance/salary costs) and willingness to engage. Within each province, it was
     anticipated that ten communities would be selected in the first year of participation and an additional ten communities
     would be selected in the second year of participation, in which Community Officers (COs) would be recruited.
     Communities would be selected by participating provincial governments based on factors including accessibility,
     willingness of communities to host COs, existing community institutions with which the COs would work, population
     coverage and similar ongoing assistance from other donor-financed programs, etc.

                                            Table 1: Intended Coverage and Phasing
                 Financial year                              2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18               Total
                 Participating provinces                        2        2         4    4                    4
                 Community Officers                            20       40        60   80                   80

     The slower than anticipated implementation progress, together with the resource constraints of the four participating
     provinces, has resulted in the coverage and phasing indicated in Table 2 below.

                                             Table 2: Revised Coverage and Phasing
              Financial year                2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20                   Total
              Participating provinces          2          2         2        2     4  4                         4
              Community Officers              37         37        37       37     57 57                       57
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



A. Project Components
The components of the Community Governance and Grievance Management Project are as follows.

Component 1: Revitalizing Government-Community Linkages (US$1,170,000)

The objective of this component is to revitalize linkages between government and target communities. Both provincial
and central governments regard COs as valuable in supporting and strengthening their outreach and extension activities.
Necessarily, given the role of COs, this will be achieved primarily through working with relevant departments of
participating provinces, but linkages will also be fostered with central government agencies responsible for policing,
land and natural resources and local development financing. This objective will also be achieved by assisting participating
provincial governments to fulfill key responsibilities associated with the selection, contracting, remuneration,
coordination, reporting, performance management and supervision of COs.

A feature of this component will be a facilitated process, led by participating provincial governments, to engage with
communities in order to reach a common understanding around how COs work, tailored to the local context, and how
they will interact with relevant community institutions and actors and with government authorities. Through this
process, it is expected that provincial government staff, assisted by the project, will work with communities to assess
the most significant problems facing communities (including the nature of disputes and gender-specific issues) and how
well existing grievance management mechanisms are responding to these issues. Agreement would then be reached on
how COs operate within their host community, i.e. who they will interact with locally, what disputes and grievances they
would focus on, how they will be expected to behave and what kinds of accountability, locally, and with government
would be defined, so as to tailor COs activities to particular contexts. As part of this process, provincial government staff,
assisted by the project, will collect baseline data on the use of and satisfaction with existing community grievance
management mechanisms as well as satisfaction with current government-community linkages.

This component would also support the provinces to raise public awareness of the roles and responsibilities of COs in
the context of existing community governance arrangements so as to ensure that COs, local interlocutors and provinces
are held accountable for their actions, including mechanisms for community feedback and grievance redress. Under this
component, the relevant provincial department will be provided with the necessary office and communication
equipment to enable them to effectively carry out their roles.

Component 2: Strengthening the Capabilities of Community Officers and Local Authorities (US$1,460,000)

The objective of this component is to ensure that COs and the local actors with whom they interact are adequately
equipped with the knowledge, skills and tools to perform their agreed roles. To ensure the relevance and impact of
capacity development investments, it is envisaged that the project will employ a learning-by-doing approach through
the provision of short-term training largely involving on-the-job mentoring. This will be planned and implemented by
MPGIS in collaboration with provincial governments. A standard training package will be prepared and delivered
principally through regular support and supervision visits to host communities involving a number of provincial and
central government officials. In addition, group training events will take place in provincial capitals involving all COs
within the province. Certain training activities may be extended to include relevant provincial government staff, civil
society including local actors (e.g. chiefs and leaders) and local representative bodies that exist in some provinces such
as Ward Development Committees and Councils of Chiefs.
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)




    The project will support the sharing of lessons learnt across provinces (and potentially with neighboring countries, e.g.
    Bougainville/PNG), for example by cross-provincial visits and joint review activities. Job-related equipment (e.g.
    uniforms, mobile phones/two-way radios, office supplies) would be provided to COs under this component to enable
    them to effectively undertake their roles and apply the skills promoted under the project.

    Component 3: Project Management, Evaluation and Learning (US$1,384,579)

    The objective of this component is to provide support to MPGIS to effectively implement the project, to ensure that it
    is carried out in accordance with government and Bank processes and guidelines and contributes evidence-based policy
    guidance to government. The responsibilities of MPGIS will include: (a) the coordination of the project with national and
    provincial stakeholders; (b) the management of the project, including technical, financial, procurement, social and
    environment safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, communications, and grievance redress; (c) project monitoring
    and reporting, periodic, at mid-term and completion; (d) annual project audits and performance reviews; and (e)
    through periodic workshops and seminars, sponsoring the exchange of project learning and policy dialogue across
    national and province government and local authorities. Activities supported under this component will include: (a) the
    establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) within MPGIS including the requisite equipment and operational
    budgets to facilitate PMU activities; (b) the mid-term review including associated assessments; (c) the establishment of
    a Project Monitoring System and two beneficiary surveys (at mid-term and completion); and (d) annual audits of project
    accounts.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project commenced in rural areas in Makira-Ulawa and Renbel provinces. At the time of appraisal,
    specific communities had not yet been selected. Two further provinces were to be selected for extension of
    the project in 2016/17, which at the time of appraisal had not been identified. In Makira-Ulawa, 27
    communities clustered in 3 wards were selected to host COs. In Renbel, 10 communities in each of the 10
    wards were selected to host COs. The two provinces selected for the extension of the project were Malaita
    and Central province. In Malaita, 15 communities in 15 of the 33 wards were selected to host COs. The COs
    were selected near the end of 2017/18, and were inducted and commenced work in the first quarter of
    2018/19. In Central, 5 communities in 5 of the 13 wards were selected to host COs. COs were selected in the
    second quarter of 2018/19 and are expected to be inducted and commence work in the third quarter of
    2018/19.



    2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Ross James Butler, Social Specialist
        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered        Explanation
                                                            The project will have no physical impacts. This
                                                            policy is triggered because it is the umbrella policy
                                                            that guides the triggering of the other
                                                            environmental and social safeguards policies. No
                                                            separate instrument will be prepared or disclosed.
                                                            The key messages of this policy on environmental
                                                            and social assessment will be incorporated into the
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                            design of the project. This includes awareness
                                                            creation on the basic policy principles, addressing
                                                            the concerns of the vulnerable groups of people,
                                                            etc., and the training for COs and other change
                                                            agents in Solomon Islands for the purposes of
                                                            promoting environmental and social sustainability
                                                            of development interventions.
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No

 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                            The policy is triggered. Solomon Islands population
                                                            is considered Indigenous People (IPs) based on the
                                                            requirements of OP 4.10. Since the overwhelming
                                                            majority of project beneficiaries would fall under
                                                            this OP 4.10 definition of indigenous peoples, no
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes             stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan is required.
                                                            However, elements of an IPP in this case derived
                                                            from a simple Social Assessment (SA) proportional
                                                            to both the positive and negative impacts of this
                                                            project, that has been prepared and disclosed, are
                                                            integrated into the design of the project.
                                                            The policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                            have no physical/resettlement impacts, but will
                                                            provide support to establish arrangements,
                                                            through COs, that assist communities to manage
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No
                                                            conflicts that undermine community security,
                                                            development and social cohesion. Even though one
                                                            key area of conflict is land disputes over tenure and
                                                            ownership, this will be addressed under OP 4.01 as
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



                                                                       indicated under the provisions of footnote 8 of OP
                                                                       4.12.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project does not raise any issues under safeguard policies and will have no physical impacts. The social risks
      associated with the project consist of: (a) possible difficulty in reconciling the tensions between customary law with
      state law and human rights principles in the kinds of conflict that COs will typically encounter; (b) challenges in the
      selection of COs with the required mediation and reconciliation skills who have the confidence of the community, and
      in particular finding and supporting female candidates with the willingness and ability to operate in. the face of
      potential cultural hostility and even physical threat; and (c) possible difficulty in securing the buy-in of some local
      authority figures where there has been abuse of position to gain personal advantage, especially from development
      projects, particularly natural resource development. All these are provided for under OP4.01 and integrated in the
      project design.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      The project presents an opportunity to support the development and expansion of conflict management mechanisms
      that are lawful, objective and perceived as equitable, and which are sensitive to local kastom and leadership and
      connected to the wider provincial administrative framework. Outcomes of conflict management/avoidance could be
      considerably improved in particular for women and youth.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

      None.


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      No safeguards plans or frameworks are required for this project. Informing project design, comprehensive free
      informed prior consultation with local leaders, men, women and youth was undertaken during the evaluation of the
      precursor Royal Solomon Islands Police Force-initiated CO pilot and during project preparation. This has included nine
      communities in five Provinces in October 2011 for the evaluation of the CO pilot project and 86 rural communities for
      the earlier ‘Justice Delivered Locally’ project. Subsequent consultations have taken place with all nine Provincial
      Governments, and with civil society stakeholders. The process confirmed broad community and official support for
                            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



                       the project. A SA has been undertaken as part of project preparation. Findings from the SA and consultations have
                       been taken into account in the project design, particularly the inclusion of safeguards principles and management of
                       grievances in planned community outreach activities and CO training. MPGIS and the provincial governments have
                       constrained fiscal and personnel resources. Though provincial governments have undertaken to appoint, pay and
                       support COs, competing demands for provincial budgets present some risk of under-resourcing for the CO function.
                       The project contains components and a budget to support capacity building for COs, provincial governments and
                       MPGIS.


                     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                       Key institutional stakeholders include the Implementing Agency, MPGIS, and provincial governments that will host
                       and resource the CO program. The Ministries of Lands, Housing and Survey; Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification;
                       and Meteorology, Environment and Conservation will be consulted on awareness raising and CO training on
                       management of disputes arising from development projects involving land and natural resources. Local level leaders
                       and communities and beneficiary stakeholders will continue to be consulted and will participate in the formulation
                       with COs of agreements about key local issues to be addressed and how COs will operate in their areas. In agreeing
                       on the mode of operation with beneficiary communities, care will be taken to ensure that the grievance mechanism
                       is available to all groups in communities. The SA has been disclosed through the InfoShop and locally through
                       advertisements in the main daily newspaper and signboards in relevant provinces.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure


         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                Date of Disclosure
            Solomon Islands
         The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)



 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                         No



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                           No
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                           Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups            Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                           Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                           Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                           Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                           Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Solomon Islands Community Governance and Grievance Management Project (P147005)




    Task Team Leader(s)                   Virginia Ann Horscroft


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
