The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2017| Report No: ISDSR22156




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                              Country Director:    Yaye Seynabou Sakho
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Michal J. Rutkowski
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Pablo Gottret
                            Task Team Leader:      Hugo Martin Brousset Chaman
            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)


.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of
    P145410
                                                                Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Hugo Martin Brousset Chaman                                 Guatemala
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    07-Nov-2014                                                 Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSP04

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    2,750,935.00                                                2,750,935.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    Trust Funds                                                                                       2,750,935.00
    Total                                                                                             2,750,935.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of parents and communities to improve and monitor child
    development outcomes (physical, cognitive, socio-emotional and linguistic skills) for children under two in project
    intervention areas.




.
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The four-year Project has the following three components:

Component 1: Promotion of physical, cognitive, linguistic and socio-emotional development through a parenting and early
stimulation intervention (US$1,758,798): This component will introduce parenting and early childhood stimulation
activities into existing health and nutrition community services under the Government ’s Zero Hunger Program (especially
the AINM-C strategy and the Extension of Coverage Program which provides a basic package of health and nutrition
services in most of the intervention areas) in order to improve children’s physical, cognitive, and emotiona l development.
Specific Component activities include:

Component 2: Enhanced social and behavior change communication to achieve improved child nutrition and development
(US$443,267). This component will develop a strategy to address social and behavioral change, tailored specifically to
address concrete constraints caregivers face in adopting positive practices to ensure optimal child nutrition (e.g. early
initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding, opportune introduction of complementary nutritious foods, improved
hygiene practices in the household, timely health seeking behavior especially in the case of managing childhood illnesses,
which affect nutritional status, etc.). The strategy will be based on culturally-appropriate and motivational communication
delivered at critical moments in child development to have the greatest impact and using emotional/cognitive levers to link
actions with expectations for the future with an aim to change the behavior of parents, as well as others, such as grandmothers
and midwives, who influence mothers’ choices in Guatemala. Specific activities include:

Component 3: Project management and administration, monitoring & and evaluation, and knowledge dissemination
(US$548,858): This component will support project management and administration, technical assistance and training for
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and knowledge dissemination.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project will be implemented in a cluster of departments comprising Huehuetenango, Quiche, San
    Marcos, and Totonicapán where chronic malnutrition affects, on average, 70 percent of all young children,
    and poverty affects nearly 90 percent of the population. These departments are diverse in their ethnic and
    linguistic composition. In the state of Huehuetenango. 57.4% of the population belong to one of eleven
    Mayan linguistic communities: Akateko, Awakateko, Chuj, Mam, Popti, Q'anjob'al, Tektiteko, Akateko,
    Awakateko, K'iche' and Chalchiteko; in Quiché, 88.6% of the population belong to one of five: K'iche', Ixil,
    Q'eqchi, Poqomchi' and Sakapulteko; in San Marcos, 27% of the population are either K'iche', Mam or
    Sipakapense; and 97% of the Totonicapán population belong to the K’iche’ linguistic community. In these
    departments, the project will be implemented in communities in 17 municipalities. These municipalities are
    characterized by: high rates of poverty, child mortality, and malnutrition; demonstrated need for child
    development and nutrition interventions; and community interest and demand for such interventions. In
    addition these municipalities have access to Ministry of Health facilities and interventions, active community
    participation, and the presence of the Recipient, which can increase the likelihood of delivering short-term
    results while securing long-term impact. Finally, these municipalities have been also prioritized by the
    Government of Guatemala’s Hambre Cero (Zero Hunger) Initiative, which aims to reduce the prevalence of
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)



chronic malnutrition in children under-five and child mortality through the coordination of multisectoral
interventions. However, the selected areas currently do not benefit from any parenting or early childhood
stimulation activities, so this proposed Project will fill an important gap. Implementing such activities in the
prioritized areas will contribute to improving child development outcomes and complement any other
interventions (e.g., food distribution, water and sanitation interventions, etc.) to ensure optimal child
development. The Project will also prioritize coordination with other stakeholders and institutions to
facilitate effective synergies.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Erika Piber, Social Safeguards Specialist
Dianna M. Pizarro, Social Safeguards Specialist
Mariela Mena, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 This policy is not triggered as impacts to the
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No
                                                                 environment are highly unlikely.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered as the project will not
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No
                                                                 impact natural habitats.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                                 will not finance activities that affect forests.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                                 will not finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered given that there will be
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                 no expected impacts on physical cultural resources.
                                                                 This policy is triggered given that the population in
                                                                 the project intervention areas (Huehuetenango,
                                                                 San Marcos, Totonicapán and Quiché) are diverse
                                                                 in their ethnic and linguistic composition and are
                                                                 considered indigenous for the purpose of this
                                                                 policy. It is expected that Indigenous Population in
                                                                 the Project’s areas will be the primary beneficiaries
                                                                 of this project.
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes
                                                                 In accordance with the requirements of the policy,
                                                                 a social assessment commensurate to the size and
                                                                 impacts of the project was undertaken during the
                                                                 preparation of this project and its findings informed
                                                                 project design.

                                                                 Broad community support for the project was
                                                                 ascertained during a process of free, prior, and
           The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)



                                                                         informed consultation with the affected Indigenous
                                                                         Peoples’ communities and will be further
                                                                         ascertained at the municipal level in accordance
                                                                         with Guatemalan legal requirements during project
                                                                         implementation.

                                                                         An indigenous Peoples Plan was already prepared,
                                                                         consulted and disclosed in country and through
                                                                         Infoshop. The Indigenous Peoples Plan summarizes
                                                                         the findings of the social assessment, the measures
                                                                         undertaken to avoid negative impacts and ensure
                                                                         that the benefits of the project are culturally
                                                                         appropriate, and the consultation arrangements
                                                                         during project preparation and implementation.
                                                                         This policy is not triggered given that the project is
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)          No                     not expected to have any involuntary resettlement
                                                                         impacts.
                                                                         This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                                         will not support the construction or rehabilitation
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                    No
                                                                         of dams nor will support other investments which
                                                                         rely on the services of existing dams.
                                                                         This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                  No                     will not affect international waterways as defined
 (BP 7.50)
                                                                         under the policy.
                                                                         This policy is not triggered given that the Project
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No                     will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                         policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The Project will be carried out in the states of Huehuetenango, San Marcos, Totonicapan and Quiche in the western
      region of Guatemala with diverse ethnic and linguistic indigenous populations and is expected to have a positive
      impact on indigenous children development outcomes (physical, cognitive, socio-emotional, and linguistic skills).

      Due to the particular emphasis on behavioral change implicit in the project development objective, two potential
      adverse effects related to indigenous socio-cultural beliefs, practices and interactions were identified during the social
      assessment: (a) disregard and/or misrecognition of Mayan health care and cultural illness belief systems and diet;
      and (b) inadequate socio-cultural interaction and communication with beneficiaries and communities.

      To ensure existing belief systems and diet are fully taken into account, a Sub-component to map the early stimulation
      practices in participating communities was included in Component 1 of the project, and an investigation of current
      child feeding and caring behaviors in Component 2. Coordination and consultation with grassroots organizations,
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)



  local partners and traditional healers, the establishment of an ethics code for socio-cultural interaction and
  dissemination of project information and activities in a culturally appropriate manner will ensure adequate
  communication with beneficiaries and communities.

  Within the above context, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts are expected. However,
  given that the Project is implemented in areas culturally and socially complex, the indigenous peoples safeguards is
  being triggered in this revised ISDS. Therefore, the safeguards category is being upgraded from C to B. The change
  will not have a practical impact in the implementation of activities since the Project is already considered an
  ‘indigenous’ project; however, it will contribute to ensure a closer monitoring by the designated Safeguards specialist
  in the system.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The expected impacts are improved child development outcomes and community ownership in tracking these
  indicators. There are no indirect and/or long term adverse impacts as a result of future activities expected for this
  project in the areas of intervention.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  No alternatives were deemed necessary to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  ChildFund International USA, the implementing NGO, carried out a Social Assessment (disclosed on October 6, 2014)
  during the preparation of the project to: (a) review the legal and institutional framework applicable to Indigenous
  Peoples, (b) gather baseline information on the demographic, social, cultural, and political characteristics of the
  affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities, (c) identify key project stakeholders and a culturally appropriate process
  for consulting with the Indigenous Peoples at each stage of project preparation and implementation, (d) assess the
  potential social adverse and positive effects of the project, and (e) identify measures necessary to avoid adverse social
  effects. ChildFund International USA carried out several rounds of consultations on their findings, ensured that the
  design of the project was informed with the findings and the feedback gathered at the consultations. The findings of
  the social assessment are included in the Indigenous Peoples Plan.

  The Indigenous People’s Plan has been prepared by the Recipient and establishes project guidelines regarding
  culturally appropriate consultation activities and participation measures to ensure that they respond to local practices
  and beliefs and to ensure high indigenous peoples participation in the project throughout its implementation.

  The Recipient has experience in working with indigenous communities, and the Bank will work with the agency to
  further solidify their capacity to plan and implement the measures needed.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)



                      Project stakeholders include the target beneficiaries (the poorest and vulnerable members of the indigenous
                      communities), as well as indirect beneficiaries, including the recipient communities at large, local leaders, midwives,
                      etc.

                      ChildFund International USA, the implementing NGO, carried out several rounds of consultations with the target
                      beneficiaries of the Project in the northwestern municipalities of Guatemala to clarify their priority needs.
                      Consultations included targeted small-group discussions as well as field visits to health centers, community centers,
                      and directly with families. The NGO has been instrumental in organizing these small group discussions and the field
                      visits. Consultations with target beneficiaries at the municipal level will continue during project implementation.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        Date of submission for disclosure
13-Aug-2014                                                                         14-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                Date of Disclosure
            Guatemala                                                              14-Oct-2014
            Comments
            Given the low risk of the operation, and that steps for the consultation process at the municipal level have already taken
            place, hard copies of the IPP and project paper will be available at the ChildFund office and published on the website.
            Subsequently, a Spanish version of the IPP will be disclosed in country.


       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                        Yes
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                                        Yes
            review the plan?

            If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                                        Yes
            approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



           PDI_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (P145410)



    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                    Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                  Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                    Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                    Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                    Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                    Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Hugo Martin Brousset Chaman


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
