The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Feb-2018| Report No: ISDSR24253




                       Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director:    Paul Noumba Um
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Wendy E. Hughes
                            Task Team Leader:      Joseph Mwelwa Kapika
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation
    P133184
                                                                Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Joseph Mwelwa Kapika                                        Zambia
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    30-May-2013                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE08

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                           Total Financing
    210,000,000.00                                              210,000,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                               40,000,000.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                      105,000,000.00
    Parallel Financing                                                                                65,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                            210,000,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The objectives of this project are to increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity transmission and
    distribution system in the Lusaka area.


    Proposed New PDO
    The objectives of the Project are to increase the capacity and improve the reliability of the electricity transmission
    system in the Lusaka area.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project will be implemented in Lusaka area. The Lusaka Transmission network is supplied by two main
    supply stations, Leopards Hill substation in the East of the city and Lusaka West substation in the West of the
    city. These substations supply the three main bulk supply points (BSP) into Lusaka: Coventry, Roma and
    Waterworks. These further supply 33kV distribution substations throughout the area, which in turn supply
    the 11kV distribution network and ultimately the majority of consumers in the Lusaka area.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Richard Everett, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Mwansa Lukwesa, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                           Triggered               Explanation
                                                                         The Project was classified as a category B project.
                                                                         Current activities being undertaken involve the
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                         rehabilitation and upgrade of existing transmission
                                                                         and distribution networks. The Project involves
                                                                         three Components 1, 2 and 3. However, only
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



                                                                 Component 1 and 2 involve civil works that may
                                                                 pose environmental and social risks. Component 1
                                                                 involves the Rehabilitation of the 132kV and 88kV
                                                                 Transmission Network in Lusaka Area, and
                                                                 Component 2 involves the Rehabilitation of the
                                                                 33kV and 11kV Distribution Network in Lusaka
                                                                 Area. Following the proposed restructuring, the
                                                                 Project will only consist of activities under
                                                                 Components 1 and Component 3 (Technical
                                                                 Assistance and Project Management). Component
                                                                 2 which is solely financed by EIB has been dropped.
                                                                 However, the current arrangement whereby
                                                                 supervision of works by the Owner’s Engineer
                                                                 financed by the Bank also covers the EIB - financed
                                                                 activities will continue until the restructured
                                                                 project closes.

                                                                 The Project is currently being implemented mainly
                                                                 within the built-up area of Lusaka and in already
                                                                 existing transmission line wayleaves (rights of way)
                                                                 with some deviation to a greenfield area in the
                                                                 southern part of Lusaka. Various instruments were
                                                                 developed before commencement of current
                                                                 works on the project namely: Environmental and
                                                                 Social Management Plan (ESMP) which was
                                                                 approved and disclosed, Greenfields Environmental
                                                                 and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an
                                                                 Environmental Project Brief (EPB) for the Roma -
                                                                 Avondale - Ibex - Chawama - Coventry for the
                                                                 132KV lines. The ESIA and EPB for the portion of the
                                                                 project that is being implemented in the greenfield
                                                                 area are pending ZEMA Approval. A Resettlement
                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and has
                                                                 guided the development of 3 Resettlement Action
                                                                 Plans (RAPs), of which two (Lusaka 132 KV Ring RAP
                                                                 and Waterworks RAP) have been approved and
                                                                 implemented while, the third (Greenfield RAP) is
                                                                 pending ZEMA approval.

Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                 The policy on natural habitats was not triggered as
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                                 the project is being implemented in a built-up area.
                                                                 The policy on forests was not triggered as the
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                                 project is being implemented in a built-up area.
           The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



                                                                         The policy on pest management is not triggered as
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                       No                      the project is not financing the direct or indirect use
                                                                         of pesticides.
                                                                         The policy on Physical Cultural Resources was
                                                                         triggered as current civil works involve excavation
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                          activities that which are likely to result in a chance
                                                                         find occurrence. The ESMP incorporated a
                                                                         procedure for chance find management.
                                                                         The policy on indigenous people has not been
                                                                         triggered as the area under project implementation
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)               No
                                                                         does not have indigenous people as defined by the
                                                                         Bank policy.
                                                                         The project may have to acquire land for the
                                                                         extension of existing substations and construction
                                                                         of new substations.
                                                                         A RPF was prepared and it outlines the process for
                                                                         addressing PAP’s. Subsequently three RAPs have
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         Yes
                                                                         been developed and two (Lusaka 132KV Ring RAP
                                                                         and Waterworks RAP) were approved and
                                                                         implemented. The third RAP (Greenfield RAP) is
                                                                         pending ZEMA approval.

                                                                         The policy on dams is not triggered as the project
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
                                                                         will not finance any dams.
                                                                         The policy on international waterways is not
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No                      triggered and the project does not involve activities
 (BP 7.50)
                                                                         requiring the engagement of riparian states.
                                                                         The policy is not triggered as the project is not in a
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                         disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The safeguards categorization of the ongoing Project is Category B, and the proposed changes will neither raise this
      classification nor trigger any new safeguards policies. Consequently, the Project’s Environmental and Social Impact
      Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
      Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that have already been developed
      shall remain applicable.

      Although it is proposed to drop Component 2, the related activities will continue to be implemented, under EIB
      financing, separate from the Bank - financed Project. The current arrangement whereby under Component 3 of the
      project, the Bank finances project supervision that also covers EIB financed activities shall continue. To this effect, a
      joint Bank and EIB implementation support plan shall be agreed upon to cover supervision of the EIB financed
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



       activities until the restructured Bank - financed project closes, following the proposed extension, in February 2021.
       This will allow ZESCO and EIB sufficient time to put in place adequate supervision arrangements for once the Bank –
       financed project closes, through to the completion of the EIB financed activities.

       ZESCO will be expected to inform the Zambia Environmental Management Authority (ZEMA) of the changes to the
       financing arrangements and the impact on the environmental and social safeguards arrangements. The Bank will also
       continue to support ZESCO in the overall strengthening of safeguards capacity. This will contribute towards ensuring
       that the implementation of safeguards instruments continues at the expected level once the Bank’s financing closes.



     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
       There are no indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities envisaged in the project area as
       once the rehabilitation and upgrading activities have been completed, ZESCO will demarcate and secure the areas
       with assets and maintain the Right of Way (ROW).


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
       The Project will reinforce and upgrade existing power transmission infrastructure in Lusaka area. The existing
       wayleaves were found suitable as they have minimal impacts/risks.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       ZESCO prepared an ESIA to identify potential adverse impacts likely to arise from project implementation, and
       proposed mitigation measures. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for sub-projects were also
       prepared and approved by the Bank. ZESCO’s Environmental and Social Analysis Unit (ESU) is well resourced and has
       the capacity to prepare and implement environmental and social safeguards instruments. In addition, the PIU has
       experience in the implementation of Bank financed projects and in August 2017 hired a dedicated Environmental
       Specialist and a Social Affairs Specialist.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Energy, ZESCO, and both the peri-urban and the urban population, as well
       as commercial and industrial enterprises within the Lusaka Division of ZESCO who will benefit from improved
       electricity service provision and access. These parties have been consulted during the scoping meetings in preparation
       for the TORs for the ESIA and also during the stakeholder consultation process during the preparation of the ESIA as
       required by Zambian environmental legislation and World Bank safeguard policies. The Zambia Environmental
       Management Agency (ZEMA) is responsible for reviewing and clearing safeguards instruments prepared for the
       projects, and consultations are ongoing between the Agency and ZESCO officials.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                         The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        11-Feb-2013                                                         18-Mar-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            Zambia                                                             18-Mar-2013
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Date of submission for disclosure
11-Feb-2013                                                                   18-Mar-2013
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          Zambia                                                               18-Mar-2013
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                  Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)



Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       TBD

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    Yes
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                  250



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                    Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                    Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Lusaka Transmission and Distribution Rehabilitation Project (P133184)




III. APPROVALS


                                           Joseph Mwelwa Kapika
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Mirlan Aldayarov

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
