The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jan-2018| Report No: ISDSR24020




                       Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director:    Mark R. Lundell
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Carolina Sanchez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Pierella Paci
                            Task Team Leader:      Javier Eduardo Baez Ramirez
              The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P162621                                                       National Statistics and Data for Development
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Javier Eduardo Baez Ramirez                                   Mozambique
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    06-Jul-2017                                                   Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GPV01


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             92.54
    Total Financing                                                                                                92.54
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  62.00
         IDA Grant                                                                                                 62.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          10.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        10.00
      Other Sources                                                                                                20.54
         UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)                                                 3.80
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



         CANADA, Govt. of                                                                                            6.00
         ITALY, Govt. of (Except for Dev. Coop. Dept. - MOFA)                                                        1.70
         SWEDEN, Govt. of                                                                                            4.60
         NORWAY, Gov. of (except for Ministry of Foreign Affairs)                                                    4.10
         UN Fund for Population Activities                                                                           0.34


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to improve the production and dissemination of quality socioeconomic statistics.
    The project will also support the use of data in evidence-based policy making through improved capacity for spatial
    development planning and aid data management.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1.     The project is structured into four components: (1) INE Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building; (2)
Data Collection, Analysis, and Dissemination; (3) Mainstreaming Spatial Development Planning; and (4) Aid Data
Management for Enhanced Planning, Budgeting, Monitoring and Accountability. The following exposition focuses on the
main activities for each component, including a more in-depth description of the main activities.

Component 1: INE Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Total of US$4.60 million equivalent)

Subcomponent 1.1: NSS Strategy, Coordination, and Quality Assurance (US$0.50 million equivalent)

2.      Mozambique’s NSS Strategic Plan 2013–2017 highlights the need for continued strategic planning and better
coordination and quality assurance in the production of statistics. The project supports the evaluation of the current
NSDS and the production of the strategic plan for statistical development (2020–2024). These two activities provide a
comprehensive and unified framework to identify the priorities for the overall NSS moving forward and set out the
strategies to meet these needs in a more coordinated and efficient manner. Coordination of statistical activities in the
country is also important to avoid redundancies, create synergies, and ensure high-quality standards. INE is the lead
agency with the responsibility of coordinating the NSS and providing technical and methodological guidance. However,
intersectoral coordination is inadequate. This is also in light of the growing demand for statistical information, many of
which rely on routine/administrative data. The project also supports other areas that are important for INE to fulfill its
coordination and quality assurance roles: updating and implementing mechanisms for data production, harmonization,
and quality control; increasing INE’s technical capacity on statistical quality assurance; and increasing communication,
knowledge exchange, and coordination with key actors of the NSS and users of statistics.
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



3.      The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Undertake the final evaluation of the current NSDS and produce the new strategic plan

        (b)   Provide TA to update existing quality standards and manuals for the NSS

        (c)   Strengthen INE’s quality assurance professional services provided to other members of the NSS

        (d)   Introduce support mechanisms such as workshops to facilitate communication, knowledge exchange,
              coordination, and sensitization with actors of the NSS and users of statistics;

        (e)   Support study tours and exchange visits between INE and more advanced NSSs both regionally and
              internationally

Subcomponent 1.2: INE Skills-Development and Technical Capacity (US$1.30 million equivalent)

4.       A skilled workforce is a key element for the development of high-quality statistics and for the sustainability of
the project outcomes. The project invests in updating a staff competence and training needs assessment as well as
implementing a skill enhancement program for staff based on the gaps identified in the needs assessment. This
subcomponent targets skill development in areas that are complementary to technical training inherent to the data
collection and statistical production activities supported by the project. Priority areas identified for training programs,
seminars, and manuals include basic statistical theory; ‘Statistics in Action’ (overview of all phases of a standard survey
such as measurement methods, questionnaire design, interview techniques, data entry and editing, and preparation of
tables and charts); Excel (basic and advanced), management, leadership, and motivation; and quality systems for statistics.

5.       INE’s ENE is expected to be at the center of the activities to implement the skills development and technical
capacity strategy. ENE was created to provide technical training on applied statistics to INE and other actors of the NSS.
However, the few courses currently offered benefit mostly INE’s personnel at headquarters. ENE lacks staff with graduate
degrees in statistics. The proposed project intends to fund a scholarship program (four or five scholarships) to train
competitively selected staff abroad in accredited graduate programs in statistics. The scholarship program covers tuition
fees, stipends, and book fees. The scholarship recipients sign binding contracts to return to INE after the completion of
the degree program to teach at the statistics school for a minimum of four years. If a scholarship recipient leaves
employment with INE or does not complete the four-year requirement, the recipient is required to reimburse INE for the
total scholarship amount. The competitive selection process for scholarship recipients is detailed in the Operations
Manual. With regards to physical infrastructure, ENE has two rooms (housed at INE’s headquarters) with 25 computers to
carry out in-house training activities. Yet, the school needs minor physical renovations and lacks basic furniture and ICT
equipment to enhance the delivery of face-to-face and remote training to provincial offices (ICT investments for ENE are
described in the next subcomponent). INE also plans to build a language lab within ENE to improve the language skills of
its technical staff, many of whom are unable to attend regional workshops and other training activities delivered in English
and French and to interact with international consultants who are not fluent in Portuguese.

6.      The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Update existing staff competence and training needs assessments

        (b)   Develop training plan for staff of INE and the NSS
         The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



        (c)   Train staff in relevant areas of statistics, information management, quality systems for statistics, and
              leadership and motivation

        (d)   Improve the human and physical infrastructure of ENE

        (e)   Develop a language lab at ENE

        (f)   Introduce a scholarship program

Subcomponent 1.3: Investment in ICT (US$1.80 million equivalent)

7.       The availability of timely and quality statistics requires an adequate technical set up to collect, process, and
disseminate data. The project supports ICT infrastructure development at INE along two broad areas. The first of these
areas focuses on ICT capacity building and includes the preparation of the strategic ICT plan. Another aspect of ICT capacity
building to be supported by the project includes training in areas such as management, coordination, and maintenance of
hardware, software, and network; computer programming; and help desk support services. The second area of
engagement finances the needed upgrade of the ICT infrastructure at INE to ensure efficient workflows for data collection,
processing, analysis and storage. This includes investments in the hardware and software to improve data connectivity
and video conferencing between headquarters and the 10 regional offices; strengthening data exchange systems through
a portal to be used by INE and other actors of the NSS, expanding the SIEE to include demographic and social data and
indicators, and developing ICT inventory and support management systems. This subcomponent also supports the ICT
infrastructure required (laptops, videoconferencing, language lab, hardware, and software) for in-house training activities
at ENE.

8.      The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Elaborate INE’s strategic ICT plan

        (b)   Train relevant staff on ICT management, coordination, and maintenance; systems development; and client
              support services

        (c)   Upgrade ICT infrastructure at INE and regional statistics offices

Subcomponent 1.4: INE Project Management (US$1.00 million equivalent)

9.       This subcomponent supports INE’s capacity to plan, manage, and implement the nontechnical aspects of all
project activities under Components 1 and 2. This subcomponent provides financing that enables INE to (a) prepare AWPs
and budgets; (b) carry out all disbursements and any FM and procurement-related activities in accordance with World
Bank-approved procedures; (c) prepare and consolidate periodic progress reports; and (d) monitor and evaluate project
activities. The unit is supported by international consultants, when needed, with a focus on building the capacity of the
unit over the initial phase of the project.

Component 2: Data Collection, Analysis, and Dissemination (Total of US$69.94 million equivalent, of which IDA
US$39.40 million equivalent)

Subcomponent 2.1: Population and Housing Census (Total US$55.54 million equivalent, of which IDA US$25.00 million
equivalent)
           The World Bank                                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



10.     The enumeration of the 2017 Population and Housing Census was carried out as planned during the period of
August 1-15. The post-enumeration survey to assess the coverage of the census was successfully undertaken in the second
half of September 2017. INE released some preliminary results of the census (total population disaggregated across
provinces and by gender) on December 2017. All the completed census questionnaires have been returned to the Data
Processing Center (DPC), a warehouse located near Maputo, the capital city.

11.      There is substantial progress in the processing of the census data. The Government paid an outstanding debt
with Novabase, the firm hired to process the data, for work undertaken in 2017. Final census results will be released in
April 29, 2019. All questionnaires have been digitalized/scanned and 67 percent were verified for character interpretation.
Novabase is expected to finalize its tasks by the end of November. INE will be responsible for the finalization of the data
processing. INE will need additional equipment and technical assistance to successfully finalize the data processing and
avoid further delays. UNFPA and US Census Bureau have hired staff to provide technical assistance on the ground and the
Bank contributed with the purchase of additional computers.

12.      Another challenge is the reimbursement of expenses associated to the census field work. Expenditures of the
field work (enumerators, controllers, guides, operational costs, etc.), were to be reimbursed with project funds given that
project was declared affective only after the census enumeration. Following an audit performed by Tribunal
Administrativo, the WB approved reimbursement of 94 percent of the $10m advanced by the Government. INE will visit
its provincial offices to solve the issues identified during the audit.



Subcomponent 2.2: Welfare Monitoring System (US$11.53 million equivalent)

13.      The current welfare monitoring system in Mozambique collects data every six years, making it difficult to track
the evolution of poverty and other social indicators on a regular basis. The Government’s goal to reduce poverty is
articulated in its PQG, Action Plan for Poverty Reduction, and its long-term vision—the Agenda 2025. To assess progress
against this action plan, INE has conducted four household budgetary surveys (IOFs) in the last two decades (1996/1997,
2002/2003, 2008/2009, and the most recent in 2014/15). Although these surveys produce key poverty and social
indicators, the long time elapsed between them does not allow for more frequent monitoring of these indicators.

14.     Modern statistical systems are expected to update poverty numbers every three years. The project supports the
setup of a welfare monitoring infrastructure by establishing a flexible, robust, and continuous survey system delivering
poverty numbers every three years, in line with international standards.1 The backbone of this system will consist of two
household budget surveys implemented in 2019/20 and 2022/23—the first and fourth year of the project—to produce
updated poverty numbers every three years. Each of the surveys will interview a sample of about 12,000 households over
12 months, nominating representatives at the province and urban/rural levels. The household budget surveys will be used
to update the CPI weights. The sample for the 2019/20 survey will be based on a sampling frame, drawn upon the census
2017. The sample for the 2021 survey will be drawn from the 2017 Population and Housing Census. Seasonality will be
captured by stretching fieldwork over 12 months. The surveys will be implemented using computer-assisted personal
interview systems and will follow the new global World Bank protocols on survey design and comparability. Anonymized
datasets will be made freely available in a micro-data library.




1
 International standards refer to the ‘World Bank Shared Strategy for Household Surveys: Tracking the Twin Goals and Informing Investment and
Policy Decisions’ and ‘Household Surveys at the World Bank: Protocol for Data Collection, Quality Assurance, and Standard Setting ’.
         The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



15.     This subcomponent also supports a technical assessment to uncover the factors driving the under-reporting of
expenditures in existing household welfare surveys. There are concerns that the IOFs may have a structural problem in
capturing consumption, which has been apparently grossly under-reported. This has seriously compromised the potential
for producing accurate estimates of monetary poverty. Another feature of the IOF-2014/15 that further undermined the
use of the data for analysis is the panel aspect of the survey. High attrition rates among respondents in the poorest parts
of the country are adversely affecting the comparability of data. The findings from this technical assessment would lead
to improved data quality for more reliable poverty estimates.

16.      The GoM is also interested in developing a mechanism to complement the standard budget surveys with shorter
ones to measure poverty on a more regular basis. Collecting detailed, high-quality data on household incomes and
expenditures is costly and time consuming and requires strong technical capacity. For that reason, the objective of this
activity is to develop a lighter household survey in 2021 (without including income and expenditure data) to infer poverty
based on household characteristics. At the same time, a shorter multipurpose survey could provide data to monitor other
social and economic indicators. INE developed, in the past, a lighter survey with similar purposes but its design needs to
be revisited to further reduce the length of the questionnaire, revise its geographical coverage, and strengthen its focus
on variables that are strong determinants of household consumption.

17.      There are gaps in technical capacity on poverty data, measurement, and diagnostics. The MEF, with TA from the
University of Copenhagen and UNU-Wider, has the responsibility of producing poverty estimates and analysis. However,
INE expressed an interest and willingness to develop the technical capacity of its own staff to take over this responsibility
and generate these estimates on their own. This would align INE with practices followed in most national statistical
institutions in other parts of the world. The implementation of the two surveys in 2019/20 and 2020/23 will give INE staff
the opportunity to build capacity in generating poverty estimates.

18.     The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Conduct IOF in 2019–2020

        (b)   Conduct IOF in 2022-2023

        (c)   Carry out a technical assessment on underreporting expenditures in IOFs

        (d)   Implement a lighter household survey in 2021 and a high frequency poverty measurement system

Subcomponent 2.3: National Accounts, Consumer Price Indicators, and Economic Statistics (US$2.41 million equivalent)

19. The current system of national accounts and other economic statistics face several constraints that undermine their
coverage and quality and therefore limit their ability to accurately reflect the structure and dynamics of the economy.
The project provides TA for the rebasing and updating of the series as well as for helping close some data gaps to expand
the accounts to additional economic sectors (for example, transportation and construction) and the informal economy
and increasing their frequency and regional disaggregation. Thanks to project support, INE launched in November 2018
the new base year for the national accounts (2014), bringing it up to international standards. INE will update the GDP
series back to 1991 using the new base year. Preliminary results show that the rebasing resulted in a jump in 2017 nominal
GDP figures by 7 percent.

20.    INE is currently developing an online system to capture and analyze integrated economic statistics for
measuring the country’s economic activity. In an effort to increase the quality and frequency of firm-level data and reduce
         The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



the costs of collecting it, INE has been developing a portal called SIEE where firms are required to upload their data online.
The platform automatically runs consistency and validation checks and produces key indicators. Given that some firms still
do not have access to the Internet or prefer to fill out physical questionnaires, the online system will be run in parallel
with the traditional paper-based data collection system to ensure high response rates and the statistical
representativeness of the sample. Operationalizing the SIEE requires extensive training, both internally with staff from
headquarters and the regional offices and externally with the firms.

21.      The data and geographical coverage of the current CPI do not capture price dynamics in key urban markets and
economic sectors. The national CPI currently covers only Maputo, Nampula, and Beira, excluding important urban centers
in other provinces. INE plans to expand the coverage of the CPI to nine of the eleven provinces in the country by regularly
collecting price data in the the cities of Quelimane, Tete, Chimoio, Inhambane, and Xai-xai. In addition, outdated data for
the imputation of house rents and the use of nonconventional units to measure the consumption of several basic goods
constrain the tracking of price changes over time and across regions. INE’s technical capacity on CPI measurement
methodology and analysis also needs to be reinforced.

22.     The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Provide technical support for the rebasing of the national accounts and updating of the series

        (b)   Improve the availability (collection) and quality of economic statistics used for the national accounts

        (c)   Improve the data and geographical coverage of the production of the CPI

Subcomponent 2.4: Data Accessibility (US$0.47 million equivalent)

23.      Open and timely access to anonymized data contributes to transparency, supports evidence-based policy
making, and creates user demand for high-quality statistics. While INE and other actors of the NSS have made efforts to
make data and statistics available to the public, several constraints remain. The Statistics Strategic Plan 2013–2017 noted
that implementation of a publications plan is weak; there is absence of an effective marketing unit for services and
products of the NSS; the multiplicity of databases is not based on a common platform or information architecture; and
measures to fully protect micro-data (that is, data related to individual respondents) against improper disclosure are not
in place. The project will support an update of INE’s current micro-data access and information policies and dissemination
practices. In addition to this, the project will finance TA on statistical data anonymization techniques and solutions for
protecting micro-data against identity and attribute disclosure. These activities are expected to take place by December
2018. With regards to accessing the data, prospective users currently need to make a written request to INE, which can
take a long time to be reviewed. Moreover, information readily accessible online is mostly about aggregate indicators
rather than the actual micro-data. The project will support the development of an online platform to share aggregated
information and micro-data from censuses, surveys and other sources.

24.     The main activities under this subcomponent include the following:

        (a)   Review and update the micro-data access and dissemination policy

        (b)   Carry out TA and training on micro-data anonymization

        (c)   Develop an online micro-data portal to make micro- and aggregated data publicly available.
             The World Bank                                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
             National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



Component 3: Mainstreaming Spatial Development Planning (Total of US$10.00 million equivalent)2

25.      Besides issues that constrain the production of statistics, there are also challenges to mainstreaming the use of
available data for development planning across government agencies. National development planning across different
government levels and sectors can contribute to increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of public policies and programs
in Mozambique. As in many countries, it is particularly challenging for the Government to manage and maximize the
impact of a large, diverse, and geographically spread portfolio of investments. With the absence of adequate cross-sectoral
policy research, planning and portfolio management, there is a high risk of waste, misuse, or under-allocation of public
resources. Lack of cross-sectoral integration and coordination also undermines the impact of investments as each project
is developed and executed without taking into consideration synergies with the investments in other sectors.

26.     Between 2011 and 2015, the GoM—with support from the World Bank3—conceptualized and developed the
PDE. The PDE comprises an advanced multisectoral national GIS, a SDP Unit under the MTC, and an Inter-Ministerial
Coordination Committee. The PDE is intended to foster cross-sectoral SDP by integrating, analyzing, and providing access
to geo-referenced national statistics and sectoral data from national ministries and agencies. The GIS stores an extensive
database and a large catalogue of high-definition satellite images, covering national and sectoral censuses and household
surveys; geographic information (for example, administrative boundaries, hydrology, topography, geology, and so on);
land use; ICT networks; and public infrastructure (such as roads, rails, health, and education facilities), among others. In
the past, statistics, sectoral data, and satellite photos were fragmented and difficult to access as they were produced and
managed by different agencies, using different systems and protocols. The GIS not only creates one point of access for all
relevant spatial data, but also offers sophisticated analytical applications to facilitate cross-sectoral development planning.

                                            Figure 1.1. SDP Platform Capabilities/March 20174
                                      The SDP Cross-Sectoral Institutional Network




2
    The total US$10 million allocated to component three includes an unallocated amount of US$401,000.
3 The World Bank assisted the GoM in implementing the SDP TA Project from 2011 to 2015. The project PDO was to provide financial and technical
assistance to improve national social and economic development planning through the introduction, institutionalization, and mainstreaming of
multisectoral SDP methodologies and practices.
4
    Source: Spatial Development Platform Project Implementation Unit, Ministry of Transport 2017
The World Bank                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)




                               SDP Platform Hardware

       Part Number                         Description          QTY
                       Blade Enclosure - SERVER CHASSI           1
                 HP Suporte-anos Foundation care 24x7 service    1
                                Blade Servers                    3
                                 HP Suporte                      3
                           Switch para Chassi Blade              2
                                 HP Suporte                      2
                                  Tor Switch                     2
                                 HP Suporte                      2
                                 core Switch                     1
                                 HP Suporte                      1
                 Amario e Fontes de Alimentacao-server Rack      1

                               SDP Platform Software
         The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)


                            Product Name                               Version Available   Total
                            Data Interoperability Server                     10.5    1       1
                            Data Interoperability Server                     10.5    1       1
                            ArcGIS Network Analyst for Server                10.5    1       1
                            ArcGIS Network Analyst for Server                10.5    1       1
                            ArcGIS GIS Server Advanced                       10.5    1       1
                            ArcGIS GIS Server Advanced                       10.5    1       1
                            Geostatistical Analyst for ArcGIS Server   10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            Geostatistical Analyst for ArcGIS Server   10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            Data Interoperability Server               10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            Data Interoperability Server               10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            ArcGIS Spatial Analyst for Server          10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            ArcGIS Spatial Analyst for Server          10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            ArcGIS Network Analyst for Server          10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            ArcGIS Network Analyst for Server          10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            ArcGIS for Server Advanced Enterprise      10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            ArcGIS for Server Advanced Enterprise      10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            ArcGIS 3D Analyst for Server               10.1 - 10.4.1 0       1
                            ArcGIS 3D Analyst for Server               10.1 - 10.4.1 1       1
                            SQL Server                                         12    0       1
                            SQL Server                                         12    1       1




27.     While a new SDP system was developed with TA from the World Bank, the system has not been mainstreamed
into other sectors, and it remains to be effectively institutionalized. The Government invested significant resources in
the conceptualization and development of the Inter-Agency National GIS. Even though the GIS was launched by President
Nyusi in October 2016, the SDP TA closed in December 2015. The platform has not yet gained much traction in ministries
and national agencies outside the MTC. Further efforts are required to build capacity in the utilization of the platform
across the main ministries and national and subnational agencies and avoid fragmentation and inefficiencies in current
SDP practices. Different governmental entities and private organizations will continue to develop their own GIS’ in an
uncoordinated manner, wasting resources with multiple licenses and satellite images, and producing data without
common protocols. It is important for the Government to formulate and implement a National SDI Strategy to expand the
capabilities (data, services, and applications) of the GIS; build capacity on spatial development planning across key sectors
(applying spatial planning in policy formulation, program design, planning, monitoring and evaluation); and strengthen
the institutional framework (effective leadership, governance and management) underpinning national geospatial
development planning.

28.      The aim of this component is to (a) enhance SDP capacity across priority national government agencies; (b) ensure
the sustainability and institutionalization of the PDE; and (c) enhance the development of skills in spatial planning in
Mozambique’s public sector. The project finances primarily technical assistance (that is, consultancies), capacity building,
and project management costs. The purchase of GIS equipment, software, and data gathering (high-resolution satellite
imagery and sector data collection) is not the focus of this project. However, the project might provide limited financial
support in these areas, if proven critical in the context of other activities. Several of the statistical products supported in
this project (for instance, the Census 2017, the welfare household surveys, and AidData) are expected to provide key data
to feed the spatial development-planning platform. This component comprises five subcomponents.

Subcomponent 3.1: Cross-Sectoral Institutional Development on Spatial Development Planning (US$4.18 million
equivalent)
         The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



29.       This subcomponent also supports the mainstreaming of the spatial planning and the utilization of the SDP
platform in priority national agencies where demand, ownership and impact have been identified. Several national
agencies need TA to mainstream the use of available spatial data for the formulation of policies, programs, and plans, as
well as for monitoring and evaluation. This component also supports the mainstreaming of the spatial planning and the
utilization of the SDP platform in priority national agencies where demand, ownership, and impact have been identified.
Memorandums of Understanding between the PDE and the agency describe the expected results from the TA, capacity-
building activities, and time frame. Specific activities include (a) mainstreaming of spatial planning in relevant sectoral
policy formulation, development planning, and monitoring and evaluation across the selected national institutions and (b)
developing new tools, applications, and methodologies to integrate spatial data, analysis and planning in the national
planning processes across the selected national institutions. Government agencies that have been preliminarily identified
to benefit from this TA and the specific areas of support include the following:


        (a)   National Agency for Roads (ANE). Project support for ANE would focus on (i) expanding the coverage of
              ANE’s current spatial database, adding unclassified roads (under the responsibility of municipalities and
              districts) to the already existing data on classified roads (under ANE’s responsibility) and (ii) developing an
              application to calculate the Road Accessibility Index.

        (b)   National Statistics Institute (INE). Project support to INE would focus on the production of maps and other
              analytical tools using updated census and household survey data.

        (c)   National Agency for Health (INS). Project support to INS would focus on (i) developing public health
              applications with georeferenced data, including modelling cases of diarrhea, tuberculosis, and malaria,
              identifying hot spots for road accidents, and tracking medical test samples; and (ii) prioritizing the allocation
              of human resources and the expansion of health clinics based on population density, access to transport,
              and epidemiology of diseases.

        (d)   Bank of Mozambique (BoM). Project support to the BoM would focus on helping operationalize the BoM’s
              Financial Inclusion Support Framework by using geo-referenced data on the location of financial providers
              (ranging from brick-and-mortar commercial banks to mobile providers) to determine underserved areas.

        (e)   National Institute for Disaster Management (INGC). Project support for INGC would focus on (i)
              incorporating spatial analysis to enhance INGC’s capacity for risk management and prevention and (ii)
              developing an application to assist INGC authorities in quickly determining the level of resources required
              for disaster recovery and response in the event of catastrophic events.

        (f)   Ministry of Land, Environment, and Rural Development (MITADER). Project support for MITADER would
              focus on (i) producing a national territorial master plan using the analytical tools in the PDE platform and (ii)
              integrating geospatial data from MITADER into the PDE platform to use for territorial planning and
              environmental management purposes.

        (g)   National Institute of Communications and Postal Service (INCM). Project support for the INCM would focus
              on the geo-referencing of mailing addresses across the entire country as this is currently nonexistent.

        (h)   Minister of Economy and Finance (MEF). Project support for the MEF focuses on piloting SDP in the
              Government’s budget, five-year plan and medium-term fiscal scenario.
          The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



        (i)   Ministry of State Administration and Public Function (MAEFP). Project support for using spatial data and
              analytical tools in the formulation of municipal territorial planning instruments (Municipal Urban Structure
              Plans or PEUMs – Plano de Estructura Urbana Municipal, and Partial Urbanization Plan, or PPUs – Plano
              Parcial de Urbanizacao); land management (cadaster and land regularization); and property taxation
              (Imposto Predial Autárquico).

Subcomponent 3.2: National Policy and Institutional Framework of Spatial Development Planning (US$1.99 million
equivalent)

30.     This subcomponent provides technical support to Mozambique’s authorities toward the permanent insertion
of the PDE within the country’s public sector. While the PDE was developed under the MTC, the country still lacks a
National Policy and Institutional Framework to guide, regulate, and ensure common protocols in spatial data and systems
across sectors and government levels. Thus, this component provides technical support to Mozambique’s authorities
toward the permanent insertion of the PDE within the country’s public sector. Specific activities include the following:

        (a)   Formulation and initial implementation of a five- to 10-year national SDI strategy

        (b)   Development of cross-sectoral norms and standards for GIS infrastructure and spatial data (for example,
              data quality standards and validation, database integration, and security)

        (c)   Development and implementation of a Business Plan for the SDP Unit, including governance, management,
              institutional, legal, and financial arrangements to ensure the sustainability of the PDE system in the medium
              and long term;

        (d)   Designing and implementation of a communication strategy and annual plans to enhance awareness of SDP.

31.      This group of activities will be under the oversight of the Inter-Sectoral Ministerial Committee, with representation
from key sectoral agencies under the leadership of the MEF and the MTC. This committee will have two tiers: (a) a technical
level, responsible for building consensus and making formal recommendations regarding the technical aspects underlying
the functioning of the PDE and spatial data standards in general, as well as providing formal recommendations and (b) a
policy level, responsible for overseeing the development and initial steps toward the implementation of national standards
for spatial data, mechanisms to ensure the sustainability of the PDE, a national strategy, and plan for mainstreaming spatial
planning throughout Mozambique’s public sector.

Subcomponent 3.3: Spatial Development Planning Learning (US$0.53 million equivalent)

32.     This subcomponent provides support to the selected academic institutions for the development of high-quality
training programs on spatial planning and analysis. The country lacks people with capacity in the utilization of GIS and
people with capacity to incorporate SDP in policy making, programming, planning, and monitoring and evaluation.
Demand for qualified GIS experts and senior public officers with spatial planning knowledge and skill is expected to grow
substantially with the mainstreaming of the SDP platform across sectors and government levels. This will include the
following:

        (a)   On the supply side, the project will provide support to strengthen the curricula of selected national academic
              institutions (that is, the Faculty of Geography, and Faculty of Architecture and Physical Planning at the
              Eduardo Mondlane University) to develop high-quality (accredited or tailor-made) training programs on
              spatial planning and analysis (including the utilization of the PDE).
         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



        (b)   On the demand side, the project will provide support to key technical, medium career, and senior
              government staff at the selected national institutions to attend training programs of SDP in nationally and
              internationally recognized institutions.

Subcomponent 3.4: GIS Platform Management and Operation Costs (US$1.44 million equivalent)

33.      This subcomponent provides support to the SDP Unit within the MTC, which has the overall responsibility for
operating and managing the interagency GIS. The SDP Unit within the MTC has currently the overall responsible for
managing the national interagency GIS platform. It currently has a team of GIS specialists and IT technicians responsible
for the technical aspects of the GIS infrastructure and data management. The project supports the SDP Unit to manage
and expand the operational capabilities of the GIS platform, including the following:

        (a)   Overall management of the GIS platform and administration of institutional users

        (b)   Technical coordination of the integration of the interagency platform with the other sectoral GIS
              infrastructure

        (c)   Technical oversight for reviewing new geographic data and maps

        (d)   Overall technical support during implementation of MoUs with priority institution

        (e)   Technical support to the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee and the Inter Agency Coordination Group

        (f)   GIS licenses and operational costs

Subcomponent 3.5: SDP Unit Management (US$1.47 million equivalent)

34.    This subcomponent finances the core activities needed to manage Component 3. The SDP Unit has a core team
responsible for managing all activities of Component 3, including the following:

        (a) Overall coordination, planning, and management of Component 3

        (b) Budget planning, FM, disbursement, and reporting

        (c) Procurement planning, coordination of procurement processes, and administration of contracts

        (d) Results Framework planning, monitoring of Component 3 indicators, and coordination of internal evaluation
            for the midterm review and for the ICR.

Component 4: Aid Data Management for Enhanced Planning, Budgeting, and Monitoring (Total of US$2.00 million
equivalent)

35.      Mainstreaming the use of aid data for enhanced planning and budgeting has been a challenge for the GoM.
Tracking data on aid contributions from DPs is in the interest of the Government because it can enable more effective
domestic resource allocation in the national planning and budgeting processes. An AIMS that is integrated into existing
government systems for expenditure reporting and project management can strengthen national institutions and ensure
the efficient use of national development resources. Government planning and budget officers can then review off-budget
         The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



data and combine it with data captured in the budgeting and treasury systems, allowing for greater efficiencies in domestic
and foreign development resource spending.

36.     Aligning and integrating data on aid contributions from DPs is also important as a critical first step to improving
aid effectiveness. Monitoring aid flows through a country’s AIMS is important for three more key reasons:

        (a)   It encourages improved aid cooperation, avoiding duplication of DP efforts and ensuring equitable support
              across sectors and regions.  

        (b)   It allows for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of national development strategies and
              international development agendas, harmonizing DP projects with key policy priorities.

        (c)   It facilitates greater transparency and accountability between governments and DPs, including increased
              oversight by NSAs.


37.    This component is a continuation of support from the World Bank to the GoM to improve its ability to capture,
manage, and use aid data. The World Bank’s Governance Global Practice has been providing non-lending TA to DC since
2015. The culmination of this assistance was a functional and technical assessment of ODAmoz, conducted by the World
Bank and DC in 2016, the recommendations of which were used to design the activities proposed for this project’s
component.

38.       The assessment report found that the primary challenge hampering aid data management in Mozambique is
that ODAmoz does not use national budget classification categories, complicating the integration of aid data with
budget data. Secondary critical challenges include unnecessary complexity (there are currently more than 50 required
fields), lack of flexibility (no updates to reflect annual changes to the country’s Chart of Accounts), and inability to
accommodate multidonor projects and pooled funds (leading to double counting). Communication lines between the GoM
and DPs are also limited, thus excluding the principal source of feedback on usability. These challenges have led to a
negative cycle whereby more data is being lost, or being captured but not shared.

39.     The report recommended several institutional changes, including allocating sufficient staff for directing and
managing ODAmoz, improving communication by building on existing aid coordination mechanisms and collaborating
better with line ministries, and restarting engagement with DPs. Most critically, the report also recommends that the
GoM redesigns ODAmoz in a way such that aid data is recorded in a format that can easily be used in the national planning
and budgeting process; this would entail the new platform being housed within the MEF and closely linked to e-SISTAFE.

40.     The aim of this component is to enhance the GoM’s aid data management for improved planning, budgeting,
and monitoring of overall development spending. This will be achieved through a combination of financial support for
the design and development of a new AIMS, as well as sustained TA and capacity building for producers, managers, and
users of aid data.

41.     The main activities under this component are the following:

        (a)   Development and maintenance of new AIMS. The World Bank and DC’s functional and technical assessment
              clearly identified the need for a new aid data management platform that is directly linked to e-SISTAFE and
              whose data structure uses Mozambique’s Chart of Accounts. A follow-up data mapping and technical and
              data specifications analysis of Mozambique’s national PFM systems was conducted to determine the exact
              manner in which the new system could interface with e-SISTAFE, as well as other PFM systems, and
        The World Bank                                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



              automatically push and pull data. This activity consists of development of a Business Architecture document
              that allows the GoM to understand and optimize the organizational structure, offering a clear vision of the
              present and future state of the processes and resources of aid data management, and how change will be
              achieved. It also involves a Process Architecture document that disaggregates the links of the value chain to
              a level of detail to understand the following aspects: (i) scope of the processes and interdependencies
              between existing PFM processes (including processes flowcharts); (ii) stakeholders and roles within the MEF;
              (iii) inputs required; (iv) products-services generated by the processes; (v) recipients of the products or
              services; and (vi) main concepts of the processes. To fully resolve the functional issues identified in the
              functional and technical assessment, the GoM requires a newly designed AIMS. This activity involves
              procurement of a new system and capacity building of the MEF to ensure that the GoM can manage and
              maintain the system with limited resources. Possibilities include procuring an existing, off-the-shelf AIMS or
              design of a customized AIMS. Table 1.1 highlights the trade-offs of both.

              i)      Consulting services for information technological services
              ii)     Design and development of new AIMS, including ongoing upkeep
              iii)    Acquisition of relevant software and licenses

                             Table 1.1. Procurement of an Off-the-Shelf AIMS Versus Customizing One
             Option                         Licensing                        Hosting                  Capacity Requirement

Commercial off-the-shelf          Vendor owns all the rights to   GoM or vendor-hosted            Negotiation and site
AIMS (based on UNDP long-         the code                                                        administration, as these sites
term agreement); no                                                                               are complex
allowance for modifications
based on specific needs

Customized AIMS—designed          GoM owns source code and        GoM hosting, either in-house    Capacity to design and specify
and built by a vendor to the      rights                          (preferably CEDSIF) or with a   AIMS—require significant aid
GoM’s needs                                                       commercial service provider     management TA



       (b)    Aid data collection, management, and dissemination. TA will be provided to DC on collecting, managing,
              and disseminating aid data for the planning and budgeting process. This will involve consultancy and non-
              consultancy services focusing on training manuals, regular trainings, institutionalizing data sharing, and
              capacity building on data analytics.

              i)      Consulting services to support project coordination and DC’s aid data management
              ii)     Regular trainings and workshops for DPs and PIUs on data
              iii)    Support for relaunching and oversight of AIMS Management Committee

       (c)    Data use for planning, budgeting, monitoring, and accountability. TA will also be provided to the
              Government, DPs, and NSAs on accessing and using aid data for monitoring and holding to account DPs and
              their development projects, with a focus on demand-side capacity building.

              i)      Consulting services to work directly with PFM institutions on using aid data management within
                      existing PFM systems and processes
              ii)     Regular trainings and workshops for MEF PFM institutions
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



                 iii)   Workshops for NSAs on the use of aid data for monitoring and accountability
                 iv)    Analytical work and data visualizations combining external finance data with domestic development
                        resource data

          (d)    Capacity building of DC and the DNPO. Capacity building and training will be provided to staff at MEF
                 Directorates involved in data collection, management, and use. Staff will also be offered skills enhancement
                 activities based on diagnostics determining level of literacy around data management, manipulation,
                 visualization, and analysis.

                 i)     Training in data management, PFM, and information technology
                ii)     Study tours and peer learnings to obtain international good practices (such as from Bangladesh,
                        Colombia, and/or Rwanda)
                iii)    Goods and services and operations costs



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project is national in scope, however, the renovations works proposed in this restructuring as part of
    Component 1.2: "INE Skills Development and Technical Capacity" will take place at the National School of
    Statistics (ENE) in Maputo.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Bruno Alberto Nhancale, Environmental Specialist
    Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe, Environmental Specialist
    Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava, Social Specialist
    Maria Do Socorro Alves Da Cunha, Social Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                           Triggered             Explanation
                                                                        The project restructuring will not cause large scale,
                                                                        significant and/or irreversible impacts since the
                                                                        focus continues to be on capacity building and
                                                                        technical assistance activities. However, the
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No                         addition of physical interventions in subcomponent
                                                                        1.2 "INE Skills Development and Technical
                                                                        Capacity" could potentially generate new
                                                                        risks/impacts. Since the proposed renovation
                                                                        works (i.e. reinforcement of the steel frame,
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



                                                                       concrete coating, replacement of window frames,
                                                                       door knobs, tile and wood floors) are simple in
                                                                       nature, the risks/impacts more likely to arise relate
                                                                       to dust, noise, vibration, waste, etc., which are
                                                                       inherent to any physical interventions. These
                                                                       risks/impacts are negligible, site specific, reversible.
                                                                       Furthermore, best practice procedures and
                                                                       national environmental legislations provisions will
                                                                       be included in the Project Operations Manual to
                                                                       assist the Borrower in managing said risks/impacts.

                                                                       As such, the decision is not to trigger OP/BP 4.01
                                                                       "Environmental Assessment", and to maintain the
                                                                       project's environmental category as "C" and "Low
                                                                       Risk" rate.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                                No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)                No

 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                         No

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                      No

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No

 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)              No

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)        No

 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts have been identified with the proposed restructuring
      of the project. The physical renovation works are minor with negligible environmental impacts. Hence, as a
      precautionary measure, the Client proceeded to commission a report to evaluate the presence of asbestos in the
      facilities that will be renovated with project funds.
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)




      The main findings of the report are as follows:
      1. There is no asbestos in the air. So, as it stands there are no health or environment risks.
      2. There are minimal amounts of asbestos contained in a non-friable material of 3 small water tanks (approx. 500
      liters each) which are in a restricted access area. Moreover, the water thanks material has not suffered any
      noteworthy deterioration, so this poses no risk to health and environment through release of fibers containing
      asbestos to the air or water.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      No potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area have been
      identified.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

      Due to the negligible risks/impacts generated by the renovations works, no project alternatives need to be considered


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      The environmental impacts of the proposed renovations are negligible and thus no such assessment of borrower
      capacity has been undertaken.


 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
      an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      No safeguards related consultations are warranted due to the negligible environmental impacts of the proposed
      renovations.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
 B.    COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                       NA
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                         NA
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            National Statistics and Data for Development (P162621)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       NA
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       NA
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       NA
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Javier Eduardo Baez Ramirez
    Task Team Leader(s)                      Andre Herzog
                                             Carlos Chadreque Penicela Da Maia

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
