The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSR25233




                      Regional Vice President:    Ferid Belhaj
                             Country Director:    Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Guangzhe Chen
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Olivier P. Le Ber
                           Task Team Leader:      Andrew Michael Losos
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P146502                                                     TN-Road Transport Corridors
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Andrew Michael Losos                                        Tunisia
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    14-Jul-2015                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR05


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             231.01
    Total Financing                                                                                                231.01
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 200.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                           30.10
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                         30.10
      Trust Funds                                                                                                     0.91
         MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                                                                            0.91
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objectives of the Project are: (i) to reduce transportation cost and time and improve road safety on select road
    corridors between lagging regions and more developed areas in the territory of Tunisia; and (ii) to strengthen the capacity
    of the Ministry of Equipment, Habitat and Land Planning in road asset management.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project was approved by the Board on July 14, 2015 with an IBRD loan of USD 200 million and a grant from the
MENA MDTF of USD 0.91 million and become effective on December 30, 2015. There is no overdue audit report and all
due legal covenants are complied with. The Legal covenant related to Schedule 2, Section I.C.6: Execution of the Action
Plan concerning legacy resettlement issues is being actively implemented by the client prior to the beginning of works
on plots affected by the Action Plan or adjacent to plots affected by the Action Plan as agreed at negotiations. The lack
of reporting of two fatal accidents led to a temporary suspension of disbursements on 31 October 2018. The Borrower
has promptly fulfilled all actions and provided all information required by the SIRT and conditions for lifting the
suspension, including the carry out of a root cause analysis (RCA) of the two accidents. In light of the satisfaction of the
specified conditions, the Bank lifted the suspension of disbursements on December 25, 2018. The Borrower is
committed to continue to improve health and safety of the workers and roads users. As a result, the ratings on
Implementation Progress have been restored to Satisfactory. The Overall Safeguards and Environmental Assessment is
rated Moderately Satisfactory. All other implementation progress remains satisfactory. The project is in compliance with
all applicable Bank Safeguards policies. As of January 15, 2019, the cumulative disbursements are USD 105.22 million
from the loan (52%) and USD 0.9 million from the grant (99.46%).

Due to savings made during implementation of the TN Road Transport Corridor Project (P146502), this restructuring
proposes to add the rehabilitation of a road of critical importance of about 55km in length, situated in the lagging region
of Tataouine, to the project without requiring additional funds or any change in PDO or safeguards category. This level
two restructuring would add new activities and results indicators to the project. The government proposes to finance a
new road corridor in the governorates of Tataouine and Medenine, linking the city of Tataouine to the A1 highway.

The proposed works will cover mainly:
         (a) Widening 13.5 Km of the National Road N°19;
         (b) Construction of 30 km of a new expressway of 4 lanes;
         (c) Construction of a bypass of the city of Tataouine (around 3.7 Km) to connect the industrial zone to the
             National Road N°19;
         (d) Rehabilitation of 7.3 km of a 2 lanes road to connect Bir Lahmar and Ghomrassen to the new corridor;
         (e) Construction of two bridges for the crossing of Oued Tataouine and Oued Ettaam (around 100 meters long
             each);
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



            (f) Construction of 13 overpasses; and
            (g) Development of 14 roundabouts.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The restructured project will finance another road corridor of 55 km between Medenine and Tataouine. Civil
    works include constructing of new road segments (33,7 Km) as well as widening and upgrading of existing
    road sections when necessary (20,8 km), construction of 2 bridges and improvement of culverts, road
    intersections, traffic signs and implementation of other road safety measures. The project area influence is
    characterized by an arid climate, with an average annual rainfall of 150 to 200 mm with a rudimentary and
    intermittent surface hydrology following stormy rainfall. The project area is par excellence the domain of
    psammophilous vegetation. The predominant use of the land in the project area is pastures. Private
    rangelands are characterized by a system of free and continuous grazing which causes degradation of
    vegetation cover and loss of valuable pastoral species. No specific valuable fauna or flora described in the
    area of the project. The project will be localized in the 2 governorates of Tataouine and Medenine. The most
    part of the road will be located outside urban areas and will pass close to the community of Bir Lahmer in the
    Governorate of Tataouine.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Markus Friedrich Vorpahl, Social Specialist
    Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                        Triggered          Explanation
                                                                  The policy is triggered since adverse environment
                                                                  impacts are likely to occur if constructing,
                                                                  upgrading and/or rehabilitation of selected roads
                                                                  are not properly planned, designed or constructed.
                                                                  Environmental impacts can be related to improper
                                                                  management of issues related to site clearance;
                                                                  construction waste and debris; slope stability, soil
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                  erosion and sediment control; fugitive dust, noise,
                                                                  spills and other emissions; storm water and
                                                                  wastewater       runoffs,   quarries   etc.     The
                                                                  environmental impact of the cutting of economic
                                                                  and non-economic trees that line stretches of the
                                                                  roads will need appropriate mitigation measures.
                                                                  Occupational health and safety issues associated
                                                                  with road construction workers and pedestrians
       The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



                                                 and traffic safety will also need management,
                                                 particularly in urban areas. The contractors will be
                                                 national and the labor will reside locally in existing
                                                 settlements. No labor influx is expected. The new
                                                 road section will be in underused land and existing
                                                 road sections have no known informal users. All
                                                 these impacts are described in ESIA/ESMP who
                                                 were publicly consulted in the two governorates of
                                                 Medenine and Tataouine on June 2018. ESIA/ESMP
                                                 will be disclosed on Borrower website and on
                                                 project specific areas for easy access by all
                                                 stakeholders prior to implementation. The Bank
                                                 will also disclose the ESIA on the external website.
                                                 The ESMPs will be incorporated in designs and
                                                 bidding       documents     of   contractors      and
                                                 implementation documents and will be supervised
                                                 to ensure that due diligence measures are being
                                                 strictly followed.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No    NA
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                 According to the ESIA, there is some natural
                                                 vegetation already degraded by human activities.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes   There is no protected, sensitive or critical habitat
                                                 impacted by the project.

                                                 According to the ESIA. There is no Forests in the
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                 area of the new road section Tataouine-Medenine.
                                                 It is not envisaged to procure or use any pesticides
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                 under the project.
                                                 The project is not expected to impact on physical
                                                 cultural resources. However, chance finds
                                                 procedures will be described in the respective
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No    ESMPs and the ESMF to safeguard any cultural
                                                 resources that may be discovered during works or
                                                 services performed under the project under any of
                                                 its components.
                                                 No Indigenous Peoples as defined under this policy
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                 are affected by or beneficiaries of the project.
                                                 OP/BP 4.12 was triggered for the project during
                                                 preparation. Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have
                                                 been prepared for the upgraded roads under the
                                                 ongoing project, including an Action Plan to deal
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes   properly with legacy issues encountered during
                                                 project design and implementation. In late 2017,
                                                 the RAPs are still under implementation, and civil
                                                 works have only started on sections where land
                                                 issues have been remediated successfully. A
        The World Bank                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



                                                   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been
                                                   functioning and has dealt successfully with several
                                                   grievances submitted.

                                                   The additional road segments between Tataouine
                                                   and Mednine requires the approval by the
                                                   borrower and the Bank of an additional RAP to
                                                   manage the acquisition of the required land. The
                                                   RAP is currently in draft stage and under revision. A
                                                   total of around 240 hectares (ha) must be acquired
                                                   through expropriation, of which around 180 ha are
                                                   private property and the remaining land is state
                                                   land without known users. The expropriation of
                                                   private property will affect 84 known PAPs and 60
                                                   plots for which due to inheritance the exact owners
                                                   are not known at this stage. The RAP contains an
                                                   initial census, entitlement matrix, description of
                                                   compensation standards, gap analysis, GRM, and
                                                   the other elements as required by the policy. The
                                                   RAP took into account alternative alignments to
                                                   ensure land acquisition impacts on livelihoods were
                                                   reduced and physical displacement is excluded, by
                                                   avoiding irrigated and inhabited areas. The impact
                                                   on livelihoods is minor as the land use is restricted
                                                   to non-irrigated seasonal agriculture. No structures
                                                   have been identified and damages to crops will be
                                                   compensated through the RAP.

                                                   The restructuring will not be effective (i.e. no
                                                   activities will be eligible for financing under Part 1.5
                                                   of the Project) until the ESMP and RAP for the
                                                   construction works for the new Tataouine section
                                                   of the Project have been prepared, consulted,
                                                   adopted and disclosed by the Borrower and at the
                                                   Bank, in a manner acceptable to the Bank.

                                                   The project will not finance construction or
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No    rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                   policy.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)          None of the project roads are expected to be across
                                             No
 (BP 7.50)                                         international waterways.
                                                   None of the project roads are expected to be in
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                   disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
          The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)




A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The project has been assigned to environmental Category B, because it will support the rehabilitation and widening
     of 20,8 km existing road within the current right-of-way and with minimal change in existing alignments and
     construction of new 33,7 km section in uninhabited areas and does not contain any specific protected natural
     resources. This is associated with environmental risks which are not significant and have well-defined mitigation
     measures. The main types of potential negative impacts which are likely to occur due to the project implementation
     are:
     - generation of solid and liquid construction wastes;
     - dust, noise and vibration due to the use of construction machinery (construction phase), and due to increased traffic
     flow (operation phase);
     - air pollution by exhaust gases and dust;
     - soil damage due to excavation works and borrowing construction machinery;
     - soil contamination due to accidental spills of fuel and lubricants;
     - water pollution due to improper waste management and accidental fuel and lubricant spills.
     - issues related to occupational safety and pedestrian and traffic safety during the construction phase.
     - removal of trees during the widening of the road
     - incorrect management of quarries and gravel pits

     The above impacts will be minimized or mitigated by the implementation of measures envisaged by the respective
     Environmental and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans and monitored by DGPC.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
     The potential positive impacts include improved traffic flow and congestion mitigation effects (loss of time, reduced
     emissions due to reduced wait-time), ensure better road safety (fewer accidents, safer pedestrian crossings) and
     provide employment opportunities to the local workforce. This improved connectivity will result in improved
     employment opportunities and access and strengthen business revenues due to easier and increased movement of
     people.
     The potential long term impact could include increased traffic movement and associated noise impact, especially
     around habited areas which should be mitigated through the implementation of specific measures, such as sound
     and safety barriers.



3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
     The additional section between Tataouine and Mednine took into account alternative alignments to ensure land
     acquisition impacts on livelihoods were reduced and physical displacement is excluded, by avoiding irrigated and
     inhabited areas.
      The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 The DGPC has undertaken Environmental Impact Assessments of the road and has prepared an Environment and
 Social Impact Assessment/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESIA/ESMP) and RAP.
 The ESIA/ESMP and RAP were consulted with policy level stakeholders and will be disclosed on Borrower website and
 on an external website. In additon, the RAP will be made available on site in offices and headquarters of the DGPC,
 easily accessible to PAPs.

 The ESIA/ESMP has been completed in coordination with the road design team. In addition to the environmental
 mitigation measures, the ESMP include institutional arrangements for supervision, reporting and monitoring and
 training and coordination requirements between the multiple stakeholders. Screening tools for chance finds
 procedures have been included to safeguard any cultural resources that may be discovered.

 The DGPC has hosted site-specific consultations on draft documents (ESIA/ESMP and RAP) with all relevant and
 impacted stakeholders (including communities, land owners and land users, other relevant agencies at national and
 local levels, NGOs etc.) and the comments and feedback have been incorporated in project design and ESIA/ESMP.
 The final safeguard instruments will be disclosed on the Borrower website and on project specific areas for easy access
 by all stakeholders prior to implementation. The Bank will also disclose the ESIA/ESMP and RAP on the external
 website. The ESMP will be incorporated in designs and bidding documents of contractors and implementation
 documents and will be supervised to ensure due diligence measures are being strictly followed.

 Public consultations took place in January 2017 (regional directorates of Medenine and Tataouine) as well as in
 November 2017 in the following places.

    Date                         Place    Attendees
 9 November 2017             Délégation de Bir Lahmar             33 present
 22 November 2017        Délégation de Ghomrassen                 29 present
 24 November 2017            Délégation de Tataouine Nord           7 present

 Public consultation on ESIA/ESMP took place in June 2018 (regional directorate of Medenine and Tataouine)

  Date           Place                    Attendees
 18 June 2018                     Délégation de medenine        8 present
 19 June 2018                     Délégation de medenine sud        23 present
 21 June 2018                 Délégation de Bir Lahmar          21 present
 26 June 2018            Délégation de Ghomrassen           22 present
 26 June 2018                     Délégation de Tataouine Nord              26 present


 The DGPC has successfully implemented the ESMPs and the RAPs for the three exisiting road segments under
 implementation. Legacy issues have been handled according to the action plan that has been prepared in 2016(?) and
 implemented as part of the RAPs. Several complaints, in particular on land acquisition, have been handled by the
 DGPC appropriately. Reporting on and monitoring of safeguards implementation by the client has been satisfactory.
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



       A rigorous Grievance system has been put in place for ongoing feedback from project affected persons, including
       issues related to involuntary resettlement. The GRM is described in the ESIA and the RAP, as well as ESMP for the
       project. Brochures detailing the GRM process will be distributed during the public consultations.

       The MET has had experience working with World Bank safeguards requirements during the former 3 roads
       implementation project. The MET has demonstrated strong ownership in responding to Bank requirements

       The MET will hire full-time environmental and social expertise to support the project team during implementation
       and supervision to ensure compliance with ESMPs and RAPs. Budgetary provision is included in the ESMPs for
       technical training of the Borrower’s project team at both national level and local levels in environmental aspects of
       road design, implementation, monitoring, reporting and maintenance. These measures will build the capacity of the
       MET to manage environmental and social impacts in adherence with international best practice in the future. The
       DGPC’s main staff specialists for environmental and social/resettlement issues during project preparation have been
       assigned to the PIU to handle those issues, and a grievance mechanism is in place providing citizens affected by the
       project with multiple points of contact for their concerns.




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The key project stakeholders are the DGPC, local municipalities, other Government bodies, Project Affected Persons,
       and potential users of the upgraded roads. Their respective roles and responsibilities are clearly spelt out in the ESIA
       and RAP. Local communities and road users are direct beneficiaries of the Project. A wider range of the population of
       Tunisia will benefit in a longer term from the expected increased access to economic and social opportunities as well
       as improved road safety.

       Consultations on the ESIA and RAP were held in January and November 2017 and in June 2018. The key stakeholders
       identified in the ESIA and RAP (including communities, land owners and land users, other relevant agencies at national
       and local levels etc). The comments and feedback are incorporated in the documents and will be disclosed in country
       were invited, and was open to members of the public and included representatives of environmental NGOs. The
       questions and comments raised, The ESIA will be disclosed on the website of the MET.
       The GRM has been designed to handle the social and environmental questions, concerns and complaints related to
       the project. DGPC is responsible for setting up, maintaining and for monitoring the system. A variety of channels will
       be available to project affected people and other stakeholders (in person, via phone, mail and/or email at the local
       and/or central level). A brochure detailing the mechanism has been produced and will be made available to project
       affected people during the public consultations.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                         The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)




        Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
        24-Mar-2015                                                     23-Apr-2015
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Tunisia                                                        23-Apr-2015
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
24-Mar-2015                                                               23-Apr-2015
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
          Tunisia                                                          23-Apr-2015
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                           Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                             Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
        The World Bank                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)



Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                      No
natural habitats?

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures              NA
acceptable to the Bank?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                      Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                         TBD

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                      TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                      Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups        Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                      Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                      Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                      Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)




III. APPROVALS


                                          Andrew Michael Losos
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Kristin Panier

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
