The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 1-May-2019| Report No: ISDSR25124




                       Regional Vice President:    Axel van Trotsenburg
                              Country Director:    Yaye Seynabou Sakho
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Timothy Grant Evans
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Daniel Dulitzky
                            Task Team Leader:      Eleonora Del Valle Cavagnero
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P159213                                                      Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Eleonora Del Valle Cavagnero                                 Guatemala
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    24-Mar-2017                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GHN04


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             109.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                109.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 100.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                     9.00
         Global Financing Facility                                                                                    9.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve selected practices, services and behaviors known to be key
    determinants of chronic malnutrition (with an emphasis on the first 1,000 days of life) in the intervention areas.



.


    PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The proposed Project will finance three Components to be implemented over five years.

Component 1. Providing Inter-sectoral Services to Address Chronic Malnutrition Risk Factors (US$ 81.00 Million – Bank
financing)

This Component will support provision of quality nutrition and health services to mothers and children; promotion of
behavioral change interventions targeted to families and communities; improving access to safe drinking water and
sanitation; and enhancing coordination across sectors. It will finance works for health posts, small water supply and
sanitation systems, and select community centers, as well as equipment, medical and nonmedical supplies, health
promotion activities, technical assistance, studies and training.

Component 2. Moving the Focus towards Results (US$ 14.75 million – Bank financing)

This Component will introduce results-based financing to: (i) promote the use of health services, including timely prenatal
care; (ii) promote behavioral changes, including exclusive breastfeeding during the first six (6) months of life; and (iii)
strengthen the Conditional Cash Transfer Program in the intervention areas.

Component 3. Supporting Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 4 million – Bank financing)

This Component will provide support to the Ministerio de Salud Publica y Asistencia Social (MSPAS), for the carrying out
of Project management, coordination and evaluation. It will finance consulting services including consultants to support
MSPAS, office equipment, training, and operating costs, and an external entity to evaluate achievement of the
Disbursement Linked Indicators.

.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project will finance investments and activities in an estimated 138 municipalities in seven prioritized
    departments. The first phase will include 81 municipalities from Alta Verapaz (17 municipalities),
    Huehuetenango (32 municipalities), Quiché (21 municipalities), and Chiquimula (11 municipalities). The
    second phase, estimated to start during year two of implementation, will include: San Marcos (30
    municipalities), Totonicapán (8 municipalities), and Sololá (19 municipalities). The PHC package will be
    offered simultaneously in all of the seven departments. All of the targeted municipalities have Indigenous
    populations that meet the four criteria of OP/BP 4.10, and four of the seven have the largest percentage of
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



Indigenous populations in the country, i.e., Totonicapán (97.8%), Sololá (96.5%), Alta Verapaz (89.7%), and
Quiché (88.6%). The Indigenous populations of the other beneficiary departments are: Huehuetenango
57.5%, San Marcos 30.3%, and Chiquimula 7.10%. The Social Cultural Assessment documented important
differences between departments and linguistic families in regards to capacity to communicate in native
languages and Spanish, literacy, extreme poverty, fertility rates, and maternal mortality that should be taken
into account when designing project interventions. For example, only 56% of Indigenous women are literate
in Spanish compared to 77.7% of Indigenous men. Women´s education levels and chronic malnutrition
appear to have a strong correlation as 69.3% of illiterate women are chronically malnourished whereas that
rate drops to only 20.1% among women with secondary education. In regards to linguistic and literacy
tendencies, in Alta Verapaz 51.8% of Q’eqchi’ are monolingual in their native language and literacy rates in
Q’eqchi’ are 28.5% whereas only 17.3% of Mam are monolingual (and thus a significant portion also speak
Spanish) and literacy rates in this native language fall to 6.9%. These differences are important to take into
account when designing communications tools and strategies to ensure the most effective use of linguistic
and written materials. It was also found that being Indigenous is not necessarily a determining factor for
fertility rates, as both Alta Verapaz and Chiquimula have fertility rates of 3.9 vs. the 3.7 average for rural
Guatemala, despite the fact that Alta Verapaz is predominantly Indigenous and Chiquimula has a small
Indigenous population.



2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Erin Conner, Environmental Specialist
Dianna M. Pizarro, Social Specialist
Fabiola Maria Lucia Mercado Jaldin, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered           Explanation
                                                                The Project is classified as Category B. The potential
                                                                environmental impacts associated with the type
                                                                and size of works are expected to be relatively
                                                                minor to moderate, and will not involve significant
                                                                impacts, and the potential negative impacts would
                                                                be managed appropriately. An Environmental and
                                                                Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
                                                                prepared to manage the potential associated
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                environmental impacts and risks related to the
                                                                types of works to be financed under Project Sub-
                                                                component 1 (works to rehabilitate and build some
                                                                new health posts (“puestos de salud?) as well as
                                                                rehabilitate a few community centers; medical
                                                                equipment; medical and non-medical supplies;
                                                                technical assistance and training; some equipment
                                                                for secondary level health facilities that would
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



                                                               contribute to build health networks), Sub-
                                                               component 3 (design and implementation of water
                                                               supply and sanitation subprojects in rural
                                                               communities in the prioritized areas), and
                                                               Component 2 (co-finance the Government strategy
                                                               through disbursements linked to eligible
                                                               expenditures and specific results defined in relation
                                                               to results chain (Disbursement-linked Indicators –
                                                               DLI).
                                                               The Project will be highly participatory in nature,
                                                               building on the successes of the Inclusive Health
                                                               Model that supports complementarity between
                                                               traditional and official health systems, intervening
                                                               at individual, family and community levels. The
                                                               ESMF includes a grievance redress mechanism to
                                                               ensure adequate and reiterative information,
                                                               communication channels and a system to address
                                                               complaints in a transparent, efficient, and
                                                               confidential manner. The ESMF also includes
                                                               screening criteria to identify and avoid any
                                                               potential cases of land acquisition that would
                                                               generate involuntary resettlement impacts per
                                                               OP/BP 4.12.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               The Project does not contemplate rehabilitation or
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                  new works in areas of natural habitats or that
                                                               would significantly impact natural habitats.
                                                               The Project will not finance activities in forests or
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                  that could potentially affect forest resources or
                                                               their management.
                                                               The Project will not finance activities involving the
                                                               use of pesticides nor will it promote and is not
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                               expected to lead to an increase in the use of
                                                               pesticides (e.g. for mosquito control).
                                                               Due to Project scope in water and sanitation
                                                               projects in rural areas, there might be a possibility
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                               of chance findings that will be managed via the
                                                               ESMF.
                                                               The Project will finance activities and investments
                                                               that benefit, almost in the majority, Indigenous
                                                               communities that meet the four criteria of OP/BP
                                                               4.10. Given this, the Project is considered an
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes
                                                               Indigenous Peoples project and all requirements of
                                                               this Policy was complied with through Project
                                                               preparation       and     will   continue      during
                                                               implementation, guided by the PAD and Project
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



                                                               Operations Manual. A sociocultural assessment
                                                               was carried out to inform project design that
                                                               included consultation processes at a departmental
                                                               and national level. Based on the results of the
                                                               sociocultural assessment and consultation process,
                                                               specific Project actions and provisions for
                                                               community level participation and to ensure broad
                                                               community support in relevant project decisions
                                                               have been incorporated into the Operations
                                                               Manual.
                                                               The Inclusive Health delivery model works directly
                                                               with communities to diagnose and treat health
                                                               issues and attend to community concerns and
                                                               priorities. The entire Project will engage at the
                                                               community level to increase knowledge and
                                                               awareness among expected beneficiaries and
                                                               promote access to services through the COCODES
                                                               and COMUDES. Project-related grievances will be
                                                               handled in accordance with the GRM outlined in
                                                               the ESMF.
                                                               During Project preparation it was determined that
                                                               no investments will be supported that could
                                                               introduce involuntary resettlement impacts per
                                                               this Policy. The ESMF includes screening criteria to
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No                  avoid the involuntary taking of land and that if
                                                               usage or acquisition rights are attained for health
                                                               posts or WSS infrastructure, these are fully
                                                               voluntary in nature by the individual or community
                                                               granting or transferring the rights.
                                                               The Project will neither support the construction or
                                                               rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                               investments which rely on services of existing
                                                               dams.
                                                               Given the limited amounts of water to be
                                                               abstracted and the localized nature of the sources,
                                                               the Task Team has concluded that while the
                                                               activities financed under project consist of
                                                               additions or alterations of the ongoing scheme,
                                                               they: (i) will not adversely change the quality or
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           Yes                 quantity of water flows to the other riparian; and
(BP 7.50)
                                                               (ii) will not be adversely affected by the other
                                                               riparian possible water use.
                                                               An exception to the riparian notification
                                                               requirement was granted on November 7, 2016, on
                                                               the basis that while the activities financed under
                                                               the Project consists of additions and alterations to
           The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



                                                                         an ongoing scheme, they will not affect point i and
                                                                         ii mentioned above.
                                                                         The Project will not finance activities in disputed
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No
                                                                         areas as defined in the policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Environment: Guatemala’s environmental and health legislation and associated regulatory instruments are quite
      extensive. The government’s capacity to enforce compliance however, is limited. Weak institutional capacity will
      require project support to strengthen implementation.
      The potential environmental impacts associated with the type and size of works are anticipated to be relatively minor
      to moderate, and will not involve significant impacts, and with appropriate standard mitigation measures the
      potential negative impacts would be managed appropriately.

      Social: The majority of the Project’s beneficiaries are Indigenous peoples. Given this, and the fact that the Primary
      Health Care (PHC) Inclusive Health Model to be supported by the Project builds fully on Indigenous health systems
      and community driven models, for the purpose of OP/BP 4.10, the Project is considered an Indigenous Peoples
      Project. The Project does not introduce any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Potential
      social safeguards risks for this Project include the exclusion of Indigenous populations, the delivery of health care
      systems that are culturally insensitive or undermine traditional beliefs and practices, and/or discrimination or poor
      treatment of Indigenous populations in health posts or centers supported by the Project. Whereas historically, all of
      these risks have been present in the delivery of PHC in Guatemala, in the case of this Project, indigenous populations
      will be among the predominant beneficiaries due to the ethnic make-up of the targeted departments. At the same
      time, the Government’s new Strategy to combat Chronic Malnutrition and the proposed PHC model for builds on a
      highly successful intercultural model for health care delivery. This model builds complementarity between traditional
      Indigenous systems and concepts of health and illness and western “official? systems, strengthening and building
      complimentary, mutual understanding and referral systems between official and traditional health service providers.
      In addition, traditional health service providers, such as midwives or "comadronas" and traditional healers and
      specialists are integrated into the health delivery system, fully recognizing their knowledge, importance and role
      within their communities and as service providers.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      Environment: The Project’s anticipated activities are relatively minor and are not expected to have any indirect and/or
      long term impacts. In fact, the Project’s interventions are expected to improve environmental management both of
      health posts and rural water supply and sanitation systems through the application of Guatemala’s extensive
      environmental legislation and regulatory instruments together with other Project supported activities such as
      capacity building, occupational health and safety training and environmental education.

      Social: There are no potential indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the Project area that
      would raise safeguards concerns.
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)




3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Environment: N/A

  Social: The primary Project alternative considered was the extent to which the Inclusive Health Model could be
  escalated and adopted within the Government’s primary health care delivery model. The original proposal for Project
  design was to only include some aspects of the Model due to budgetary limitations and compliment as necessary with
  the IPPF. After further consideration the Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance has decided to escalate the
  full model by reducing costs through eliminating some actors on the extramural teams so that the extramural service
  will be focused solely on the nursing assistants working integrally within the communities and with the traditional
  health service providers to ensure the full application of the Model. With this change it was decided that the Project
  could be considered an Indigenous Peoples Project as it will implement the actions requested and recommended
  through the Sociocultural Assessment and participatory processes. The specific decision points and key issues for
  implementation that were requested through the participatory processes with Indigenous leaders and
  representatives have now been integrated into the Project´s Operations Manual and a separate IPPF or preparation
  of IPPs is not necessary.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environment: The two main government counterparts are the MSPAS and the Ministry of Environment. The first as
  the implementing agency and main recipient of project funds and the second as an important partner in guaranteeing
  compliance with environmental legislation. The Government undertook an extensive review of Guatemala’s
  environmental and health legislation and regulatory instruments as they pertain to the Project. These were found to
  comply with the requisites of the World Bank’s safeguards policies. Health service providers targeted under the
  Project will implement the MSPAS guidelines for health care waste management, storage and disposal system to
  adequately accommodate any additional waste that would occur as a result of the expanded coverage. Where
  sufficient capacity does not exist, the Project will finance activities as needed to ensure adequate disposal of all health
  care waste related to the Project. Equally, the Government will ensure that water supply and sanitation systems
  supported by the Project will be done in accordance with current legislation and Bank policies thus minimizing any
  potential environmental impact. The MSPAS will have a professional responsible for coordinating the environmental
  issues.

  This Project is considered an Indigenous Peoples project as the overwhelming majority of direct beneficiaries are
  Indigenous. A sociocultural assessment (SA) was carried out to inform Project design that included consultation
  processes at a departmental and national level. Based on the results of the SA and consultation process, specific
  Project actions and provisions for community level participation in relevant Project decisions have been incorporated
  into the Operations Manual. MSPAS will hire a social specialist to supervise implementation of these actions and
  provisions, elaborate and implement a culturally appropriate communications strategy, and to ensure any concerns
  or issues that arise during Project implementation at a community level are adequately addressed.

  The SA included: (i) a stakeholder mapping at both the national and departmental levels for the first four participating
  departments; (ii) interviews with key stakeholders at a national, departmental and community level, including
  government actors, NGOs, and Indigenous organizations; (iii) focus groups in 12 municipalities from the four
  departments prioritized under the first phase, with Indigenous leaders - traditional health care providers, youth and
                            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



                       Indigenous women; and (iv) a desk analysis of barriers to access, and both unsuccessful and successful past
                       experiences in reducing chronic malnutrition, infant mortality, maternal mortality, and increasing adoption of family
                       planning methods. The full SA was published on the Bank’s, MSPAS, MIDES,and SESAN’s websites.


                     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                       Key stakeholders include beneficiary communities in the seven departments where the Project will be implemented,
                       local and Indigenous community leaders, health personnel working at health posts and centers, extramural nurse
                       assistants, midwives, and other Mayan healers and specialists. These stakeholders participate and are represented in
                       the Community Development Councils and Municipal Development Councils where key project decisions will be
                       made. The MOP requires a revision of the legitimacy of these Councils and, in cases where Indigenous authorities are
                       not adequately represented, additional measures should be taken to ensure their voice in key Project decisions.

                       Given this restructuring, the ESMF has been revised, as part of the implementation phase, to include MSPAS as
                       implementing agency.

                       The revised ESMF was disclosed on the MSPAS’s and on the World Bank's websites on April 26, 2019.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

       Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
       25-Apr-2019                                                              26-Apr-2019
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                Date of Disclosure
            Guatemala                                                              26-Apr-2019
            Comments
            https://www.mspas.gob.gt/images/files/proyectos/crecersano/PROYECTOCRECERSANO.pdf


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        Date of submission for disclosure
           The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



05-Sep-2016                                                      04-Nov-2016
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Guatemala                                                       27-Oct-2016
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                  Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                      Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                      Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                      Yes
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 PIW_TABLE
 OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)



    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                            No

    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
    has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP                          Yes
    prepared and sent?

    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                           Yes



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


                                             Eleonora Del Valle Cavagnero
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Marco Antonio Aguero

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Christel Vermeersch                       03-May-2019

.
The World Bank                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Crecer Sano: Guatemala Nutrition and Health Project (P159213)
