The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2019| Report No: ISDSR27288




                       Regional Vice President:    Hartwig Schafer
                              Country Director:    Junaid Kamal Ahmad
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Guangzhe Chen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Shomik Raj Mehndiratta
                            Task Team Leader:      Arnab Bandyopadhyay
              The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
    P130339                                                       India Second Kerala State Transport Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Arnab Bandyopadhyay                                           India
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    14-May-2013                                                   Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR06


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             445.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                445.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 216.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          229.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        229.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project's development objective is to improve condition, traffic flow and road safety with a focus on vulnerable road
    users on selected roads in Kerala.


    Proposed New PDO
    To improve condition, traffic flow and road safety with a focus on Vulnerable Road Users on selected roads in Kerala,
    and to enhance resilience to climate change and disaster risk.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The proposed project will be implemented in state of Kerala. The LSGI sub-component (D.2) will be
    implemented across districts severely affected by floods and landslides. These include Wayanad, Thrissur,
    Idukki, Alappuzha, Pathanamthitta, Kottayam, Ernakulam and Palakkad. Environment: Kerala lies between
    8°17'30" and 12°47'40" N latitudes and 74°27'47" and 77°37'12" E longitudes. It is located between the
    Arabian Sea on west and Western Ghats on the east. Total geographical area of the state is about 38,863
    km², which is 1.18% of country's landmass. Kerala’s coast runs some 580 km in length, while the state itself
    varies between 35-120 km in width. Geographically, Kerala has five physiographic zones, namely, high ranges
    with elevation above 600 m, foothill zone between 300-600 m, upland regions between 100-300 m, midland
    between 20-100 m and coastal areas and low lands below an altitude of 20 m. Kerala’s climate is mainly wet
    and maritime tropical, heavily influenced by the seasonal heavy rains brought by the monsoon. As a result,
    Kerala has an average of 120–140 rainy days per year. Kerala receives an average annual rainfall of 3107 mm.
    In summer, most of Kerala is prone to gale-force winds, storm surges, and torrential downpours
    accompanied with cyclones coming off the Indian Ocean. Kerala’s average maximum daily temperature is
    around 37°C while the minimum temperature is 19.8°C. There are 44 rivers in Kerala, all originating in
    Western Ghats. The rivers of Kerala are small, in terms of length, breadth and water discharge. The highlands
    of Kerala experience several types of landslides, of which debris flows are the most common. They are called
    ‘Urul Pottal’ in vernacular. Kerala has 9,400 sq.km of natural forests. Of this, 3213.24 sq.km of forest is under
    protected area network, which includes 5 National Parks, 2 Tiger Reserves, 1 Community Reserve and 17
    Wildlife Sanctuaries. Kerla produces 97% of the national output of black pepper and accounts for 85% of the
    natural rubber in the country. Coconut, tea, coffee, cashew, and spices including cardamom, vanilla,
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



cinnamon and nutmeg are main agricultural products. Social: Out of these eight districts, where LSGD roads
are proposed for coverage under the restructured project, two districts have a high percentage of Schedule
Tribe population. Thus, leading to the applicability of World Bank's OP on Indigenous People. The 3 roads to
be covered by KSTP may have minimal adverse impact on people.



2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Mridula Singh, Social Specialist
Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered            Explanation
                                                               While socio-economic benefits are likely to accrue
                                                               due to road condition, safety, drainage and
                                                               resilience improvement works proposed under the
                                                               restructuring of the project, some adverse impacts
                                                               on bio-physical environment are also likely to occur
                                                               due to reconstruction/widening activities of PWD
                                                               and LSGI roads.
                                                               Based on the information available from the
                                                               screening exercises and field investigations that are
                                                               currently underway to identify the list of proposed
                                                               road sections to be funded under the proposed
                                                               project restructuring, potential environmental
                                                               impacts may include: (a) felling of roadside trees;
                                                               (b) impact on local rivers, drainage channels and
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                   water bodies; (c) possible effect on water resources
                                                               during construction stage; (d) slope failure/stability
                                                               issues; (e) construction related Environment,
                                                               Health, and Safety (EHS) impacts, related to work
                                                               zone safety, occupational health, debris and waste
                                                               disposal, dust generation and potential impacts
                                                               associated with camps, plants and use/operation of
                                                               material sources (including some issues related to
                                                               illegal coastal sand mining); (f) increased noise
                                                               pollution in the post-construction stage; and (g)
                                                               impacts on existing sensitive receptors and road
                                                               side religious/cultural properties, if proper
                                                               avoidance and mitigation measures are not taken
                                                               during design and construction of the proposed
                                                               roads.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



                                                               The exact nature and magnitude of environmental
                                                               impacts will vary in accordance to the location, type
                                                               and magnitude of engineering interventions.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No                  Not Applicable.
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               No road traversing through a designated protected
                                                               area or a critical natural habitat will be included in
                                                               the additional/new works under the restructured
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                               project. This will be ensured through environment
                                                               screening early-on in the project cycle, right after
                                                               identification of the sub-project/s.
                                                               No diversion of forest land is envisaged for the
                                                               proposed works under the restructured project.
                                                               The project may require cutting of road side trees,
                                                               which in some cases are classified as Notified
                                                               Protected Forests (NPFs). This impact will be
                                                               mitigated by compensatory tree plantation, which
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                               would be taken up by the concerned
                                                               Implementation Agency (PWD or LSGD) with
                                                               support from State Forest Department. The EIAs
                                                               (for PWD roads) and DPRs (for LSGD roads) for sub-
                                                               projects will provide requisite details on location,
                                                               number, species, girth size etc.
                                                               OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                               biological/environmental control methods or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                               reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                               envisaged.
                                                               The project may impact cultural/religious
                                                               properties, mainly road side structures. Hence, OP
                                                               4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is being
                                                               triggered for the proposed project restructuring.
                                                               These impacts will be addressed through site
                                                               specific plans as part of EIA/EMP for PWD roads or
                                                               through appropriate avoidance and/or mitigation
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 as part of DPR preparation for LSGI roads.
                                                               Also, since civil works are involved, which will
                                                               include excavation, ‘chance finds’ at work sites is a
                                                               likely impact that will have to be managed by
                                                               incorporating appropriate provisions in the
                                                               bidding/contract documents. Such clauses will be
                                                               integrated in bidding documents for both PWD an
                                                               LSGI roads/sub-projects.
                                                               The project roads implemented by LSGD are
                                                               located in Wayanad District that has highest
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes                 Schedule Tribe population i.e. 18.5% of the total
                                                               tribe followed by Idukki district with 5.3%. Both
                                                               National and state laws on Panchayat Extension to
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



                                                                        Scheduled Area and OP4.10 requires free prior
                                                                        informed consultations with scheduled tribe,
                                                                        irrespective of whether the investment will adverse
                                                                        impact or not. The project has updated the
                                                                        guidelines for social management currently
                                                                        implemented for PMGSY program to address the
                                                                        requirements of the laws and bank's OP to prepare
                                                                        one safeguard document i.e RPF cum TDF .It
                                                                        includes measures to address risks associcated with
                                                                        adverse impacts, labour influx, citizen engagement,
                                                                        grievance management and action plan to address
                                                                        safe mobility for women and children.
                                                                        Lessons from previous projects indicates that land
                                                                        is required for geometric improvement or widening
                                                                        and upgradation. The Government of Kerala, has
                                                                        adopted a state R&R policy, an enhanced R&R
                                                                        package which is offered for negotiated purchase
                                                                        of land following the social impact assessment.
                                                                        Accordingly, land is purchased for the ongoing KSTP
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)          Yes                   II project. The existing RPF has been updated for the
                                                                        roads considered under the proposed restructuring
                                                                        project. The RPF includes measures for labour
                                                                        influx, citizen engagement, grievance management
                                                                        and action plan to address safe mobility for women
                                                                        and children. It will include a road map to carry out
                                                                        the Social Impact Assessment and preparation of
                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                        OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                        there is no construction of new dams or activities
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                    No
                                                                        that are concerned with safe functioning of existing
                                                                        dams.
                                                                        OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                                                        there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                               or around an international waterway that could
                                                  No
 (BP 7.50)                                                              cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                        activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                        waterway.
                                                                        OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No
                                                                        proposed in any disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



Environment Issues/Impacts

From an environment management and safeguards perspective, the following changes under the proposed project
restructuring are of significance: (a) addition of a new component on “Climate and Disaster Resilience Enhancement?
(Component D), which would include reconstruction activities on roads managed by Kerala Public Works Department
(about 75 km) and those under administrative control of Local Self Government Institutions (LSGI) (about 300 km
across various flood affected districts); (b) addition of Kerala Local Self Government Department (LSGD) as one of the
implementing agencies for rebuilding and reconstructing roads under the said new component and; (c) changes in
Sub-Component A2, which originally included upgrading 82 km of a state highway through a Public Private Partnership
(PPP) modified annuity concession to an Engineering-Procurement-Construction (EPC) mode.

While socio-economic benefits are likely to accrue due to road condition, safety, drainage and resilience improvement
works proposed under the restructuring of the project, some adverse impacts on bio-physical environment are also
likely to occur due to reconstruction/widening activities of PWD and LSGI roads. Based on the information available
from the screening exercises and field investigations that are currently underway to identify the list of proposed road
sections to be covered under proposed project restructuring, potential environmental impacts may include: (a) felling
of roadside trees; (b) impact on local rivers, drainage channels and water bodies; (c) possible effect on water resources
during construction stage; (d) slope failure/stability issues; (e) construction related Environment, Health, and Safety
(EHS) impacts, related to work zone safety, occupational health, debris and waste disposal, dust generation and
potential impacts associated with camps, plants and use/operation of material sources (including some issues related
to illegal coastal sand mining); (f) increased noise pollution in the post-construction stage; and (g) impacts on existing
sensitive receptors and road side religious/cultural properties, if proper avoidance and mitigation measures are not
taken during design and construction of the proposed roads. The exact nature and magnitude of environmental
impacts will vary in accordance to the location (terrain and surrounding environmental features), type and magnitude
of engineering interventions.

Some impacts on forests and/or critical natural habitats may also occur on account of proposed interventions if the
environment screening exercises for upfront identification of such issues are not undertaken in time or with proper
vigor. In the eight flood affected districts (some of which will be selected for reconstruction of damaged roads as part
of the new component), there are ecologically sensitive areas like wildlife sanctuaries, national parks, and bio-
reserves. Some road segments in these districts traverse eco sensitive zones and/or pass through reserved forests
areas as well. Therefore, to avoid significant adverse environmental impacts on such features, a key sub-project
selection criterion entails exclusion of roads located within ecological sensitive areas and critical natural habitats. To
minimize potential adverse environmental impacts, roads having available right of way and those with lower
environmental/ecological impacts, will be selected and the inclusion or exclusion of a road will be based on results of
the screening exercise. Therefore, all investments to be covered under the proposed project restructuring (both PWD
and LSGD) will first apply the screening protocol for upfront identification of any significant environmental issues, on
lines agreed with the Bank, which includes use of geo-spatial tools to maintain higher levels of diligence. The list of
proposed road segments, both for PWD and LSGI, will be shared for prior concurrence of the Bank before detailed
sub-project preparation is undertaken by the respective implementation agencies.

With an additional scope of 360 km and uncertainties as road segments/site conditions are not fully known, there is
a likelihood of road side cultural and/or religious structures getting affected apart from the possibility of chance finds
in a culturally rich like Kerala. In view of the above, OP 4.11 is being triggered for the restructured project to account
for requirements related to Physical Cultural Resources. No other environment safeguard policy is being triggered for
the proposed KSTP II restructuring. OP 4.01, which was triggered for the original project, continues to be relevant to
the proposed interventions under restructuring.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)




  On the whole, to avoid/minimize large scale, significant or irreversible impacts due to interventions proposed under
  project restructuring, it has been agreed with Govt. of Kerala that the proposed reconstruction and/or widening work
  of the road corridors will be largely confined to the existing Right of Way (RoW). With application and implementation
  of environment management protocols and procedures, of which screening exercises and management plans are the
  mainstay, adverse impacts can be mitigated to a large extent.

  Social Issues/Impacts

  The proposed roads include approximately 75 km to be built by KSTP and 300 km by LSGD. One of the selection criteria
  for road is availability of Right of Way for upgradation and strengthening of KSTP roads and rehabilitation of LSGI
  roads. Lessons from the past and on-going projects indicates that there may be minimal impact on people may be
  affected for improved geometrics, designs and construction induced impacts. Labour influx during the construction
  period may increase risks related GBV and competing with host community for resources.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Environment

  Road improvement interventions proposed under the restructuring of the project have a potential to restore
  damaged infrastructure and help economic growth (including tourism) that faced a setback on account of
  unprecedented floods in 2018. The devastating floods and landslides caused extensive damage to houses, roads,
  railways, bridges, power supplies, communication networks and other infrastructure. It was the worst disaster in
  nearly a century that ravaged the state, causing floods and landslides in all 14 districts, and affected approximately
  5.4 million people. The proposed project interventions will primarily help in rebuilding and reconstructing the
  damaged road and associated assets with enhanced resilience to the growing impact of climate change.

  Additionally, the project interventions will help in catalyzing the benefits of investments made under the previous
  projects (KSTP I, now closed) and the works undertaken under the original project (on-going with most civil works
  either complete or nearing completion), which have faced comparatively much less damages during the floods of
  2018. It is expected that the improved road conditions will facilitate smoother traffic flows, thereby resulting in
  savings in time and vehicle operating costs. Apart from enhancing road safety, some local drainage, water logging and
  landslide problems will also be resolved.

  However, increased road use may expose the road side communities, specifically vulnerable groups to adversities
  linked to inadequate levels of safety. If not properly designed, improved roads could have safety concerns during the
  operation phase, especially since design speed improvement is a desired outcome of the project.The impact of road
  accidents and its impact on a household level is therefore a risk, which will be factored-into the design,
  implementation and operation of the project.

  There are no potential indirect and/or long-term environmental impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
  project area. With the road improvement, there will be a greater and more regulated flow of traffic but this will not
  have any long-term adverse impacts.

  Social
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



  The improvement of the proposed corridors will have a long-term impact for the community benefitting from greater
  mobility. The rural roads will connect hamlets inhabited by Schedule Caste and Tribes, whereas, the roads within
  Municipalities will connect the wards to the connecting district roads.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Environment

  A “no action alternative? was considered and rejected, as the reconstruction and improvement of roads is an
  important requirement for the people and economy of the state, post the unprecedented floods of 2018 that caused
  heavy damages to lives, properties and infrastructure.

  The selection and prioritization criteria (being formulated) for works to be undertaken under the newly added
  component would consider strategic importance of the road segment, usage of public/bus transport, population
  served, habitation connectivity, extent of flood/geo-hazard impact/vulnerability and potential significant
  environmental impacts. For this, as part of the sub-project preparation process, an environmental screening will be
  conducted (exercise has been initiated for some road segments). This screening will allow identification of key
  environmental issues early-on in the project preparation cycle. To address potential impacts on biodiversity and
  natural habitats, the project’s environment screening mechanism has been designed to identify and avoid impacts on
  critical/ecologically significant natural habitats. This will ensure that no such road traversing through a designated
  protected area or a critical natural habitat is included in the list of works to be selected for funding under the
  restructured project.

  The Environment Management Framework (EMF) prepared/updated to deal with environmental issues requires
  analyzing various alternatives for each sub-project. All civil works to be financed under the proposed project
  restructuring will follow existing alignments and would largely be confined to the available Right of Way. Since the
  operation does not involve construction of green field roads or by-passes, alternative measures to manage adverse
  impacts focus on reducing the impact on road-side features.

  Alternatives will be explored in cases where alignment adjustments are required to avoid and/or minimize impact on
  roadside trees, water bodies, sensitive receptors or other such features that are locally considered important.
  Adjoining land use, drainage, landslides, safety and road geometry will be factored into the design process to create
  optimal and locally conducive improvements.

  Further, engineering design for roads incorporates feedback from the consultations with concerned local community,
  state departments (including officials from Forests/Wildlife, Public Works Department, Local Self Government
  Department), Community Based Organizations and other key stakeholders. The factors to influence the design of road
  improvement works would include tree cutting, road safety aspects, impact on cultural/religious properties, sensitive
  receptors and water sources. During the engineering design process and as part of the environment impact
  assessments, cross-sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives will be explored. Further, alternatives to
  increase resilience and environmental sustainability (such as through bio-engineering and reduction in material
  footprint) will be evaluated. This includes exploring the possibility to use rubber and waste plastic in road
  construction. To the extent possible and depending on relevance to specific site conditions, these will be considered
  in the design of road corridors proposed under restructuring.

  Social
      The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



 The Resettlement Policy Framework for KSTP and Resettlement Policy Framework cum Tribal Development
 Framework will guide designs that will take into account minimization of adverse impacts on people and includes
 mitigations measures to improve the livelihood of the affected people.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 Environment Management and Safeguards

 From an environment management and safeguards perspective, the following changes under the proposed project
 restructuring are of significance: (a) addition of a new component on “Climate and Disaster Resilience Enhancement?
 (Component D), which would include re-building and re-construction activities for PWD (~75 km) and LSGI roads (~300
 km across various flood affected districts); (b) addition of Kerala Local Self Government Department as one of the
 implementing agencies for rebuilding and reconstructing roads under the said new component and; (c) changes in
 Sub-Component A2, which originally included upgrading 82 km state highway through a PPP modified annuity
 concession to an EPC mode.

 The Environment Management Framework (EMF) prepared for the original project continues to be applicable and will
 guide the environment management process, including preparation of sub-project specific instruments/ designs for
 the restructured project as well. It has been updated/revised in March-April 2019 to include the aspects pertaining
 to the additional/new component and associated changes in scope of works and implementation arrangements,
 specifically regarding LSGD. To account for the requirements of OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, which is now
 being triggered for the proposed project restructuring, the procedures related to ‘chance finds’ at work sites and
 avoidance/mitigation measures to deal with any potential likelihood of impact on road side cultural and/or religious
 structures, have been added to the revised Environment Management Framework (April 10, 2019 version). This
 version has been slightly updated in May 2019 with findings from the on-going ground verification exercise, both for
 PWD and LSGI roads.

 While the same approach, similar management instruments and akin implementation arrangements, as agreed and
 executed for the original project, will continue to apply to the new road works to be managed by PWD, the process
 and procedures with regard to environment management for roads to be supervised by LSGD will follow the norms
 and methodology adopted for PMGSY (also financed and supported by the World Bank with an Additional Financing
 operation of USD 500 million currently under execution - same approach has been adopted for similar rural road
 operations in Rajasthan, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh). Similar to PMGSY, the national rural roads program, the LSGD
 works are likely to be confined to existing tracks (in most cases), are similar in nature despite dispersed locations and
 the scale of the operation is fairly limited (smaller lengths involved for an individual road). Therefore, instead of sub-
 project specific assessments and management plan preparation, the procedures for environment management, like
 the national program, will include: (a) screening to identify significant environmental issues, right at the sub-project
 selection stage; (b) application and implementation of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECoPs) that includes use of
 comprehensive assessment/audit checklists at four stages - DPR preparation (integrating site specific
 requirements/mitigation within the design itself and includes transect walk and consultations with community); Pre-
 construction; Construction and Post-construction; and (c) integration of the standard/generic Environment
 Management Plan in the Bidding Document to address construction stage environment, health and safety issues.
 Implementation arrangements, including supervision, monitoring and reporting systems, will be similar to those
 agreed for PWD and used under the original project.

 All investments to be covered under the proposed project restructuring (both PWD and LSGD) will first apply the
 screening protocol for upfront identification of any significant environmental issues, on lines similar to the original
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



project. In the eight flood affected districts, some of which will be selected for reconstruction of damaged roads as
part of the new component, there are ecologically sensitive areas like wildlife sanctuaries, national parks, and
bioreserves. Some road segments in these districts traverse eco sensitive zones and pass through reserved forests
areas as well. Therefore, to avoid significant adverse environmental issues, a key sub-project selection criterion entails
exclusion of roads located within ecological sensitive areas and critical natural habitats. To further minimize potential
adverse environmental impacts, roads having available right of way and those with lower environmental/ecological
impacts, will be selected and the inclusion or exclusion of a road will be based on results of the screening exercise.
Environmental screening exercises for some identified road segments are currently underway.

Sub-project investigations (through sub-project specific EIAs for PWD roads and DPR stage assessment through
application of ECoPs/climate screening checklist for LSGD roads) will also assess potential climate change impacts and
suggest appropriate measures to be incorporated in the sub-project design, as needed in the light of site conditions,
including on the possibilities to reduce damages from floods (such as damage to structures, breach due to missing
drainage arrangements etc.) and landslides. Alternative techniques/material options (such as use of rubber, plastic,
bio-engineering etc.) will also be explored as part of these assessments and promoted based on site conditions.The
replantation measures to compensate tree cutting on either category of roads, will be addressed through Forest
Department, Govt. of Kerala, as has been done for the original project.

Sub-project specific EMPs to minimize and mitigate impacts will be prepared for PWD works and appropriately
integrated into the Bidding Documents. Such EMPs will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approval of the
bid documents. For LSGD works, a generic Environment Management Plan to address typical construction stage
environment, health and safety issues will be reviewed/approved by the Bank while giving concurrence to the Model
Bidding Document.

Overall, the Project Management Team (PMT) and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) of PWD are fully aware and
familiar with the potential environmental impacts and the required mitigation/management measures, as they have
successfully implemented the previous Bank supported project (KSTP I, now closed). In the previous project as well
the on-going project (KSTP II), environment management plans, by and large have been satisfactorily implemented,
albeit with some delays in obtaining forest clearances and slippages in worksite safety management. Apart from these
two areas, there are many good practices and lessons that have been accounted for in the selection, design and
execution of works. The PIUs will be supported by Construction Supervision Consultants who will be providing specific
day-to-day oversight on implementation of EMPs as an integral part of technical supervision of different construction
contracts under the new component D on “Climate and Disaster Resilience Enhancement."

However, the proposed restructuring entails changes in the original project's institutional and implementation
arrangements. A new implementing agency, the Kerala Local Self Government Department (LSGD) - the state’s agency
responsible for local self-government institutions, is being added as one of the implementing agencies for component
D. This agency will be primarily responsible for construction, rehabilitation and/or improvement of the LSGI Roads,
and supporting day-to-day implementation of the LSGI roads sub-component (D.2) as part of the proposed
component D.

To ensure successful implementation and day-to-day management and administration of the LSGI road sub-
component, a Project Management Unit (PMU) headed by a Superintending Engineer (SE) Level Officer [Project
Director] with at least three years of service to retirement has been created at the head office of LSGD in Trivandrum
(state capital). The Project Director will be supported by a team of one Executive Engineer (EE) [Deputy Director], one
Assistant Executive Engineer (AEE) and an Environmental Specialist apart from other specialists. The PMU would also
include staff from PMGSY Rural Roads Development Agency (RRDA) that are conversant with PMGSY procedures and
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



  have been involved in the implementation of the program. The PMU would be supported by Project Implementation
  Units (PIUs) at Division levels for implementation headed by an Executive Engineer who would be responsible for
  overall execution of works. Services of Design and Supervision Consultants will be availed to support LSGD, which
  would include application and implementation of ECoPs (PMGSY guidelines and procedures) for environment
  management. Foe LSGD sub-component, while design would follow the PMGSY framework, implementation would
  follow the existing KSTP II model.

  Furthermore, all LSGD officials (at headquarters and in the field), consultants and contractors will be provided with
  hand-holding support and training in environment management and safeguard requirements, possibly with some
  support from existing consultants working on the original project.

  While the Design and the Supervision Consultants are in the process of being procured and brought on board, in the
  interim, a team of individual consultants from the empaneled consultants of Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund
  Board (KIIFB) would be engaged to support the LSGD engineers in shortlisting and prioritizing 300 km roads. KIIFB has
  already deployed around 30 field engineers for on-ground verification and is recruiting an Environment Expert with
  prior experience of working in KSTP by June 30 2019. The two Implementation Agencies are also making
  environmental capacity as a requirement in the teams of the Design and Supervision Consultants.

  Social

  The state of Kerala has pioneered in developing R&R policy that encompasses a package which is above the
  compensation and benefits laid down in the Right to Fair and Transparent land Acquisition and Resettlement and
  Rehabilitation (RFCTLAR&R) Act, 2013. The KSTP project has Institutionalized the approach of negotiated settlement
  to purchase assets by incorporating it in the state Rules for LAR&R. It provides the necessary legal framework for
  direct purchase of land. District Level Purchase Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of the District
  Collector emerged as a viable institutional arrangement to firm up land value through negotiation with the land
  owners in groups. An updated RPF has been disclosed after consultation in project area. This project has provided an
  opportunity to LSGD to update the guidelines for social management of risks implemented by PMGSY program to
  cover both rural and urban local governments. The revised framework also cover the requirements of the Indigenous
  people laid down in Panchayat (Extension) Scheduled Area Act and Bank's policy 4.10. According to the requirement
  for free, Prior, Informed Consultation (FPIC), consultations in tribal District was carried out on the draft safeguard
  instrument. The community and elected representatives have indicated their support to the project. The existing
  PMGSY guidelines includes the processes and procedures to comply with FPIC during preparation and implementation
  of sub-projects.. The RPF for KSTP and RPF cum TDF for LSGD will guide the preparation of Resettlement action Plan
  for project roads..


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Environment Management and Safeguards

  Stakeholders: From an environmental perspective, the primary stakeholders of the project include: (i) the community
  residing along/close to the road, including farmers/plantation owners; (ii) road-side shop
  owners/vendors/businessmen; (iii) road users; and (iv) trusts/committees of the religious properties and local market
  associations; and (v) workers employed by the Contractors. The secondary stakeholders include local bodies like
  panchayats and municipalities, officials from Public Works Department, LSGD, Forests, Wildlife, Agriculture, Irrigation,
  Utility Departments and representatives from the Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs).
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



Consultations: Stakeholder consultation mechanisms have been and will continue to remain central to the design and
implementation of sub-projects under KSTP II. This includes procedures for dissemination of information and
consultation with communities in particular through various stages of the sub-project cycle. While initial involvement
requires stakeholder participation in planning/designing of road and providing for local level interventions (such as
those related to cultural/religious properties, provision of ramps/access and drainage), implementation phase
requirements encourage feedback for a more participatory monitoring. Guidance on consultations has been laid out
in the Environment Management Framework (EMF) to ensure proper stakeholders consultation at all key stages of
sub-project preparation and implementation. The consultation process is designed such that: (i) affected people are
included in the decision making process; (ii) links between communities and their natural resource base adjacent to
project locations are explored; (iii) public awareness/information sharing on project alternatives and benefits is
promoted and; (iv) views and design solutions are solicited. Over-all, the consultation strategy/process is designed to
enhance positive and avoid/manage negative impacts from the project.

Findings from the consultations will be considered in deciding the alignment/cross sections, drainage facilities,
protection works, safety and other design interventions. Follow-up consultations will also be conducted, as needed
through pre-construction and construction stages of the restructured project. Outputs from this process will be
integrated into the engineering design to the extent possible. Consultations on environmental issues and design
propositions, with both primary and secondary stakeholders will be conducted as part of the EA studies (for PWD
roads) and DPR preparation (for LSGI roads).

The public consultation process so far (during field investigations and at the district level) has indicated that the
people support the proposed project interventions. Some over-all concerns have been highlighted by the people
during field interactions (carried out so far) and these pertain to drainage; flood damage; landslides; accidents;
potential disturbances to religious property, schools and water sources. These will be addressed during design
preparation, to the extent possible, bearing in mind the specific site conditions of the sub-project.

Disclosure: The Environment Management Framework, which has been revised for the restructured project (in April
2019 and thereafter slightly updated towards end of May 2019), has been disclosed on public domain. The revised
EMF and the ECoPs (from PMGSY - AF) has been made available at PWD's and LSGD's offices for reference of
interested individuals/groups and also uploaded on the websites of the concerned implementation agencies (PWD
and LSGD, Govt. of Kerala).

Following the procedure and method adopted for the original project, the other environment management and
safeguard instruments/documents (such as the sub-project specific EIAs and EMPs for PWD roads) will be disclosed
in line with Bank's policy on Disclosure as and when they are ready but prior to bid invitation. The executive summary
of the documents will be translated in vernacular for information and use of key stakeholders and will be placed in
locations accessible to public.

Social

The project will benefit the community and may marginally have adverse impact on select few who form the primary
stakeholders. The draft RPF and RPF-TDF was disclosed in both the languages, English and Malayalam on the LSGD
website. Following which information regarding scheduling the consultation in Idukki district was conveyed to district
tribal extension officer who further contacted the community for consultation scheduled on May 20-30, 2019. The
consultations were presided over by Tribal Extension officer and Members of Local Self Government. More than 100
people participated in the consultations that were organized at the location, majority of the participants were women.
The elected members of the Gram Panchayat willingly offered to support consultations at Tribal settlements after
                       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



                  receiving information on the project. The participants sought clarification on selection of roads, requested for
                  inclusion of other damaged roads, bridges, requested for further information on technical issues, etc. The project
                  team explained that further detailed informationand consultations will be carried out subsequently. The Tribal
                  community expressed their support to the sub-projects.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
        08-Oct-2012                                                       18-Dec-2012
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            India                                                              20-Jun-2019
            Comments
            The Environment Management Framework (EMF) prepared for the original project and the main instrument that guides
            the environment management process, continues to be applicable to KSTP II for the PWD roads. It has been
            “revised/updated? in March/April 2019 to include the aspects pertaining to the additional/new component, associated
            changes in scope of works and implementation arrangements, specifically regarding LSGI roads, for which the approach
            and process used for PMGSY (Rural Roads Project) has been added. The updated/revised document dated April 10, 2019
            will be disclosed through Bank's Operations Portal by June 20, 2019. Other environment management and safeguards
            instruments can be/will be prepared and disclosed once the sub-projects have been identified, prioritized and the
            DPR/design preparation process is initiated.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
24-May-2019                                                                30-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          India                                                                30-Apr-2019
                            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



           Comments
           The RPF and RPF-TDF have been consulted with the community and were disclosed.
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         Date of submission for disclosure
24-May-2019                                                                         30-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure


       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                      Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                        Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                           Yes



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                          Yes

            Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                                        Yes
            impacts on cultural property?



           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                        Yes
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
            review the plan?

            If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
            approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                      Yes
    (as appropriate) been prepared?

    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                      Yes
    review the plan?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Arnab Bandyopadhyay


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Maged Mahmoud Hamed                       14-Jun-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Shomik Raj Mehndiratta                    14-Jun-2019

.
       The World Bank                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)



Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
