The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Nov-2018| Report No: ISDSR26134




                        Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                               Country Director:    Elisabeth Huybens
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Charles Joseph Cormier
                             Task Team Leader:      Alassane Agalassou
              The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity
    P144135
                                                                  Building Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Alassane Agalassou                                            Gabon
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    17-Sep-2015                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE07


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                               60.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                  60.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                      60.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objectives (PDO) are to expand access to water and energy services in targeted rural areas and
    to establishmechanisms to improve sustainability of service provision.




.
         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




 A. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1. The project has the following three components:
     a. Component A: Expansion of access to basic services in rural areas by providing access to electricity
         and water in targeted rural areas (individual and social-public areas), through: (i) rehabilitation and
         construction of rural electrification infrastructure, including installation of solar home systems and
         mini-grid solutions; (ii) construction and installation of wells and water pipes for drinkable water;
         and (iii) provision of goods and equipment required for the purpose.

      b. Component B: Implementation support, supervision and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) by: (i)
         Carrying out a program of activities aimed at ensuring sustainability in the electricity and water
         sector, through capacity building and technical assistance in technical, financial and contractual
         areas to key selected actors. (ii) (a) Development and completion of a master plan for access to
         basic services in the Borrower's rural areas covering, inter alia, rural electrification and water supply
         and related technical options on a village-by-village basis; (b) development of related
         environmental and social impact studies; and (c) provision of engineering expertise for
         implementation support purposes.(iii) Development and implementation of a communication,
         education and awareness program in targeted rural areas, including the implementation of a health
         campaign aimed at raising awareness on the benefits of clean water. (iv) Support to the Borrower
         in the areas of Project coordination, supervision, financial management, procurement, monitoring
         and evaluation, audits, and preparation and supervision of implementation of the Safeguards
         Instruments and preparation of related surveys, including through the provision of Training,
         Operating Costs, goods and services for the required purpose

      c. Component C: Capacity building and sectoral technical assistance by: (i) Strengthening the
         capacity of the MERH, CNEE, ARSEE and private operators to better manage the energy sector by
         developing and implementing a module-based training program (including on-the-job daily training
         and workshops) in the areas of, inter alia, planning, operation and maintenance, and management
         of basic rural services. (ii). Carrying out a program of activities aimed at assisting the MERH in
         strategic decision making and implementation in related sectors through, inter alia: (i) provision of
         technical assistance; (ii) development of electricity and water codes; (iii) update of the national
         electricity transmission and generation master plan; and (iv) the preparation of analytical and sector
         work focused studies.

2. While Components B and C have registered improvement in implementation progress since 2017 when
   the loan agreement was declared effective, the implementation of Component A has not advanced
   notably to comply with the disbursement conditions in the Loan Agreement.

3. The Project was designed to be a cornerstone operation for a larger rural water and electrification program
   to be financed by the Government of Gabon (GoGA) and other donors and to finance broader sector
   analytics to support the GoGA’s efforts to establish sector reforms and sustainability of overall service
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



      provision in the water and energy sectors. As such, the project aims to finance a new model to create a
      market for basic water and energy services in rural areas based on two pillars: (a) delegation of
      responsibility for service provision to specialized O&M operators; and (b) sustainable long-term financing
      combining cost recovery and subsidies. The project’s focus is on villages located outside of the SEEG
      (national Water and Electricity utility) perimeter that are too distant from urban and peri-urban areas to
      be connected to the water and electricity networks in five years’ time starting 2015. Water and electricity
      services will be provided to households and to public buildings (for example, schools, clinics, community
      centers, police stations, and religious buildings) under the Project. Streets lighting will also be supported
      under the Project


B. PROJECT STATUS

 Overall

 4.    Progress towards achievement of PDO has been very slow due to lack of progress in the major
 Component A (Expansion of access to basic services in rural areas) representing 75 percent of the financing
 due to non-compliance with the disbursement conditions of that component. The Loan Agreement
 stipulates that no withdrawal shall be made under Category (1), until and unless the Borrower has: (a)
 recruited the first O&M Operator; and (b) prepared and submitted to the Bank an O&M Financing
 Framework, in form and substance acceptable to the Bank. The Borrower has not recruited an O&M
 operator and has not submitted a satisfactory O&M Financing Framework. The GoGA recently indicated its
 willing to adopt a new and sustainable operation and maintenance mechanism utilizing SEEG (Société d’Eau
 et de electricity du Gabon) as the new operator of rural investment to be done under the project. Overall
 disbursements of the Project are approximately 23.9 percent (US$14million) after two years of
 implementation. Most of the disbursements have occurred in the latter half of FY18.


DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES

 5.       This Restructuring Paper proposes to restructure the Project as follows:

 6.    Original design: The Project was originally designed to finance a new model to create a market for
 basic water and energy services in rural areas based on two pillars: (i) delegation of responsibility for service
 provision to specialized O&M operators; and (ii) sustainable long-term financing combining cost recovery
 and subsidies. The O&M operators were to be competitively selected and were to be in charge of installing
 equipment (including rehabilitation of old systems), carrying out O&M, and recovering payment for service
 in their regional service areas. In addition, the Project’s focus was on villages located outside of the SEEG
 perimeter that are too distant from urban and peri-urban areas to be connected to the water and electricity
 networks.

 7.    This design will be changed under the restructuring. The Project will not delegate responsibility for
 service provision to specialized O&M operators. Going forward, SEEG, will be responsible for O&M of service
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



provision. This includes maintaining assets constructed under component A and applying national tariffs to
the provision of electricity and water services. The Project will finance activities in localities where the SEEG
grid can be extended and decentralized localities that will be managed by SEEG. This means some initial
localities that are too distant from SEEG coverage will be dropped.

8.     Change in sustainability mechanism of assets financed by the project: the new mechanism will be
based on the “centralized? approach through extension of SEEG’s concession to villages that will be
connected through extension of existing networks of SEEG or decentralized electrified localities. Once
connected, these localities are included de facto within the concessionary area and their management is
transferred to the SEEG. The regional Directorate of SEEG will oversee operation and maintenance of rural
localities inclusive of the assets financed under this project through its decentralized departments in each
province of Gabon. These departments are responsible for operation and maintenance of water and
electricity assets and delivery of basic services to customers in urban and rural areas in each province of
Gabon. These departments will be reinforced to better carry out operation and maintenance activities in all
project areas.

9.     Component A: (i) This Component will no longer finance installation of solar home systems since
remote small localities with few people have been dropped under the new design. In addition, since O&M
operators will not be utilized, SEEG will be technically involved in the implementation of these activities. The
new design will adapt the rural electrification model and project areas accordingly by integrating grid
extension electrification under this component, incorporating additional new localities and dropping other
localities in the pilot areas; and (ii) the Component will finance new activity on rehabilitation and extension
of water networks in rural localities operated by SEEG to provide sufficient potable water to the rural
population; and (iii) will support human capital development through financing water points and latrines to
schools and health centers.

10.   Component B: No activity will be dropped.

11. Component C: No activity will be dropped. A new activity will be financed under this Component,
namely, provision of advisory services for the SEEG reforms. This new activity help GoGA to have onboard a
reputable international advisory firm to support SEEG’s reforms.

12. Implementation Arrangements: The institutional arrangements will be revised to include SEEG in the
steering committee of the project and as technical focal point for implementation of activities under
Component A. SEEG will provide technical assistance for network extension activities and mini-grids and
water supply activities. The PIU will continue to be responsible for the Project’s technical and fiduciary
aspects.
13. Safeguards implementation from 2014 to 2018: The borrower prepared an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) for the parent project. The ESMF reviewed and approved by the Bank and
disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s InfoShop on October 9, 2014. The ESMF sets forth guidelines and
procedures for the environmental and social screening process and the preparation of Environmental and
Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for sub-projects/site specific ESIA. As per ESMF requirements, the
environmental and social screening of some subprojects in 44 localities (these localities are no longer
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



    considered in this restructuring) was carried out in December 2017 and ToR for an ESIA submitted for NO
    on January 12, 2018. However, the preparation of these instruments is still pending for the purpose of
    structuring and change of project areas and civil works were not undertaken. Grievance Redress Mechanism
    was elaborated by the PIU and will integrate a communication plan and specific gender and GBV’s
    arrangements to ensure that all stakeholders are actively involved in project’s activities and are fully aware
    of all grievance’s uptake channels and management mechanisms. To bolster implementation of the
    safeguard instruments, the PIU, in July 2018, recruited an Environmental Specialist and a Social development
    Specialist on a full-time basis.
.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Location: Rural Areas and peri-urban areas of the Republic of Gabon. The project exact activities location is
    not known yet.



    2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    FNU Owono Owono, Social Specialist
    Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      The original project was categorized as B and the
                                                                      proposed restructuring will not trigger new
                                                                      safeguards policies, and is therefore categorized as
                                                                      B. Potential environmental and social risks and
                                                                      impacts of the project for the most part are
                                                                      expected to remain minimal, site-specific and
                                                                      manageable to an acceptable level.
                                                                      The Environmental and Social Management
                                                                      Framework (ESMF) has been updated to consider
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                      additional activities and new locations and related
                                                                      environmental and social issues. The ESMF includes
                                                                      standard methods and procedures, and along with
                                                                      appropriate institutional arrangements for
                                                                      screening      projects     activities,   reviewing,
                                                                      implementing, and monitoring specific ESIAs to
                                                                      prevent adverse risks and impacts, as well as
                                                                      cumulative impacts. The updated report was
                                                                      disclosed in country and at the Bank’s Imagebank
                                                                      on May 16, 2019.
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



                                                                  This project will develop a master plan for access
                                                                 to basic services in the Borrower’s rural areas
                                                                 covering, inter alia, rural electrification and water
                                                                 supply. The envisioned Master plan is likely to have
                                                                 environmental and social impacts when
                                                                 implemented through future programs or projects.
                                                                 Terms of References for the master plan for access
                                                                 to basic services           will then incorporate
                                                                 environmental and social considerations. There will
                                                                 be an agreement/agreed ToRs with the client on
                                                                 the need and process to incorporate environmental
                                                                 and social considerations into the master plan
                                                                 development process.

                                                                 Once the location and scope of the investments to
                                                                 be financed under component 1 will be decided by
                                                                 the Government of Gabon, as needed, RAPs will be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed to the Bank's satisfaction,
                                                                 and payment of eventual compensation (to be
                                                                 financed by the Government) completed prior to
                                                                 commencement of any works.


Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                 No risks and impacts on natural habitats are not
                                                                 anticipated. There will be no (in) direct degradation
                                                                 or loss of natural habitats (whether in a park or
                                                                 not), because targeted areas under the
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                    restructured Project are not located in national
                                                                 parks.



                                                                 They are not anticipated risks and impacts on
                                                                 forests because this project does not entail the
                                                                 construction of High voltage transmission lines ,
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                    which require largest Right of Way width .The
                                                                 restructured Project will not finance activities in
                                                                 areas designated as Forests.


Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                    This project will not involve pest management.
                                                                 This policy is triggered as the Component 1 of the
                                                                 project will support the construction of wells and
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                                 water pipes to scale up access to drinkable water.
                                                                 Holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



                                                                 forests, etc. may be affected. Activities will involve
                                                                 excavations and earth movement. The ESMF has
                                                                 included clear procedures that will be required for
                                                                 identification, protection of cultural property from
                                                                 theft, and treatment of discovered artifacts, and
                                                                 that will be included included in standard bidding
                                                                 documents. It also provides procedures for
                                                                 handling      with     “chance      finds?      during
                                                                 implementation project activities
                                                                 This policy was triggered as it is known that Baka
                                                                 are settled in Gabon in general and some may be in
                                                                 the project area. Since the exact location of the
                                                                 activities is not yet defined, the borrower has
                                                                 prepared an Indigenous People Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF) for the original project that has
                                                                 been updated and will guide the project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes
                                                                 implementation in the areas that the screening
                                                                 process will reveal Indigenous People Presence.
                                                                 The updated IPPF was disclosed in country and at
                                                                 Imagebank on May16, 2019.



                                                                 The Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered as
                                                                 some households may be in the vicinity of lines to
                                                                 be constructed and land may need to be acquired
                                                                 that results in involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                 restrictions of access to livelihoods and resources.

                                                                 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                 prepared and disclosed in-country on October 9,
                                                                 2014 and at the Bank’s InfoShop on October 10,
                                                                 2014. An updated report was disclosed in country
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes                   on May16,2019 and at the Bank’s Imagebank on
                                                                 May 16, 2019.

                                                                 Once the location and scope of the investments to
                                                                 be financed under component 1 will be decided by
                                                                 the Government of Gabon, as needed, RAPs will be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed to the Bank's satisfaction,
                                                                 and payment of eventual compensation (to be
                                                                 financed by the Government) completed prior to
                                                                 commencement of any works.

                                                                 This project does not involve the construction of
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                                 new or rehabilitation or use of existing dams.
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No                     Activities do not affect international waterways
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     Activities will not be implemented in disputed areas
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The potential environmental and social impacts of the infrastructure investments under the proposed Project are
      expected to be generally minimal. Localized impacts may occur, thus requiring appropriate mitigation. In light of
      envisioned Project activities, there are two Environmental World Bank Safeguard policies applicable to this operation:
      Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Physical Cultural Heritage (OP. 4.11).
      Two social safeguards policies are triggered for the project and will guide the implementation of the project:
      Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
      The ESMF prepared by the client identifies social and environmental impacts that are likely expected during the works
      and exploitation phases. The most likely are the following:
      Social impacts :
      •    social conflicts related to inadequate sites choice;
      •    disruption of the free movement of people;
      •    Disruption of socio-economic activities;
      •    Risk of social conflicts due to non-local access to jobs;
      •    Risk of loss of private land;
      •    Spread of the SIT/HIV/AIDS;
      •    Risk of involuntary resettlements and loss of socio-economic assets;
      •    Risk of accidents in work;
      •    risk of injury (electrocution);
      •    risk of labor influx
      •    risk of Gender Based Violence ( GVB

      Environmental impacts :
      •    disturbance and degradation of natural habitats (forests)
      •    Trees cutting along the transmission lines;
      •    risk of local soil erosion.




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      The project activities are not anticipating long term and large scale indirect impacts. The most likely indirect impact
      that can be anticipated is the SIT/HIV/AIDS spreading. The people that are contaminated could spread the disease.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



  The access to rural electrification and rural water infrastructures remain very weak (15% and 39% respectively) with
  regard of the Government set specific quantitative targets to be reached by 2025 (80% access for both rural
  electrification and rural water infrastructure). As the project intends to contribute to reach the government target,
  no project alternatives exist.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To address safeguards issues the borrower has prepared three safeguards key instruments that will guide the project
  implementation:
  1- the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019.
  The ESMF prescribes project arrangements for the preparation, review, approval and implementation of the activities
  that will be financed under the project.
  2- an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) which was approved and disclosed on October 9, 2014. The
  IPPF was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019. The IPPF provides information on the location of Indigenous people
  in areas likely to be affected by the project. The IPPF provides information to "judge the positive and negative impacts
  of the project on Indigenous Populations?
  3- A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which was approved and disclosed both in Country and the Bank’s
  Infoshop was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019 . The RPF identifies principles to be followed in the event of
  temporary land acquisition, the damage or removal of assets such as crops and trees, and the acquisition of land.
  4-A Grievance Redress Mechanism was elaborated by the PIU and will integrate a communication plan and specific
  gender and GBV’s arrangements to ensure that all stakeholders are actively involved in project’s activities and are
  fully aware of all grievance’s uptake channels and management mechanisms.

  The Borrower has also organized an extensive public consultation during the whole safeguards instruments
  preparation process and the consultation will continue throughout project implementation.

  The Implementing Agency of the project has already implemented World Bank projects. The structure has an
  acceptable capacity to implement world bank safeguards policies. In addition, it was agreed that for this project,
  environmental and social daily implementation of the project will be carried out by one (01) an Environmental
  Specialist recruited and One (01) Social Development Specialist who will be recruited by the Project Coordination
  Unit of the project, while the whole environmental and social issues will be supervised by the General Directorate of
  Environment and Protection of Nature none as «Direction Générale de l’Environnement et de la Protection de la
  Nature (DGEPN)». (DGEPN) will receive all relevant support from CNTIPPEE(PIU) to ensure satisfactory supervision
  of social and environmental issues of the project.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders that will be part of the project are those who will be located in the five provinces that expect to
  host the project activities (Estuaire, Moyen-Ogoué, Ngounié, Nyanga, Ogoué Ivindo). This includes :
  •    Persons affected by loss of assets ;
  •    Local collectivities ;
  •    Local and traditional authorities ;
  •    Local Organizations ;
  •    Local Associations ;
  •    Local public administrations ;
  •    National and international organizations ;
                         The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



                     •   National and International NGOs.
                     The Borrower has already organized an extensive public consultation during the whole safeguards instruments
                     preparation process and the consultation will continue throughout project implementation.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        16-May-2019                                                         16-May-2019
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            Gabon                                                              16-May-2019
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
16-May-2019                                                                  16-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          Gabon                                                                16-May-2019
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
16-May-2019                                                      16-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Gabon                                                           16-May-2019
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                     Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                 Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                     Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                     Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                     Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                     Yes
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 IR_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



    OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                      Yes
    (as appropriate) been prepared?

    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                      Yes
    review the plan?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Alassane Agalassou


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Hanneke Van Tilburg                       20-May-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Charles Joseph Cormier                    20-May-2019

.
The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)
