The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Sep-2018| Report No: ISDSR25661




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Francis Ghesquiere
                            Task Team Leader:      Xueman Wang
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an
    P133456
                                                                Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Xueman Wang                                                 China
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    16-Mar-2015                                                 Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU14


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             203.31
    Total Financing                                                                                                203.31
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 100.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          103.31
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        103.31


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The&nbsp;Project Development Objective is to improve Linshui County and Qianfeng District infrastructure and
    investment support services.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Project includes four components to achieve the PDO: (1) technical assistance to strengthen the Linshui and
Qianfeng’s capacity for providing investment service; (2) investment in roads and waste water treatment plant, and
training for vocational school to improve infrastructure in Linshui; (3) investment in Qiangfeng in roads, stormwater
drainage and associated sewer pipelines, landscaping along the Luxi river to improve infrastructure and livability of the
district; and (4) project management and capacity building. The proposed restructuring will add four new project
activities to enhance the PDO, which includes:
Linshui: (i) rehabilitation of about 6.32 km of existing road in Linshui ETDZ, completed with underground separate
sewerage networks; and (ii) construction of the Linshui vocational School (Linshui-ETDZ Campus), 40,194 m2
Qiangfeng: (i) Embankment works along 1.56 km of the Luxi River (upstream section); and (ii) construction of Xiejiawan
Park, 166,400 m2.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Guang’an City is located in southeast Sichuan, bordering Chongqing Municipality in the east and south. It
    belongs to the sub-tropical humid monsoon zone with ample precipitation. Annual average temperature is
    16-18 degrees Celsius. Main landforms include low hills and river valleys. Qujiang River, a secondary tributary
    of Yangtze River, crosses Guang’an City in its middle along a north-east to south-west direction. The central
    city of Guang’an (Guang’an District) is located on the west of the Qujiang River. Qianfeng County is located
    between the Qujiang River and Huaying Mountain, while Linshui County is located between Huaying
    Mountain and Tongluo Mountain. Qianfeng County Town is about 17 km away from central Guang’an City. It
    is planned as a secondary urban center of Guang’an City. A 47km long Luxi River crosses Qianfeng County
    Town from northeast to southwest and eventually joins the Quajing River. Except the existing built-up areas,
    land use in the county town is predominantly farmland. Currently the county town has a built-up area of
    about 6.15km²; industrial and residential areas account for around 50 percent each. Qianfeng's industrial
    park is in the south of the town. According to the Qianfeng New Town Regulatory Planning which was being
    prepared at the time of project appraisal (September 2014), the planned Qianfeng New Town will cover an
       The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



area of 16.49km² by 2030. Monitoring results available show the ambient environmental quality in Qianfeng
County Town overall complies with applicable standards, except noise levels at night time, due to its
closeness to an existing railway line. Linshui County town is about 38km away from central Guang’an City.
There are several rivers in the project area. The project will support construction of wastewater interceptors
along the Shiba River, while another Bajiao River will be the receiving water body for treated effluent from
the project supported No.3 wastewater treatment plant. The Shiba River crosses the middle of Linshui
County Town from west to east. Lingbaoshan Stone Carving and Bridge Relics site, a municipal level Culture
Relics Protection Unit, is located at the middle reaches of the Shiba river. Linshui County Town currently has
a built-up area of 18.12 km², including urban and residential area (11.12km²) and industrial area (7km²).
Linshui County Town’s industrial area is located to the south of its urban core and currently has about 60
enterprises. According to the urban master plan of Linshui County Town, by 2030 the town will cover an area
of 28.3km². Monitoring results available shows ambient environmental quality in Qianfeng County Town
overall complied with applicable standards. The population of Qianfeng District and Linshui County Town and
surrounding areas is still predominantly rural. Over the next 10 – 15 years, urbanization in these areas is
expected to result from rural to urban migration. Urban-industrial expansion is required to ensure the
necessary jobs, housing and urban services can be created in these towns to absorb and provide good living
conditions for rural migrant workers. However, along with the urban-industrial expansion process, land use
change and industrial development will have a potential impact on local and regional environmental quality
and resources. Also, since most of the rural residents in urban-expansion areas would lose land permanently,
it will be a challenge for them to generate and secure their family income unless appropriate measures are
taken. To address the potential risks, a comprehensive assessment of direct, indirect and cumulative impacts
is required as well as well-designed mitigation and public communication plans to ensure environmental and
social considerations are integrated into planning processes and development decisions.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Shuang Zhou, Social Specialist
Xiaodan Huang, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered           Explanation
                                                              OP4.01 is triggered for the new project activities.
                                                              EIA and EMP have been prepared to address
                                                              anticipated environmental and social impacts.
                                                              Information disclosure and public consultation
                                                              conducted per OP4.01.
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                              Similar to earlier implemented subprojects,
                                                              anticipated impacts are generally not significant
                                                              and manageable, including: 1) soil erosion,
                                                              vegetation clearance and disturbance and surface
                                                              water/river pollution due to earthworks; (b) other
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



                                                              construction impacts and social disturbance
                                                              associated with wastewater, noise, dust and solid
                                                              waste; and (c) operational impacts such as noise
                                                              and dust associated with road transportation. The
                                                              new sub-projects included in the restructured
                                                              project are thus of a category B nature; however,
                                                              the project remains a Category A project because of
                                                              the ongoing investments of the project.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              The project area of influence is predominantly
                                                              urban, industrial and agricultural, and does not
                                                              include any critical natural habitats as defined in
                                                              OP4.04. The policy is triggered because both
                                                              negative and positive impacts are anticipated
                                                              during the proposed river rehabilitation.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                              The project will have impacts on existing green
                                                              areas and surface water/rivers, such as clearance of
                                                              vegetation and loss of farmland, and pollution of
                                                              rivers during construction mainly. Relevant
                                                              assessment and necessary measures to address
                                                              potential ecological impacts have been covered by
                                                              the EIAs and EMPs.
                                                              There are no natural forests or plantation forests in
                                                              the project area of influence. Thus the project will
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                              not have impacts on the health or quality of any
                                                              forests. The policy is not triggered.
                                                              The project is not anticipated to result in
                                                              procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                 equipment, or introduce new pest management
                                                              practices, or lead to increased pesticide use.
                                                              Therefore the policy is not triggered.
                                                              The new project activities involve no Physical
                                                              Cultural Resources. However, following the original
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                              practice under the Project, chance-find procedure
                                                              has been included in the EMPs.
                                                              The new added project activities for restructuring
                                                              located in Linshui County and Qianfeng District of
                                                              Guangan which is located in the same area of
                                                              current project activities. As concluded in the
                                                              project appraisal stage there is not any community
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                              of a Chinese minority identified by the Chinese
                                                              government in the project area, only Han
                                                              populations reside in those engaged villages. Han
                                                              populations do not fall into the Bank ethnic
                                                              minority definition. Thus, OP 4.10 is not triggered.
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



                                                              The restructuring changes triggers the Involuntary
                                                              Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 due to additional land
                                                              acquisition for the project activity of Linshui
                                                              Vocational School construction (Linshui-ETDZ
                                                              Campus). The Linshui Vocational School involved
                                                              additional land acquisition of 70mu collectively
                                                              owned land and physical displacement of
                                                              residential houses in one village. The total affected
                                                              number for land acquisition is 406 people of 134
                                                              households and for physical displacement is 187
                                                              people of 62 households. A Resettlement Action
                                                              Plan was prepared by the client in both English and
                                                              Chinese based on the requirements of Bank
                                                              OP/BP4.12 and public disclosed locally. For the
                                                              project activities of rehabilitation of roads in
                                                              Linshui, it will be conducted on the existing roads
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                              and will not involve any additional land acquisition
                                                              and physical displacement. The potential
                                                              construction impacts will be developed with
                                                              mitigation measures and considered into the
                                                              project ESMP.

                                                              The project activities of rehabilitation of river and
                                                              construction of park in Qianfeng District will involve
                                                              land use of 98mu and 166mu state owned land. The
                                                              land acquisition of 166mu for park construction has
                                                              been completed in 2014. The land acquisition of
                                                              98mu for rive rehabilitation has been completed in
                                                              2014, 2016 and 2017. A Due Diligence Report was
                                                              prepared for these two project components where
                                                              land acquisition is already completed.

                                                              The policy is triggered for the new park subproject
                                                              in Qianfeng since the Xiejiawan park is proposed
                                                              around an existing small dam (10.8m high with a
                                                              total storage capacity of 450,400m3). Dam safety
                                                              assessment was conducted during the EIA process
                                                              by an independent dam specialist locally hired and
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              Yes
                                                              the recommendations have been made to improve
                                                              the downstream drainage and to increase
                                                              monitoring equipment and communication devices
                                                              for safety management. Relevant measures and
                                                              budget have been incorporated into the subproject
                                                              EMPs.
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                      The project will not involve any international
                                           No
(BP 7.50)                                                     waters. This policy is not triggered.
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



                                                                         The project is not located in any disputed areas.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                         This policy is not triggered.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The Project originally includes 4 Components. For the restructuring changes, it includes dropping Binghe North Road
      in Component 3 (Qiangfeng District Town); two new sub-projects each will be added to the existing components 2
      and 3, including road upgrading and construction of training facility in Linshui County; extension of riverside upgrading
      and creation of a park centered around an existing small reservoir in Qianfeng District, and the other Project activities
      remains unchanged.

      Environmental

      During the implementation of original project, the Bank team has conducted regular supervision missions to oversee
      the environmental performance of the Project and the PMO has engaged an external environmental monitoring
      consultant with timely submission of semi-annual environmental monitoring reports to the Bank. The overall EMP
      implementation performance for the Project is rated satisfactory based on the findings of Bank missions and EMP
      implementation progress reports. No Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS) incident has been reported since the
      project started. Based on the original EIA findings, the following-up strategic environmental and social impact
      assessment has been recently started to review cumulative environmental and social changes in the region since
      project implementation. The environmental management experience from the original project will support the
      implementation of new activities proposed.

      OP4.01 Environmental Assessment
      The new project activities will be located within the original project areas in Qianfeng and Linshui, mainly comprising
      the rehabilitation of roads and river as the continuation of successfully implemented subprojects and the building of
      a park and a vocational school to improve local livability and skilled labor force. OP4.01 and OP4.04 are still deemed
      applicable to the new subprojects, as illustrated below. However, all the investments will be implemented in the
      urban or built-up areas involving no critical natural habitat and physical cultural resources. Considering the type,
      location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed new activities, potential negative environmental impacts would mainly
      be site-specific and limited to the construction phase in relation to dust, noise, wastewater, solid waste and traffic
      disturbance similar to the subprojects implemented before. Different from the earlier investments, these new sub-
      projects are not anticipated with significant indirect impacts since they are all proposed in the built-up areas aiming
      at the further improvements of local infrastructure conditions and living conditions. The new sub-projects included
      in the restructured project are thus of a category B nature; however, the project remains a Category A project because
      of the ongoing investments of the project.

      OP4.04 Natural Habitats
      The project area of influence is predominantly urban, industrial and agricultural, involving no critical natural habitat
      as defined in OP4.04. In Qianfeng, another section of Luxi River will be rehabilitated as the continuation of earlier
      implemented subproject to enhance the project's environmental benefits. Ecological survey conducted during EIA
      process showed there are no protected or endangered plant, animal or aquatic species in the project areas and the
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



  river. The project will have impacts on terrestrial ecology due to earth excavation, soil erosion, clearance of
  vegetation/farmland during construction. If not well managed, the project activities near the river may also adversely
  affect the river ecology. The project design and environmental assessment proposed a set of measures to avoid,
  minimize and mitigate the ecological impacts. The project will not result in significant degradation, conversion or loss
  of natural habitats. Post-construction vegetation and landscaping will be carried out upon the project completion.

  OP4.37 Safety of Dam
  An additional safeguards policy of OP4.37 is triggered for the new park subproject in Qianfeng since the Xiejiawan
  park is proposed around an existing small dam (10.8m high with a total storage capacity of 450,400m3). Dam safety
  assessment was conducted during the EIA process by an independent dam specialist locally hired and the
  recommendations have been made to improve the downstream drainage and to increase monitoring equipment and
  communication devices for safety management. Relevant measures and budget have been incorporated into the
  subproject EMPs.

  Social

  For the current safeguards implementation, the social safeguards performance rating is moderately satisfactory due
  to comparatively delay in land acquisition and resettlement work. By the time of mission in October 2018, the
  resettlement work has been made good progress in both Linshui and Qianfeng. All compensation payment for total
  1,402mu land acquisition was completed and only 18 of total 975 affected households were under negotiation of
  physical resettlement agreements. Part of affected households have moved into new resettlement apartments, whilst
  the remaining affected households were under transitional period and waiting for resettlement apartments under
  construction.

  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
  The new added project activities of construction Linshui Vocational School will cause 406 people of 134 households
  to be affected by the acquisition of 70mu collectively owned land; about 187 people of 62 households will be affected
  by the demolition of residential houses in a village. A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared by the client in both
  English and Chinese based on the requirements of Bank OP/BP4.12 and public disclosed locally.

  For the other added project activities, such as rehabilitation of roads, rehabilitation of rive and construction of Park
  in Linshui and Qianfeng, will be conducted on the existing roads and the stated owned land which have completed
  land acquisition process. The potential social impacts during the construction stage such as noise, temporary land use
  etc will be developed with mitigation measures and considered into the project ESMP.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The impacts are main identified from the new added activities from the restructuring changes, including road
  upgrading and construction of training facility in Linshui; extension of riverside upgrading and creation of a park
  centered around an existing small reservoir in Qianfeng.

  Both Linshui and Qianfeng County Town have been going through a process of urban expansion and industrial
  development over the past years. They also have strategic plans for future development up to 2030. The EA carried
  out due diligence of past development, overlapping with proposed development in the coming 4-6 years, and
  projected development up to 2030 to assess induced and cumulative impacts. In order to continuously monitor such
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



impacts, the project will support a technical assistance activity to conduct follow-up strategic environmental and
social assessment during project implementation. This effort will enable a more detailed assessment that is adaptive
to ongoing actual developments in the two towns.

The cumulative impact assessment conducted during project preparation covers urban expansion and industrial
development in both towns. Specifically:

•    In Linshui County Town, as of April 2014 the town covers an area of 18.12km², of which the industrial area
(Linshui Economic and Technology Development Zone, ETDZ) covers an area of 7 km². Linshui ETDZ was established
in 2006 and holds about 60 enterprises currently, including agricultural food processing, machinery manufacturing,
etc. Environmental monitoring results show emissions from the industries and ambient environmental quality met
applicable environmental standards.

•    In Qianfeng County Town, as of April 2014 the town covers an area of 6.15km², of which about 50 percent is
industrial. Qianfeng Industrial Park was established in 2006 and holds 29 enterprises, including manufacturing of auto
spare parts, textiles and garments. Environmental monitoring results show emissions from the industries and ambient
environmental quality met applicable environmental standards.

The proposed project, by providing some of the basic infrastructure, will facilitate the urban and industrial expansion
of these two towns. Therefore induced and cumulative impacts are the main challenge for the project. If not well-
planned, rapid urban expansion can be associated with deteriorating environmental quality around core urban areas
with long-term consequences on local communities. Induced and cumulative impacts may be exerted beyond the
direct area of influence of the project and even beyond the expansion area supported by the Bank loan. Therefore,
the induced and cumulative impact assessment considers future development scenarios and identified several key
issues.

•    According to the Master Plan of Linshui County Town (2009-2030), the built-up area of Linshui county seat will
reach an area of 22km² by 2019 and of 28.3 km² by 2030, compared to 18 km² in 2014. Some key infrastructure to be
developed in the coming years, such as the West Ring Road will facilitate the urbanization of current farmland in
Linshui County Town. In Linshui ETDZ, the main industries will include logistics, auto spare parts, machinery
manufacturing and non-ferrous metal metallurgy and processing industries.

•    According to the Master Plan of the Industrial Park in Qianfeng (2011-2020), the built-up area will reach 35.48
km² by 2020, compared to 3.5km² in 2014. Its main industries will include auto spare parts, electronic products,
garments, textiles and show manufacturing. As of the project appraisal, Qianfeng District is preparing a Regulatory
Planning for Qianfeng New Town (2013-2030), which indicates that by 2030 the Qianfeng New Town will cover an
area of 16.49 km². Since Qianfeng New Town includes the industrial park and its regulatory planning prevails the
master plan for Qianfeng Industrial Park, it is expected that actual conversion of farmland to urban and industrial land
from now to 2030 will follow the regulatory plan, i.e. from 6.15km² to 16.49km².

By combining past, current and future developments, the identified key induced and cumulative impacts include:

•     Land use change and loss of green area. In both towns, there will be significant land use change by the end of
the planning period. Expansion of the urban and industrial areas will convert farmland and green spaces into urban,
resi dential and industrial buildings. Given that most of the converted green area is farmland, it is not anticipated that
there will be significant loss of natural habitats or biodiversity in the region.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



  •     Loss of agricultural land. Most of the converted lands are farmland, which will reduce agriculture-based incomes
  for local farmers. It is expected that rural livelihoods will be converted to urban and industrial-based livelihoods,
  which is already the trend in the project areas.

  •    Impacts on regional drainage pattern. The planned development will not impact natural river channels thus will
  not have significant impacts on regional drainage patterns. Due to the loss of green space more stormwater runoff
  may end up in rivers increasing local flooding probabilities. This has been taken into consideration in the design and
  building of drainage systems which have been designed to a higher flood probability level.

  •   Social issues. Loss of farmland and agriculture-based livelihoods and conversion to urban- and industrial-based
  ones presents both opportunities and challenges to local communities.

  •   Other issues may include increased pressure on environment quality such as air pollution, surface water quality,
  groundwater, solid waste management, etc.

  The two towns have taken actions to address these issues, including stipulating development boundaries, building
  wastewater collection and treatment facilities, solid waste facilities, restricting enterprises to light polluting, labor
  intensive industries and building environmental monitoring and management institutions. Given the scale of planned
  development, the complexity level of issues, it is prudent to conduct further assessment during project
  implementation, taking into account a hybrid of induced, cumulative and strategic environmental and social issues
  related to urban and industrial development in the two towns. The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
  has been started in middle 2018 to review the trend of environmental and social changes/impacts in Qianfeng and
  Linshui since project implementation.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.



  At the project activity level, several alternatives have been considered to avoid additional land acquisition. For the
  new vocational school, the site selection has been carefully compared and selected to make sure to reduce land
  acquisition and physical displacement.

  During the restructuring, it is worth to note the construction of Vocational School will also let the project have
  significant benefits in terms of providing skills training and contributing to employment opportunities for local
  residents, boosting regional economic development, building environmental facilities such as wastewater treatment
  services.

  For the other added project activities, the construction will be conducted on the existing roads and stated owned
  land. No addition land acquisition was involved. In addition, the project provides a chance to bring international good
  experiences to the towns in terms of a more sustainable approach to urbanization, which is particularly valuable in
  the context of the country’s rapid urbanization.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environment
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)




       Accredited EIA consultants were engaged to conduct the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the new project
       activities following both domestic EIA regulations and the Bank's safeguards policies, and the EIA reports for both
       Qianfeng and Linshui has been approved by local authorities. The subproject-specific EMPs have been prepared based
       on the EIA findings and earlier experience from project implementation. The anticipated adverse environmental
       impacts can be adequately avoided, minimized and/or mitigated through measures developed either in the project
       design or with the implementation of subproject EMPs. The independent environmental monitoring consultant will
       continue to assist the PMOs in managing environmental safeguard compliance during project implementation.

       Social

       Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, the PMO has
       prepared a RAP to address involuntary resettlement impact caused by project construction. Since land acquisition for
       the phase development for Linshui Industry Zone will be conducted together with land acquisition caused by Bank-
       financed activities, the land acquisition for the purpose of Linshui Industry Zone development is covered by the
       prepared RAP. The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under the guidance of a team
       from Southwest Transportation University, with prior experience in resettlement planning for World Bank financed
       projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social economic surveys and consultations over
       resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation measures.

       The borrower has rich experience in resettlement for domestic projects; however has little experience in Bank support
       projects. Trainings on Bank’s OP4.12 were delivered by both Bank’s team and project social consultant, and all related
       local departments actively participated in the RAP preparation. At present, the borrower has a much clearer
       understanding of Bank’s OP4.12 after 3 years’ implementation.



     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       For the new investments of proposed the restructuring project, two rounds of information disclosure and public
       consultation were carried out during project preparation, respectively in March and June 2018. Public consultations
       were undertaken in the form of questionnaires, focus group discussions, and public meetings; such consultations will
       be on-going throughout project implementation. Project information was disseminated to displaced families and
       appropriate mitigation measures will be taken to address the public's concerns. The new safeguards documents were
       also disclosed at the Bank's external website on December 20th, 2018.
       The original safeguards documents were consulted on and disclosed during the preparation in August 2014. Public
       concerns raised during these consultations have been incorporated into the project design, the EMP and RAP.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
20-Nov-2018                                                      20-Dec-2018
                         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
         26-Sep-2014
         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            China                                                           20-Jun-2018
            Comments
            Two rounds of disclosure were conducted locally, respectively in March and June 2018.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
18-Jul-2018                                                                02-Aug-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
          China                                                             02-Aug-2018
           Comments
        The draft RAP documents were disclosed on the local Government Website (Liushui and Qianfeng) on August 2, 2018
        and the hardcopies of the RAP were distributed to affected households in the village.
        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                             Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                               Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
            Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                               No
            natural habitats?
        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                     NA
acceptable to the Bank?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                             Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                             Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                                Yes

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                           187

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                             Yes
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)

Provide estimated number of people to be affected.                                           406



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                         Yes

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                             NA
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                             NA
been made for public awareness and training?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                             Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups               Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guang'an Demonstration Area Infrastructure Development Project (P133456)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Xueman Wang


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Svend E. Jensby                           07-Feb-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
