The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSR24247




                       Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                              Country Director:    Jesko S. Hentschel
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Valerie Hickey
                            Task Team Leaders:     Pablo Francisco Herrera, Giovanni Ruta
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P114294                                                      Rural Corridors and Biodiversity
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Pablo Francisco Herrera                                      Argentina
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    07-Apr-2015                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GEN04

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                           Total Financing
    21,580,000.00                                                21,580,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                                13,000,000.00
    Trust Funds                                                                                         8,580,000.00
    Total                                                                                              21,580,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the project is to increase the protection of vulnerable natural areas and conserve biological diversity
    within the Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystems and, implement measures
    to enhance biodiversity resilience to climate change and protect forest carbon assets.




.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The restructured Project consists of the following parts:

Component 1: Core Protected Areas

A.   Establishment, strengthening and operational startup of Selected Protected Areas within the Gran Chaco
Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystem, through:

      (i)     the provision of the necessary selected infrastructure for basic management such as administrative
      buildings, park guard facilities, storage and maintenance infrastructure, information centers, research facilities,
      small-scale improvements for park access and visitor use, and small infrastructure such as fences, corrals and
      garages, for Selected Protected Areas;

      (ii)    the carrying out of selected technical studies on, inter alia, social, environmental, climate change and
      management themes, the elaboration of draft management plans which include climate change adaptation and
      mitigation, and the carrying out of boundary surveys, for purposes of identifying the boundaries of Selected
      Protected Areas, all acceptable to the World Bank; and

      (iii)   the acquisition and utilization of the necessary selected equipment for park management including,
      inter alia, vehicles, small-scale boats, communications, firefighting, global positioning system (GPS) and
      audiovisual equipment, computers and furniture.

Component 2: Conservation Corridors in the Gran Chaco and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine
Ecosystems.

A.   Design and implementation of a multi-stakeholder process for piloting Conservation Corridors in the Gran Chaco
Ecosystem, through:

      (i)    the development of a geographic information system for the Pilot Conservation Corridors in the Gran
      Chaco Ecosystem;

      (ii)   the participatory design, dissemination, and validation of strategic and operational plans for said Pilot
      Conservation Corridors;

      (iii) the establishment of coordination mechanisms and/or management committees for the
      implementation and sustainability of the plans referred to in the preceding paragraph;

      (iv)   the carrying out of market analysis and business plans for tourism, bee-keeping, forestry, and cattle-
      ranching, as well as the studies and workshops required for the proper social and environmental assessment
      and management, as per the World Bank Safeguards Policies; and

      (v)      the establishment of three field units to support the management of the Pilot Conservation Corridors
      (including the acquisition and utilization of equipment required therefor).
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



B.   Carrying out of catalytic actions to pilot mainstreaming of corridor conservation in the Chaco Húmedo Pilot
Conservation Corridor and the Chaco Seco Impenetrable Pilot Conservation Corridor, through:

      (i)      the provision of training on four prioritized production systems (tourism, bee-keeping, forestry and
      cattle-ranching) to agricultural producers, extension agents and rural educators, all under terms of reference
      acceptable to the World Bank, and the acquisition of the necessary equipment for said training;

      (ii)    the dissemination across the Pilot Conservation Corridors of best practices on sustainable land use and
      biodiversity conservation and monitoring, specifically in the sectors of tourism, bee-keeping, forestry and cattle-
      ranching; and

      (iii)   the carrying out of Sustainable-Use Subprojects and Demonstration Subprojects.

C.   Design and implementation of a multi-stakeholder process for piloting Conservation Corridors in the Patagonian
Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystem, through:

      (i)      the carrying out of one study for the design of the Conservation Corridors and workshops on, inter alia,
      social, environmental, productive, and climate-change issues in such Patagonia Steppe Conservation Corridors;

      (ii)    the development of a geographic information system for the Patagonia Steppe Conservation Corridors;
      and

      (iii)  the participatory design, dissemination, and validation of strategic plans for the Patagonia Steppe
      Conservation Corridors.

Component 3: Collaboration for Corridors’ Conservation

A.    Strengthening of SIFAP through the promotion among its members (especially those located within the Project
Area) of a shared vision on rural corridors as a strategy for biodiversity conservation, a comprehensive stakeholder
involvement, an adequate institutional support and a solid long-term financial plan, including:

      (i)     the provision of operational support to start-up SIFAP’s executive committee and secretariat;

      (iv)    the promotion of the adoption by the Provinces located in the Project Area, of common standards (in
      line with international standards) for classification of protected areas, to facilitate the assessment of their
      functionality as core areas within conservation corridors;

      (iii)     the establishment of a website to promote the adoption of conservation corridor strategies, by
      facilitating the integration of the information regarding the different provincial and national protected areas
      systems of the Recipient; and

      (iv)    the carrying out of national and eco-regional gap analyses and conservation priority setting.

B.    Development of management standards and strengthening of institutional capacity of provincial and national
protected areas systems (focusing on those located within the Project Area) for management of conservation
corridors, including:
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




          (i)    the carrying out of a needs assessment of national and provincial protected areas systems aimed at
          developing guidelines for enhanced protected areas management; and

          (ii)     based on the outcome of said needs assessment, the development and implementation of a training
          and capacity building plan focused on protected areas management planning and effectiveness evaluation, as
          well as their impact on biodiversity.

    C.    Development of financing mechanisms and improvement of SIFAP’s organizational structure, through the
    carrying out of analyses and the provision of support to the Recipient in the development of said financing mechanisms
    and incentives for conservation.

    Component 4: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project.

    A.    Provision of technical and operational assistance, as necessary, to support adequate Project management.

    B.   Development and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation program for the Project (including a
    monitoring and evaluation program for climate-change themes).

    C.    Carrying out of Project audits, Mid-term Review and final evaluation of the Project.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Primarily in the Patagonian Steppe and Atlantic Coastal-Marine areas of the provinces of Santa Cruz and
    Chubut, and in the Grand Chaco forest ecosystem of the provinces of Chaco and Santiago del Estero.
    Patagonian Steppe and Atlantic Coastal-Marine Ecosystem. The Patagonian Steppe is an extensive ecoregion
    of grasslands and shrub range that crosses from the Atlantic Ocean to the foothills of the Andes in Southern
    Argentina and Chile. Although the steppe is characterized by windy conditions and low rainfall (under 200
    mm per annum), a narrow band of steppe adjacent to the Valdivian forest ecosystem (near the Andes) has
    higher rainfall, around 300 mm per annum. The Patagonian coastal-marine ecosystem runs north-south
    along the Argentine coastline from Tierra del Fuego to the province of Rio Negro, south of Buenos Aires
    Province. Both the terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems provide important habitats for many species of global
    and national significance including Lama guanicoe, Pterocnemia pennata, Zaedyus pichiy, Conepatus
    humboldtii, Pseudalopex culpaeus, Puma concolor, Liolaemus escarchadosi, Spheniscus magellanicus,
    Phalacroco raxatriceps, Galictis cuja, Sterna hirundinacea, Coscoroba coscoroba, Cygnus melanocorypha,
    Otaria flavescens, Lagenorhyn chus australis, Cephabrhynchus commersonii, Festu capallescens, Junellia
    tridens and Lepidophyllum cupressiforme. Parque Chaqueño Forest Ecosystem. Over 76% of native forests
    are located in the #Bosque Chaqueño# (or #Chaco#) ecoregion . This area in northwest Argentina spans
    twelve provinces and is the most threatened eco-region in the country, primarily as a result of the massive
    industrial-scale clearing for soybean cultivation. The most current deforestation estimates show a loss of
    317,000 ha of forest in Santiago del Estero, Chaco and Formosa provinces alone for the year 2007. While the
    new Forestry Law (No. 26.331 of 2007) passed in December 2007 may have slowed the rate of conversion
    momentarily, forest fires reportedly have increased, which contributes to forest degradation. Biodiversity of
        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



global and national importance in the Chaco includes Schinopsis lorentzii and balansae, Aspidosperma
quebracho-blanco, Ziziphus mistol, Prosopis ruscifolia, Priodontes maximus, Catagonus wagneri, Pecari
tajacu, Tayassu pecari, Mirmecophaga tridactyla, Boa constrictor, Panthera onca, Rhea pennata,
Harpyhaliaetus coronatus, and Chelonoidis chilensis.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Ricardo Larrobla, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Lilian Pedersen, Social Safeguards Specialist
German Nicolas Freire, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered        Explanation
                                                            No large-scale impacts are expected given the focus
                                                            on biodiversity conservation with important
                                                            investments in capacity and institution building. An
                                                            EMP was prepared to identify the Project potential
                                                            impacts, and to develop appropriate mitigation
                                                            measures for the possible limited negative impacts.
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                            Measures included in the EMP include
                                                            environmental screening of works, mitigation of
                                                            dust and noise, proper disposal of construction
                                                            waste, worker health and safety standards,
                                                            wastewater management, and others, mentioned
                                                            under the relevant safeguard policies triggered.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                            No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                            Some of the investments will be conducted in
                                                            critical natural habitats (such as works within
                                                            officially declared protected areas) and other
                                                            natural habitats (such as small-scale Sustainable
                                                            Use Subprojects). APN has a solid policy in place for
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes             ensuring that construction within protected areas
                                                            includes an EA and mitigation measures for any
                                                            potential impacts identified. The subprojects would
                                                            be evaluated through criteria that ensure no harm
                                                            to natural habitats and are supportive of
                                                            conservation goals.
                                                            Some Subprojects-related small-scale forest
                                                            resource and non-timber forest product use are
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes
                                                            considered in the EMP through a process consistent
                                                            with OP 4.36 in regard to community-based
        The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



                                                     approaches to forestry management as well as
                                                     relevant forest laws.
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No
                                                     In case of chance findings, APN regional offices
                                                     apply specific policies and procedures that include
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes      measures to evaluate and protect physical cultural
                                                     resources, construction best-practices, soil removal
                                                     and debris management.
                                                     The Social Assessment indicates that Indigenous
                                                     Peoples’ communities customarily use natural
                                                     resources in the Project area (for hunting and
                                                     collecting non-timber forest products such as
                                                     medicinal plants, and materials for construction).
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes
                                                     An IPPF has been developed and disclosed by APN
                                                     to ensure that the needs and perspectives of the
                                                     Indigenous People are included should the Project
                                                     proposes investments in areas traditionally used by
                                                     them.
                                                     APN has a policy of no involuntary resettlement,
                                                     and the project does not support or include it.
                                                     Inhabitants living inside the protected areas would
                                                     therefore be able to chose to (i) relocate to a site
                                                     outside of the protected area with an agreed
                                                     compensation package or (ii) remain in the
                                                     protected area under restrictions and land-use
                                                     regimes that would ensure their livelihood but still
                                                     be compatible with conservation objectives. In
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes
                                                     both cases, APN would provide training and
                                                     investments to support the adjustment of the
                                                     inhabitants to their new situation. No potential
                                                     resettlement issues related to the project were
                                                     identified outside the project protected areas. To
                                                     cover the possibilities, both inside and outside the
                                                     protected areas, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                     (RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been
                                                     prepared, approved and disclosed by APN.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
          The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)




A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     No large-scale impacts are expected given the focus on biodiversity conservation with important investments in
     capacity and institution building. An EMP was prepared as part of the environmental assessment conducted during
     Project preparation, to identify its potential impacts, to develop appropriate mitigation measures for the possible
     limited negative impacts, mainly due to construction of new park infrastructure. Construction will be located to
     minimize impacts to key parts of protected areas and incorporate appropriate measures to minimize landscape visual
     impacts and integrate local designs and materials. Measures included in the EMP include environmental screening of
     works, mitigation of dust and noise, proper disposal of construction waste, worker health and safety standards, and
     wastewater management. On previous projects (P039787, P040808 and P100806) APN has shown excellent
     compliance with Bank standards, and has developed a set of protocols for works in parks which are comparable.
     Small-scale Subprojects with communities and producers in buffer zones and corridors are expected to have positive
     or negligible impacts on the environment. A screening process is included in the EMP for their assessment and
     selection, as are protocols to ensure their implementation in conformity with Bank standards and best practices.

     The Argentine National Parks Administration (APN) conducted a social assessment as part of project preparation,
     which covers the Gran Chaco Ecosystem and the Patagonian Steppe and Coastal-Marine Ecosystem (including all the
     protected areas where investments were planned). The Social Assessment indicates that Indigenous Peoples’
     communities do not exist in the proposed protected area sites. However, they customarily use the Gran Chaco
     Ecosystem for natural resources (hunting and collecting non-timber forest products such as medicinal plants, and
     materials for construction). An IPPF has been developed and disclosed by APN to ensure that the needs and
     perspectives of the Indigenous People are included should the establishment of the new protected areas in the Gran
     Chaco Ecosystem encompass forest or other areas traditionally used by them.

     Regarding the conservation corridors, Indigenous Peoples have been informed of the project and will be consulted in
     order to acquire their consent prior to their inclusion in corridors that may include their traditional territories. APN
     has a good track record working with Indigenous People in co-management within its existing protected areas.

     APN also has a policy of no involuntary resettlement, and the project does not support or include it. Inhabitants living
     inside the protected areas would therefore be able to chose to (i) relocate to a site outside of the protected area with
     an agreed compensation package or (ii) remain in the protected area under restrictions and land-use regimes that
     would ensure their livelihood but still be compatible with conservation objectives. In both cases, APN would provide
     training and investments to support the adjustment of the inhabitants to their new situation. No potential
     resettlement issues related to the project were identified outside the project protected areas. APN has a good track
     record managing these situations through different Projects. To cover the possibilities, both inside and outside the
     protected areas, and in compliance with OP 4.12, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework
     (PF) have been prepared, approved and disclosed by APN.

     An addendum to the Environmental and Social Assessments was also developed in early 2018 focusing on the El
     Impenetrable National Park and the Patagonia National Park; and including the development of an IPP for the El
     Impenetrable National Park, as well as documentation of the broad community support based on prior, free and
     informed consultations. In the case of the Patagonia National Park, it was confirmed that no IP exist in the area.
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



  The Environmental Management Plan developed by APN during Project preparation was updated in preparation for
  the first Project restructuring, in order to emphasize the guidelines and procedures to be followed to assess and
  manage the environmental risks and impacts related to the changes that would introduced to the Project (e.g. explicit
  reference was made to the updated provincial legislation, when it comes to assessing and managing the risks and
  impacts of infrastructure built in protected areas ouside of APN's jurisdiction; and an enhanced screening process was
  proposed for the subprojects, considering that they would be developed not only inside protected areas but also in
  other sites within the conservation corridors). The updated EMP was re-disclosed in country and by the WB on June,
  21 2018. As part of the first Project restructuring, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), the
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Process Framework (PF) developed and disclosed by APN during Project
  preparation were also revised, and deemed sufficient to manage the social risks and impacts related to the introduced
  Project changes.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Impacts should be positive, and result in the conservation of native forests, grasslands and coastal-marine resources
  over the long term. The Project is expected to generate positive long-term impacts, through improved management
  of conservation areas and the surrounding landscape, with particular focus on training in new techniques, and
  inclusion of local communities in decision making and support for sustainable alternative economic opportunities.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  n/a


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Given the client's focus on conservation, APN has a solid policy in place for ensuring that construction within protected
  areas includes an EA and mitigation measures for any potential impacts identified. Safeguards oversight is managed
  through APN regional offices to apply specific policies and procedures that include: measures to evaluate and protect
  physical cultural resources, construction best-practices, soil removal and debris management, and other human
  activities within protected areas. Construction is also designed in such a way as to consider landscape aspects and
  culturally appropriate architectural designs. Sustainable Use Subprojects would be of small-scale and would be
  approved based on a participatory approach through local committees and evaluated through criteria that ensure no
  harm to natural habitats and are supportive of conservation goals. A negative list is included to ensure no projects
  procure or utilize pesticides, no endangered species are impacted or utilized and no exotic species are introduced.
  Some small-scale forest resource and non-timber forest product use are considered in the framework through a
  process consistent with OP 4.36 in regard to community-based approaches to forestry management as well as
  Provincial forest and wildlife laws.

  APN also has a policy of "no involuntary resettlement" and for social participation in protected area buffer zones,
  which is extended to the Corridors area. The client has managed two IBRD projects and one GEF projects with similar
  characteristics and has a good track record for compliance, and high capacity for social and environmental
  management.

  APN has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) to guide the re quired culturally appropriate
  consultations and to address any potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples. The Framework outlines the requirement
            The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



       for consent by Indigenous Peoples prior to including their territories within the framework of a Conservation Corridor.
       These requirements are included in the operational manual. In the event that Indigenous Peoples are affected by the
       project, this framework will guide the preparation of site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs).

       A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework (PF) have been prepared by APN. The RPF will guide
       the preparation of an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), if necessary, for addressing any relocation of
       human settlements located inside any of the conservation sites during planning and implementat ion of the project.
       The abbreviated RAP has to be reviewed and approved by the Bank and disclosed in country and in the InfoShop. The
       PF addresses possible restrictions of access of local communities to natural resources in the protected a rea sites. It
       establishes the process for involving potentially affected communities in planning and implementation of the project,
       while identifying how affected communities will be assisted in restoring their livelihood, as a consequence of loss of
       access to traditional natural resources. Although no potential resettlement issues related to the project were
       identified outside the project protected areas, the RPF and PF would apply to resettlement situations related to the
       project outside a protected area in the unlikely event one should arise


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The main project beneficiaries will be (i) local communities and rural poor whose livelihoods depend on the natural
       resource base, particularly in the Patagonian Steppe and the Gran Chaco Exosystems; (ii) the total supply-chain
       involved in Argentina's nature-based tourism; and (iii) civil society as beneficiaries of the project. (In the event the
       IPPF is activated to include Indigenous Peoples, they would also be considered as beneficiaries). Each of the protected
       areas where the Project would invest will have consultative committees at the protected area and corridor levels to
       inform local beneficiaries about the project and involve them in protected area management and sustainable
       alternative livelihoods activities. Also, the corridors component will set-up participative committees to identify needs
       and ways of approaching conservation issues.

       The EA and framework for environmental management has been disclosed both locally on the APN website, as well
       as the Bank InfoShop in a timely manner prior to Appraisal and prior to the first Project restructuring. In addition, APN
       has held consultation meetings in the regions where the project will focus its activities and has also consulted national
       NGOs and Provincial and Municipal authorities. In addition to the management committees that participate in the
       planning and monitoring of investment activities within protected areas and development of the subprojects, the
       Project has developed a Social Participation Plan, which integrates all relevant stakeholders in the full cycle of project
       implementation. APN has 5 different levels of social participation within its ongoing management system including:
       Local Advisory Committees (Comisión Asesora Local), Co-management Committees (Comité de Co -Manejo),
       Biosphere Reserve Management Committees (Comité de Gestión de las Reservas de la Biosfera), Operational and
       Strategic Planning and Evaluation (Evaluación y Planificación Estratégica y Operativa) and Public Hearings (Audiencias
       Públicas).

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
                            The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



        19-Jun-2018                                                      21-Jun-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Argentina                                                      21-Jun-2018
            Comments
            https://www.parquesnacionales.gob.ar/institucional/unidad-coordinadora-de-ejecucion-de-proyectos-con-
            financiamiento-externo/


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
07-Feb-2011                                                               18-Feb-2011
“In country? Disclosure

INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
19-Jan-2011                                                                18-Feb-2011
“In country? Disclosure


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                             Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                               Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



           NH_TABLE
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                       No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                    TBD
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Rural Corridors and Biodiversity (P114294)



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       NA
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Pablo Francisco Herrera
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Giovanni Ruta

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
