The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2019| Report No: ISDSR25801




                       Regional Vice President:    Hartwig Schafer
                              Country Director:    Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Guangzhe Chen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Shomik Raj Mehndiratta
                            Task Team Leader:      Arnab Bandyopadhyay
              The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P132833                                                     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Arnab Bandyopadhyay                                         Sri Lanka
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    09-May-2016                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR06


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                        125.00
    Total Financing                                                                                           125.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                              125.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                            125.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the Road Development Authority’s (RDA) capacity for asset
    management and improve the road service delivery on the selected corridor. The selected corridor means the road section
    from Ja-Ela to Chilaw on National Highway A003 in Sri Lanka.


    Proposed New PDO
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the Road Development Authority (RDA) for
    asset management and to improve access and asset management framework for selected Provincial roads.
.



    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

       The project focuses on creating an enabling environment for more effective asset management and includes
       interventions to develop systems and capacity within the RDA. With the Government of Sri Lanka’s (GOSL) request
       to the World Bank in 2018 to assist in improving the condition of the provincial road network, Component 2 of the
       original project is to be restructured to finance the rehabilitation of selected road sections in the provincial road
       network spread across all nine provinces of the country. The Project will continue to support the establishment and
       operationalisation of asset management systems, particularly for RDA to transition itself from a provider of
       infrastructure to a service provider in line with the ambitious needs of a middle- income country. The establishment
       of systems and such procedures will also include expanding the role of safety within the RDA.
       Project Components
       The original project has been restructured as follows:
       1. Revised Component 1. Component 1 retains its name, “Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Asset
          Management? and retains the following of its key original activities: (i) operationalizing the existing web-based,
          multiuser Road Asset Management System (RAMS) in RDA to complete network referencing, deploy all RAMS
          modules, outsource data collection, and rationalize the staffing for managing the system; (ii) finalizing a Road
          Sector Policy and Strategy that was drafted during the first year of the TCAMP; and (iii) developing an Institutional
          and governance reforms action plan for RDA through institutional study. A new activity related to developing
          standards and specifications to promote road safety will be added to Component 1. The following original
          activities related to the DBMOT (later revised to DBM) model are dropped: (i) training on DBMOT methodology
          using the OPRC format, (ii) monitoring consultant for the pilot contract, (iii) studies of the institutional implications
          and other aspects of scaling up DBMOT within the RDA; (iv) cost efficiency assessment of performance-based
          contracts, and (v) Grievance redress system for RDA. The Grievance Redressal system is no longer operationally
          relevant to the project, as none of the RDA assets are being financed under component 2. The generation of the
          system was an institution wide effort which is at an advanced stage of development by RDA through ADB-financed
          Integrated Road Investment Program, i Road.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



      2. Revised Component 2. The upgrading of the JaEla to Chilaw section of the A003 highway and the associated land
         acquisition and resettlement are dropped from the project. The revised Component 2, to be renamed “Provincial
         Road Improvements?, will finance the improvements of 632.7 km of provincial roads in all nine provinces of the
         country. Component 2 will be implemented in two main phases as follows:
              a. Phase 1: This will cover 302.7 km of roads at an estimated cost of LKR 7,692.30 million (approximately
                  40 percent of the total road contracts in value). These road sections are spread across all nine provinces
                  of the country. The bids for the works on these roads will be invited in two stages.
               b. Phase 2: This will cover the remaining 330 km, at an estimated cost of LKR 8372 covering all nine
                  provinces. The bids for the works on these roads will be invited in three further stages.
       The contracts will incorporate, as needed, road rehabilitation, drainage structures, sidewalks, and physical design
       features to enhance safety. These improvements are expected to result in (a) improved vehicle operating speeds
       while ensuring the safety of road users and (b) reduced travel times and vehicle operating costs. The contracts will
       not cover any widening of road sections.


.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project will operate in all 9 provinces and 25 districts of the country. The island consists mostly of flat
    and rolling coastal plains, with mountains rising only in the south-central part. The climate is tropical and
    warm, due to the moderating effects of ocean winds. Mean temperatures range from 17 °C (62.6 °F) in the
    central highlands, where frost may occur for several days in the winter, to a maximum of 33 °C (91.4 °F) in
    other low-altitude areas. Average yearly temperatures range from 28 °C (82.4 °F) to nearly 31 °C (87.8 °F).
    Rainfall pattern is influenced by monsoon winds. The "wet zone" and some of the windward slopes of the
    central highlands receive up to 2,500 mm (98.4 in) of rain each year, but the leeward slopes in the east and
    northeast receive little rain. Most of the east, southeast, and northern parts of Sri Lanka comprise the "dry
    zone", which receives between 1,200 and 1,900 mm (47 and 75 in) of rain annually. The arid northwest and
    southeast coasts receive the least amount of rain at 800 to 1,200 mm (31 to 47 in) per year. Humidity is
    typically higher in the southwest and mountainous areas and depends on the seasonal patterns of rainfall.
    An increase in average rainfall coupled with heavier rainfall events has resulted in recurrent flooding and
    related damages to infrastructure, utility supply and the urban economy. Hydrologically, the country is
    traversed by 103 rivers, has 45 estuaries and 40 lagoons, with approximately 1,585 km of coastline and
    numerous wetlands. Sri Lanka is one of 25 biodiversity hotspots in the world, with highest biodiversity
    density in Asia. High proportion of flora ( 27%) and fauna (22) species are endemic. Provincial road
    improvements and rehabilitation to be supported under the project traverse through all types of Sri Lanka's
    landscapes and communities. These roads are in close proximity to a number of religious sites, protected
    areas and forests, crossing the rivers and wetlands. There are living trees within the Right of Way (RoW) in
    some places. Project activities may include rehabilitation and maintenance of borrow-pit areas, disposal sites
    for soil spoil material, establishment of workers camps, equipment storage areas, and operation of quarries,
    which are to be identified by the contractors.
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Andrew Zakharenka, Environmental Specialist
Darshani De Silva, Environmental Specialist
Bandita Sijapati, Social Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered          Explanation
                                                               A framework approach for safeguards was
                                                               recommended, as the detailed design of the
                                                               provincial roads improvements and rehabilitation
                                                               will be done by the contractors considering the
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                               prevailing conditions of the road. The existing ESMF
                                                               was updated. Road-specific ESMPs will be prepared
                                                               following the environmental and social screening
                                                               process.
 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                            No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               The natural habitats along the provincial roads may
                                                               include protected areas and forests, small rivers,
                                                               man-made         tanks, lagoons. Environmental
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                               screening will identify the natural habitats and
                                                               prescribe the mitigation measures according to the
                                                               ESMF to manage significant negative impacts.
                                                               Forests along the selected roads may experience
                                                               potential off-site impacts related to gravel and
                                                               material extraction within natural forests in Sri
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes
                                                               Lanka. Specific guidelines and preventive measures
                                                               for the contractors are prescribed in the ESMF and
                                                               in site-specific ESMPs.
                                                               The project does not involve pest management
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                               activities.
                                                               This policy is applicable because there are number
                                                               of religious and sensitive sites anticipated in the
                                                               project area. Protection measures maybe be
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                               required and are specified in the ESMF when
                                                               rehabilitation and improvements activities take
                                                               place.
                                                               There are no indigenous people living within the
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No                 identified project area that would be adversely
                                                               impacted due to the project.
                                                               The policy will not be triggered as the project will
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No
                                                               no longer finance sub-projects (e.g., the upgrading
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



                                                                       of the Ja-Ela to Chilaw section of the A003 highway)
                                                                       which required land acquisition.Instead, the
                                                                       component will now finance only the rehabilitation
                                                                       and improvements of provincial roads in all the nine
                                                                       provinces. Potential impacts may involve
                                                                       temporary access issues leading to possible
                                                                       temporary loss of income, e.g. shop owners.
                                                                       Further, while acquisition of private land is not
                                                                       envisaged under the project, in some rare
                                                                       instances, the need for additional land due to safety
                                                                       reasons, may arise. Any requirements for additional
                                                                       land, if at all, will be availed through voluntary
                                                                       donation, the procedure for which is outlined in the
                                                                       ESMF.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No                    The project does not involve dam related works.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                              The project does not affect international
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)                                                             waterways.
                                                                       There are no disputed areas along the project
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                       corridor.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The Project has been assigned Environmental Category B because the environmental and social impacts are generic
      to upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads that will be predictable, localized and can be
      readily mitigated. Specifically, the following types of works are envisaged under the project:
      • Improve the existing road within the ROW;
      • Strengthen the existing pavement with asphaltic concrete (AC) and ABC (Aggregate Base Concrete) Layers;
      • Improve the existing pavement with micro surfacing and other sealing techniques;
      • Improve the horizontal alignment at selected locations to improve driving conditions;
      • Widen, repair or reconstruct damaged culverts and bridges and construct new drainage structures;
      • Remove any irregularities on the existing vertical profile;
      • Provide cycle lanes, pedestrian footpaths, bus bays, separate bus lanes, and rest bays where necessary; and
      • Provide signage and markings to help promote safer driving conditions.

      Accordingly, the potential environmental impacts of the proposed project activities include: clearance of trees that
      have been planted on the road side due to realignment and safety needs (to avoid black spots), changes in drainage
      patterns to address current flooding issues and increase in sediment load into waterways, and soil and water
      contamination due to spillage and leakage of oils and other toxic materials, noise, dust and air pollution from road
      works, health and safety issues due to operation of borrow pits, quarries, crushers and asphalt plants. There are no
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated, given the fact that the proposed provincial
      road rehabilitation follows the existing road alignments and does not cause any changes to physical cultural resources
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  or natural habitats. The client is expected to ensure the implementation of the ESMPs following the guidance of the
  ESMF, the EA consultations with stakeholders, clearances obtained from the Bank. Restructuring of the project thus
  does not change the environmental issues and impacts identified during the project preparation stage.

  Originally, the upgrading of the Ja-Ela to Chilaw section of the A003 highway to be supported under the project was
  expected to require acquisition of private and public land thus leading to considerable involuntary resettlement
  impacts. Following the restructuring, the project will not support any subprojects requiring land acquisition. Instead,
  the it will only finance the rehabilitation and improvements of provincial roads in all the nine provinces of the country.
  Social impacts intrinsic to rehabilitation works are localized and can be readily mitigated. Some of the negative
  impacts anticipated during the construction phase relate to loss of access to houses and shops; storing of building
  material on the roadside thus causing public inconveniences; dust and noise generation due to construction work;
  unusual delays in public and private transportation; issues pertaining to labor influx, including those relating to
  gender-based violence; anxiety due to possible loss or damage to private or community owned land,
  assets/infrastructure/livelihoods; loss of livelihood for vulnerable groups including mobile vendors,
  encroachers/squatters that currently occupy the RoW; and issues concerning mobility of women and children during
  construction.

  Besides these adverse impacts, the project is also expected to have positive impacts with the most significant benefits
  being savings in travel time / fuel and repair cost, better prices for agricultural products and farmer inputs, and the
  prospect of appreciating the value of land. Other notable advantages include improvement of road safety, a perceived
  reduction in the cost of living, development of business premises, work place and social infrastructure.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  Not available


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Realignment to rectify identified black spots is being considered as part of the conceptual design. However, these are
  proposed to be avoided by introducing some deviations from the existing alignment to minimize or avoid potential
  environmental and social impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The potential environmental and social impacts of provincial roads improvements and rehabilitation will be mostly
  localized and can be easily managed through good planning and established good practices. A revised Environmental
  and Social Management Framework (dated June 2019) has been prepared in lieu of the Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF) dated February 2016 and the ESMF prepared under the original TCAMP Project. The combined ESMF
  which establishes clear guidelines and methodologies for the identification, assessment and mitigation of social and
  environmental impacts, will be used as a guiding document for the conceptual design and development of site-specific
  safeguard instruments. Accordingly, the ESMP for each sub-project will provide the environmental and social baseline
  condition of the roads, identify potential impacts as per the conceptual design and propose mitigation measures to
  avoid, mitigate and/or compensate for significant environmental and social impacts associated with project activities.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  As mentioned earlier, improvements and rehabilitation of roads will have minimal amount of on-site environmental
  impacts. Disturbances to land, interference to soil stability and the hydrology, clearing of roadside vegetation,
  disturbance to animal migration routes and patterns in the area are expected to be minimal and temporary; impacts
  on air quality and noise levels during project operational stage will depend on the traffic flow increases. Measures for
  minimizing and mitigating these impacts have been identified in the ESMF. Archeological, religious, and sensitive sites
  are being identified through the environmental and social screening process, and mitigation measures will be
  identified in the site-specific ESMPs. Some trees within the RoW may have to be removed or pruned to ensure safety
  of the road users. The ESMF proposes to avoid the removal of threatened species as much as possible or try to relocate
  them to a new location if cost-effective or ensure replanting similar plants in a public places. These measures will also
  be detailed in the site-specific ESMPs. While physical relocation is not envisaged under the project, there might be
  some rare instances where additional land will be required for safety purposes. In such instances, the land will be
  availed through voluntary land donation, and the ESMF details the measures that will be taken to ensure the integrity
  of such donation as well as to ensure that there are no long-term adverse impacts on the donating household/person
  due to such donation.

  The interventions proposed by the project does not require national approval from the Central Environmental
  Authority (CEA), as this project does not fall within the prescribed project list identified as part of National
  Environmental Act. However, site clearances requires permission from CEA and local authorities. Environmental
  Protection Licenses, Licenses from Geological Survey and Mines Bureau and local authority permits will be necessary
  for offsite activities such as quarry operations, crusher plants, borrow pits, etc.

  Improvements and rehabilitation works is expected to follow the road-specific ESMPs approved by MHAPCLG and the
  Bank prior to commencement of physical activities on the ground. The potential environmental and social impacts
  and proposed mitigation measures for the impacts identified as included in ESMP will be part of the bidding document
  and will form the basis for monitoring by the Borrower and the Monitoring Consultant to be engaged under the
  project. The bidding document will also include the need to update the safeguard instruments in line with the detailed
  design and preparation of an Environmental Methods Statement in line with the ESMP and construction method
  statement to be kept regularly updated satisfactory to the MHAPCLG and the World Bank.

  MHAPCLG has a Project Management Unit (PMU) set up with an experienced Environmental and Social Specialist who
  is familiar with the environmental and social safeguard requirements of the Bank to manage project related safeguard
  activities. Continuous training programs will be required on environmental and social safeguard compliance, targeting
  the staff of MHAPCLG, the general public / local CBOs and NGOs in the project area, as well as the staff and laborers
  of the contractor(s). Such trainings will mainly focus on sensitizing the need for environmental and social safeguards
  compliance in road rehabilitation projects and use of safeguards instruments in place to mitigate potential impacts.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  A national-level consultation was held on 6 June 2019 with key stakeholders to discuss the ESMF. Additional
  consultations will be carried during the preparation of the road-specific ESMPs, as detailed in the ESMF. The key
  stakeholders for the project are the people living and working along the selected roads, as well as the road users. A
  participatory approach will be adopted to carry out a comprehensive consultation process to study the socio
  economic status of the project area, identify key impacts of the project, and develop mitigation measures to address
  the impacts.
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



      As part of disclosure, the draft ESMF was disclosed on the project website on 14 May 2019 for public comments.
      Following the national-level consultation workshop, the revised ESMF was publicly disclosed in-country on 10 June
      2019. The ESMF has also been disclosed in Bank’s external website.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
15-Dec-2015                                                   09-Mar-2016
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Sri Lanka                                                       10-Jun-2019
 Comments
 A revised ESMF has been disclosed in lieu of the earlier version of the ESMF prepared under the original project.



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                  Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                    Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                     No
 natural habitats?
        The World Bank                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures              NA
acceptable to the Bank?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                   Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                      Yes
impacts on cultural property?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                      Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups        Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                      Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                      Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Arnab Bandyopadhyay


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                     Maged Mahmoud Hamed                    12-Jun-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager               Shomik Raj Mehndiratta                 12-Jun-2019

.
