The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2018| Report No: ISDSR24678




                       Regional Vice President:    Hartwig Schafer
                              Country Director:    Junaid Kamal Ahmad
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Karla Gonzalez Carvajal
                            Task Team Leader:      Shigeyuki Sakaki
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P114827                                                     Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II)
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Shigeyuki Sakaki                                            India
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    13-Dec-2013                                                 Full Assessment (A)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR06


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             286.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                286.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 175.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          111.00
         Borrower                                                                                                  111.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to improve capacity, and enhance quality and safety of road services for the users
    of the coreroad network of state highways in Gujarat, through institutional strengthening and efficient contracting and
    financing strategies.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    ORIGINAL AS PER PAD

1. The project is tailored to the objective of making transformational impacts around modernizing highway financing and
   institutions, improving asset management performance, better integration of various modes of transport and
   improving the road safety management framework - issues highly relevant for a middle-income state. The Project will
   help the GoG to develop and implement a long-term road sector financing strategy and supporting institutional
   framework, aimed at creating a conducive investment climate for raising more market resources and efficiently
   utilizing those resources, works contracting, asset management and safety management practices in Gujarat in
   support of the state’s ambitious development agenda. While together these interventions will achieve ma jor sector-
   wide benefits, the main outcomes during the Project progressively will be much-strengthened management and
   performance of the state’s CRN, supporting the majority of road transport services in Gujarat. The project concept is
   also fully consistent with the current reality of increasingly scarce multilateral financing agency resources and the
   imperative of leveraging such limited resources with market borrowing and smart co-financing.

2. The project has three components as described below:

3. Component A: Highway Improvement Component (Total Cost: US$ 290 million): About 350 km of road upgradation
   and 275 km of road rehabilitation works are proposed to be included under this component. The highway
   improvement component will incorporate safe infrastructure designs, public transport and wayside facilities. The
   works will be undertaken through a mix of nine input-based item-rate plus performance based maintenance contracts,
   one PPP Annuity Based DBFOMT and one performance based Output and Performance based Road Contract (OPRC)
   Contract. This component consists of two sub-components, A1 and A2.

4. Sub-Component A1 (US$ 180 million): This component will include upgrading and rehabilitating of 435 km state
   highways through input-based contracts in nine contract packages. A performance based maintenance period of 3
   years has been included in all contracts, post construction. This component would also include associated land
   acquisition and resettlement, utility relocation, environmental management and supervision and quality assurance
   services.

5. Sub-Component A2 (US$ 110 million): This component will include: (i) 4 laning of 61 km of State Highways through a
   pilot PPP Annuity based DBFOMT Concession at an estimated cost of US$ 60 million, and (ii) initial upgradation and
   subsequent maintenance and operation of 130 km of state highway network through a pilot OPRC, at an estimated
         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



    cost of US$ 50 million. In the PPP DBFOMT concession, spanning over 12 years, 40% of the estimated construction
    cost will be paid during construction period, linked to specified construction milestones. In addition, there will be
    performance linked annuity payments during the remaining concession period. The OPRC concession will span over
    10 years, during which the contractor will have to upgrade and subsequently maintain the road to pre-agreed
    performance standards. The land acquisition and resettlement, environmental management, utility relocation and
    design, independent monitoring and quality assurance services for these two contracts will be included in this
    component.

6. Component B: Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component (Total Cost: US$ 12 million). This component
   seeks to deepen the GSHP I efforts towards improving R&BD’s operational capacity10, and also augment the state’s
   capacity in two more critical areas, viz., Policy & Planning and Knowledge Building, as detailed below. The priority
   areas of engagement have been identified in various stakeholder and staff consultations and are closely aligned to the
   Gujarat Infrastructure Development Vision 2020.

7. Component C: Road Safety Management Component (Total Cost: US$ 22 million): This component will strengthen the
   road safety management system and improve capacity to undertake multi-sectoral road safety interventions in the
   state. The strategic planning and the development of this component has been based on a Road Safety Management
   Capacity Review, a pioneering initiative in the country, supported and funded in collaboration with the World Bank
   Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF). The following initiatives will be financed under this component.

    a) Safe Corridor Demonstration Project: Multi sectoral interventions will be implemented on two high volume, high
       safety risk, 30 km corridors (Dehgam to Bharuch & Ankleshwar to Valia) to demonstrate road safety best practices.
       The interventions will include comprehensive road safety measures including infrastructure safety designs, road
       traffic police support activities11, public awareness/social media campaign and post-crash health care
       management aimed at reducing deaths particularly among vulnerable road users. On the infrastructure
       countermeasures, specially focusing on vulnerable road users, the corridor will be improved to eliminate all high-
       risk sections by targeting of minimum 3-star rating (per iRAP program) applicable to all categories of road users.
       A robust road safety management and monitoring and evaluation system will also be developed under this
       initiative.
    b) Enhancement of asset management system with safety attributes. This activity will enhance the road safety
       module of the GRMS and facilitate piloting integrated periodic maintenance and safety enhancement contracts.
    c) Strengthening of Gujarat Road Safety Management System. The priority areas, as recommended by the road
       safety management capacity review process, include policy changes on targeted high-risk issues, establishing a
       state crash database with road traffic police training, preparation for demonstration corridor program, and
       facilitating a state-wide lead agency for road safety management. Under this sub-component, the project will
       financially support and assist the project steering committee in the implementation and technical assistance of
       the above priority areas.


 CHANGES AS PER PROPOSED RESTRUCTURING


8. The following changes are proposed under this restructuring:
   a) An extension of project implementation period by 23 months, i.e. upto December 31, 2020;
   b) Reallocation of unused loan amount to add three new road corridors, one SCDP corridor, and purchase of
       IT/ICT/MIS application, goods and equipment, and minor civil works;
   c) Revisions to relevant project indicators and legal covenants to make adjustment for extended project timeline
         The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



        and addition of new activities.

9. It is proposed to reallocate the unutilized loan amount of US$ 44 million to enhance the expected impact of the project
   by addition of the following activities:
   a) New SCDP (Safe Corridor Demonstration Project) corridor of Gandhinagar-Indira bridge: The previously allocated
          corridor for SCDP has been declared as a National Highway. The new corridor proposed for inclusion in the project
          has strategic significance and demonstration potential as it connects Ahmedabad and the state capital,
          Gandhinagar. Due to high volume of traffic at high speed, the road safety risk is considered high, especially for
          pedestrians and motorists.
   b) New corridors for widening and major maintenance/rehabilitation: Three corridors including one city bypass
          flyover in below are being proposed for inclusion in the project. Enhanced road safety measures will be included
          in all of these corridors.
           i. Radhanpur- Chanasma (60.4 km): This corridor connects two national highways and enhances connectivity
               between North Gujarat and Kachchh. Significant shoulder erosion caused by flooding will be corrected. It also
               improves alternative interstate connectivity for long distance traffic.
          ii. Mehsana – Palanpur:
                  a. Mehsana – Palanpur (61.8 km): This four-lane corridor acts as connector to two national highways,
                      connects Ahmedabad to Palanpur and beyond with continuous four-laning (Ahmedabad-Mehsana-
                      Palanpur). The corridor is an important link for interstate traffic as well as to regions of Northern and
                      Central Gujarat. Four-laning of this corridor was implemented in GSHP-I, and it is proposed to widen
                      further with paved shoulder. This road holds strategic significance for boosting industrialization in
                      Northern Gujarat and for connectivity with the State of Rajasthan and beyond.
                  b. Four-laning Road-Over-Bridge (ROB) of Mehsana Bypass (5 km): The section of the bypass will continue
                      the ongoing four-laning of National Highway from the southern section of the bypass to connect to the
                      Mehsana-Palanpur, so that all through connection will be made with four lanes. Two lane ROB has been
                      constructed by GoG, and another two-lane ROB will be constructed by the project along the existing
                      ROB. It improves connectivity and eases traffic in the city of Mehsana and segregates long distance
                      traffic with local traffic.
         iii. Vallabhipur-Ranghola (27 km): This corridor acts as a main connector between central Gujarat and Saurashtra.
               It also acts as an alternative interstate connectivity for long distance traffic and improves connectivity for
               tourism and industrial places in southern Saurashtra in Gujarat.
   c) For all of these new corridors, Engineering-Procurement-Construction (EPC) plus Maintenance contract will be
          used to examine the effectiveness of different procurement method, in addition to DBFOMT, OPRC, and extended
          maintenance on item rate, all of which are already in the project. EPC plus Maintenance will fill the void in between
          DBFOMT, which addresses the substantial capital improvement requirement, and OPRC, which is more often used
          for projects without heavy capital expenditure. As traffic volume goes up in most highways in India, particularly in
          state highways in Gujarat, it has become clear to GoG and the task team that there is a clear demand for an
          innovative contracting method designed to address medium-scale capital expenditure while ensuring a high level
          of maintenance. It was particularly evident through the designing of the OPRC contract for corridors that are
          expected to have much higher demand over the contract period. Piloting EPC plus Maintenance for the three new
          corridors with different project characteristics will certainly add options for GoG to effectively construct and
          maintain the network.
   d) Purchase of IT/ICT/MIS application, goods and equipment, and minor civil works: To implement the ICT-MIS
          Strategy and Action Plan decisions, the client will procure: Specialized ICT-MIS services for development and
          implementation of systems integration and applications software; acquisition / development of new ITS software
          and equipment for various road sector applications; acquisition / implementation of modern technical
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



          applications software and business systems and equipment, and; Minor civil works / physical upgrading of
          Engineering Staff College (ESC). This will enable R&BD, Gujarat Engineering Research Institute (GERI), ESC and the
          new Center of Excellence (CoE) to become more efficient and more accessible to their sector stakeholders and
          clientele, to improve their sustainability and to perform more effectively in delivering their mandated services to
          the roads sector and in discharging their technical, operational and administrative responsibilities and functions
          in the overall R&BD and GoG management framework.
      e) Reference to Loan Agreement: A reference of these activities to project components described in the SCHEDULE
          I of the original Loan Agreement is provided in below:
           i. The new SCDP corridor is a part of Component C activities, specifically the section 1 under Component C.
          ii. New road corridors are a part of the section 1 under Component A.
         iii. Purchase of IT/ICT/MIS application, goods and equipment, and minor works is a part of the section 1, 3, and
               4 activities under Component B.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project will be implemented in different parts of Gujarat spread across districts in Central, North and
    Western (Saurashtra) parts of the state.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Mridula Singh, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                          Triggered              Explanation
                                                                        The potential environmental impacts for the
                                                                        new/additional works proposed for inclusion in the
                                                                        project through restructuring include: (a) felling of
                                                                        roadside trees classified as Notified Protected
                                                                        Forests (NPFs) in Gujarat; (b) impact on local
                                                                        drainage; (c) possible effect on water resources
                                                                        during construction stage; (d) increased air and
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                        noise pollution adjacent to the road in the post-
                                                                        construction stage; (e) impacts on existing sensitive
                                                                        receptors and road side religious/cultural
                                                                        properties; and (f) construction related
                                                                        Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) impacts,
                                                                        including issues related to work zone safety
                                                                        management, occupational health and safety
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



                                                              aspects of workers, debris and waste disposal, dust
                                                              generation and potential impacts associated with
                                                              camps, plants and use/operation of material
                                                              sources, if proper measures are not taken for
                                                              managing construction operations.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No                 Not Applicable.
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              No road traversing through a designated protected
                                                              area or a critical natural habitat has been included
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                              in the additional/new works identified for coverage
                                                              under the restructured project.
                                                              No diversion of forest land is envisaged for the
                                                              proposed new/additional works. The project
                                                              requires cutting of road side trees, which are
                                                              classified as Notified Protected Forests (NPFs) in
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes                Gujarat. This impact will be mitigated by
                                                              compensatory tree plantation, which would be
                                                              taken up by the PIU with help from State Forest
                                                              Department. The EAs for sub-projects will provide
                                                              requisite details on number, species, girth size etc.
                                                              OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                              biological/environmental control methods or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                              reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                              envisaged.
                                                              The project is likely to impact existing physical,
                                                              community and cultural/religious properties,
                                                              mainly road side shrines. Hence, OP 4.11 on
                                                              Physical Cultural Resources is applicable. These
                                                              impacts will be addressed through site specific
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                plans as part of EA/EMP, as has been done for the
                                                              original project.
                                                              Also, since civil works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at
                                                              work sites is a likely impact that will have to be
                                                              managed by incorporating appropriate provisions
                                                              in the bidding/contract documents.
                                                              The three roads do not pass through any Scheduled
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes                areas nor will any Schedule Tribe be impacted by
                                                              the project. Thus the OP 4.10 is not applicable.
                                                              The OP 4.12 is applicable. In accordance with the
                                                              existing Resettlement Policy Framework and World
                                                              Bank’s OP/BP 4.12. on Involuntary Resettlement,
                                                              Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for Mehsana-
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes                Palanpur and Mehsana Bypass will be prepared to
                                                              cover      entitlements        of     non-titleholders
                                                              (encroachers and squatters) and relocation of
                                                              community assets. Rehabilitation works will be
                                                              carried out for the Chanasma-Harij-Sami-
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



                                                                         Radhanpur and Vallabhipur-Ranghola (Via Dhola &
                                                                         Parvala) which will not cause any physical and
                                                                         economic displacement. Social Management Plan
                                                                         (SMPs) will be developed to manage any
                                                                         construction induced impacts for these two
                                                                         corridors. The new SCDP (Safe Corridor
                                                                         Demonstration Project) corridor of Gandhinagar-
                                                                         Indira bridge will only involve cosmetic changes
                                                                         including secure sidewalk, road crossing, lane
                                                                         markings, and ICT interventions, which will not
                                                                         cause any physical and economic displacement.
                                                                         SMP will be prepared for this SCDP.
                                                                         OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         there is no construction of new dams or activities
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                    No
                                                                         that are concerned with safe functioning of existing
                                                                         dams.
                                                                         OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                                                         there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                                or around an international waterway that could
                                                  No
 (BP 7.50)                                                               cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                         activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                         waterway.
                                                                         OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No
                                                                         proposed in any disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Environment Management and Safeguards

      From an environment management and safeguards perspective, the key change proposed under the restructuring for
      GSHP II entails reallocation of unused loan amount to add three new road corridors (namely, Radhanpur-Chanasma;
      Mehsana-Palanpur and Vallabhipur-Ranghola), for widening/major maintenance/rehabilitation and one additional
      Safe Corridor Demonstration Project corridor (Gandhinagar-Indira bridge), totaling to a length of about 155 kms.
      While socio-economic benefits are likely to accrue due to the road condition and safety improvement works proposed
      under the restructuring of the project, some adverse impacts on bio-physical environment are also likely to occur.

      Based on the information available from screening exercise and on-going environmental assessments, it is envisaged
      that the potential environmental impacts would include: (a) felling of roadside trees classified as Notified Protected
      Forests (NPFs) in Gujarat; (b) impact on local drainage; (c) possible effect on water resources during construction
      stage; (d) increased air and noise pollution adjacent to the road in the post-construction stage; (e) impacts on existing
      sensitive receptors and road side religious/cultural properties; and (f) construction related Environment, Health and
      Safety (EHS) impacts, including issues related to work zone safety management, occupational health and safety
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



  aspects of workers, debris and waste disposal, dust generation and potential impacts associated with camps, plants
  and use/operation of material sources, if proper measures are not taken for managing construction operations.
  Impacts on forests and critical natural habitats are not envisaged from the proposed interventions.

  The proposed strengthening and widening work of the road corridors will be largely confined to the existing Right of
  Way (RoW). In view of the above, no new environment safeguard policies are being triggered. Large scale, significant
  or irreversible impacts are not envisaged on account of interventions proposed under project restructuring.

  Social Safeguards

  The 3 corridors will have limited impact on people. As the rehabilitation/strengthening and widening work of the
  proposed corridors will be undertaken within the existing Right of Way (RoW), there will be no land acquisition.
  However, few encroachments (commercial and mixed) along the corridors, particularly on Mehsana-Palanpur and
  Mehsana bypass are likely to be affected due to widening of the road. Further, the project may impact community
  owned assets and livestock movement (cattle and goats) along the roads in some areas.

  In accordance with the existing Resettlement Policy Framework and World Bank’s OP/BP 4.12. on Involuntary
  Resettlement, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for Mehsana-Palanpur and Mehsana Bypass will be prepared to cover
  entitlements of non-titleholders (encroachers and squatters) and relocation of community assets. For the other 2
  corridors, Chanasma-Harij-Sami-Radhanpur and Vallabhipur-Ranghola (Via Dhola & Parvala), while no physical and
  economic displacement is expected, there may be construction induced impacts as a result of rehabilitation works
  for which Social Management Plans will be prepared. The new SCDP (Safe Corridor Demonstration Project) corridor
  of Gandhinagar-Indira bridge will provide secure sidewalk, road crossing, lane markings, and ICT interventions, and
  as such, no physical and economic displacement is expected. However, a Social Management Plan for temporary
  impact will be prepared.

  None of the roads pass through Schedule V areas of Gujarat and thereby World Bank’s OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous
  Peoples, will not be applicable. Overall, the improvement of the proposed corridors is likely to have a long-term
  impact for the community benefitting from greater mobility and trade facilitation, especially in economically viable
  districts such as Mehsana. A labour influx management plan will be included in RAP and SMP that will be further
  detailed out after the contractors mobilise to ensure that the host communities are not adversely impacted. The
  existing Institutional arrangement, monitoring system and grievance redressal mechanism for social safeguard
  management will continue to function and cover the 3 corridors and for the Safe Corridor demonstration.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.


  Environment

  Over-all, the project interventions will help in catalyzing the benefits of investments made under the previous project
  (GSHP I, now closed) and the works undertaken under the original project (on-going with most civil works either
  complete or nearing completion). Road improvement interventions proposed under the restructuring of the project
  have a potential to increase economic growth. It is expected that better connectivity and improved road surface
  quality will contribute either directly or indirectly to the over-all development in the project influence area. It is also
  expected that the improved road conditions will facilitate smoother traffic flows, thereby resulting in savings in time
  and vehicle operating costs. Dust pollution that is currently arising due to deficient pavement conditions is expected
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



  to decrease. Further, due to the proposed project interventions, it is anticipated that some local drainage/water
  logging problems and road safety concerns will also be resolved.

  However, increased road use could spur growth of commercial activities along the road. Potential long-term impacts
  may include changes in land use pattern (from agriculture to non-farming purposes). This may also expose the road
  side communities, specifically vulnerable groups to adversities linked to inadequate levels of safety. If not properly
  designed, improved roads could have safety concerns during the operation phase, especially since design speed
  improvement is a desired outcome of the project.The impact of road accidents and its impact on a household level is
  therefore a risk, which will be factored-into the design, implementation and operation of the project. Climate change
  related impacts on the infrastructure created under the project as well as project induced emissions of greenhouse
  gases may also accrue on account of the additionally proposed works.

  Social

  The civil works will be carried out within the existing Right of Way. There will be no land acquisition. Few non-
  titleholders will be impacted along one corridor and on the remaining two corridors there will no adverse impact. To
  address the issues that may arise due to labour influx, a labour management action plan will be prepared. The project
  will not lead to any indirect adverse impacts. There will be long term impact leading to growth of economic
  opportunities for the communities residing in the project influence area. The likelihood of securing employment may
  also increase in-migration towards to the project sites.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


  Environment

  The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared for safeguards management requires analyzing various
  alternatives for each sub-project. All civil works to be financed under the proposed project restructuring will follow
  existing alignments and would largely be confined to the available Right of Way. Since the operation does not involve
  construction of green field roads or by-passes, alternative measures to manage adverse impacts focus on reducing
  the impact on road-side features.

  Alternatives are being explored in cases where alignment adjustments are required to avoid and/or minimize impact
  on roadside trees, water bodies, sensitive receptors or other such features that are locally considered important. For
  this, as part of the sub-project preparation process, an environmental screening has been conducted. This screening
  allowed for identification of key environmental issues early-on in the project preparation cycle. To address potential
  impacts on biodiversity and natural habitats, the project’s environment screening mechanism was designed to
  identify and avoid impacts on critical/ecologically significant natural habitats. This has ensured that no such road
  traversing through a designated protected area or a critical natural habitat is included in the additional works
  identified for coverage under the restructured project.

  Further, engineering design for roads incorporates feedback from the consultations with concerned local community,
  state departments (including officials from Forests and Wildlife and Public Works Department), Community Based
  Organizations and other key stakeholders. The factors to influence the design of road improvement works has
  included tree cutting, loss of arable land, road safety aspects, impact on cultural/religious properties, sensitive
  receptors and water sources. During the on-going engineering design process and as part of the environment impact
  assessments, cross-sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives are being explored. Adjustment of cross-
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



 section at a few locations involving tree cutting are being made during the on-going design of the new road corridors.
 Further, alternatives to increase resilience and environmental sustainability (such as through reduction in material
 footprint) are being evaluated.

 As part of activities under Component B, the project is already supporting the PWD in improving project preparation
 and management practices, design and construction standards and adopt new technologies, specifically for
 promoting cost-effective and environmentally optimal road development – some of these activities also consider
 ‘alternatives’ from the view-point of reducing costs and for minimizing the over-all environmental footprint in
 comparison to conventional practices. To the extent possible and depending on relevance to specific site conditions,
 these will be considered in the design of road corridors proposed under restructuring.

 Social

 Corridor of impact approach has been followed to reduce impacts on social features within the Right of Way of the
 road leading to no acquisition of land for the three corridors and impact on few non-titleholders along only one
 corridor.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

 Environment Management and Safeguards

 Under sub-component A1, upgrading and rehabilitation of all corridors is complete except for two (NCB-01 & NCB-
 02B). In NCB-01 one ROB is in progress and will be completed before original loan closing date. In case of NCB-02B,
 pre-construction activities are in progress and contract award is expected by March 2019. For works under sub-
 component A2, four-laning of Mehsana-Himmatnagar corridor through Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Maintain-
 Transfer (DBFOMT), is in progress. The construction started in February 2017 and is expected to be complete by
 August 2018. For the OPRC works, the RFP document has been issued and the contract is expected to be awarded in
 September 2018. For activities under Component B, Sector Policy and Institutional Development, all consultants are
 on board, studies have been completed and recommendations given. Many of the recommendations have been
 approved by the client, Roads and Buildings Department (R&BD). For Component C – Road Safety Management, Safe
 Corridor Demonstration Project (SCDP) (Bharuch-Dehgam), the contract for civil works was awarded in October 2017
 and ITS interventions are under coordination with Police (Home Department of Government of Gujarat), which will
 go beyond the original closing date of the project.

 Environment management instruments for the original project had been structured to address: (i) detailed sub-
 project specific EA for widening and strengthening of project corridors covered under Component A of the project
 except the road network covered in OPRC contract; and (ii) Environmental Management Framework for maintenance
 roads under Component A1 and the OPRC contract. The environmental compliance and performance of the original
 project has been 'satisfactory'. Institutional mechanisms are in place and the project is regularly monitoring/reporting
 on implementation of EMPs.

 The additional investments to be covered under the proposed project restructuring will follow the same approach,
 institutional arrangements and similar management instruments as that agreed and implemented for the original
 project. The Environment Management Framework (EMF), prepared for the original project works will continue to be
 applicable for the restructured project along with the application of the screening protocol for upfront identification
 of any significant environmental issues. Therefore, in line with the approach adopted for the original project,
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



  safeguard policy issues have been assessed for works proposed under restructuring by carrying out screening and
  applying OP 4.01, OP 4.36 and OP 4.11, which will result-in distinct instruments.

  Accordingly, Environmental Assessments will be conducted for the 3 roads proposed for widening/major
  maintenance/rehabilitation under project restructuring. The environmental assessments for the new/proposed
  works are currently well underway and will lead to preparation of corridor specific Environment Management Plans
  (EMPs). The EAs will also assess potential climate related impacts and suggest appropriate measures for incorporation
  in the sub-project design, as needed in the light of site conditions. Findings and recommendations from corridor
  specific EAs will be integrated into engineering design and sub-project EMPs will be integrated into bid documents.
  The replantation measures to compensate tree cutting will be addressed through Forest Department, GoG, as has
  been done for the original project.

  For the new Safe Corridor Demonstration Project (Gandhinagar to Indira Bridge), proposed interventions are specific
  such as provision of secure sidewalk, road crossings, lane markings and ICT interventions on an existing road, which
  doesn't warrant a specific EA study. However, given that worksite safety measures for road users and workers are of
  concern during execution, an EMP with appropriate environment health and safety measures will be prepared and
  integrated into the Bidding Documents.

  Overall, R&BD and specifically the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) is fully aware and familiar with the potential
  environmental impacts and the required mitigation/management measures, as they have successfully implemented
  the previous Bank supported project (GSHP I, now closed, wherein the ICR had rated Borrower Performance as 'Highly
  Satisfactory'). In the previous project (GSHP I) as well the on-going project (GSHP II), environment management plans,
  by and large have been satisfactorily implemented. There are several good practices and lessons that have been
  accounted for in the selection, design and execution of works. The PIU will be supported by field level R&BD engineers
  for different project corridors and Construction Supervision Consultants who will be providing specific day-to-day
  oversight on implementation of EMPs as an integral part of technical supervision of different construction contracts.
  Further, Project Management Consultants will also support design and implementation of EAs/EMPs.

  Social Safeguards

  GoG has demonstrated its willingness to adapt and adopt innovative ways of management of social safeguard. The
  implementation of second road project clearly demonstrated that the all land was acquired and non-titleholder were
  relocated people were relocated prior to initiation of civil works. The effective consultations with the communities
  facilitated the relocation of common property including the religious structure. This project has demonstrated the
  use of ICT tools by developing MIS and mobile application for "real time" monitoring the progress of implementation
  of Resettlement Action Plan. In addition, the tool has been enhanced to cover the preparation stage too. The R&BD
  will adopt this ICT tool for the sector as whole for monitoring the preparation and implementation of land acquisition
  and resettlement and rehabilitation. As some of the key personnel in the PIU involved previously with GSHP I continue
  involvement, there is fair exposure and familiarity to Bank’s safeguard policies, procedures and documentation
  requirements. An Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU) headed by an Executive Engineer will be
  established. Additionally, site-specific Grievance Redressal Committees and an online Complaint Handling
  Mechanism has been established for the project. For effective resolution and tracking of grievances and maximum
  outreach, a Toll-Free Helpline System has been envisaged for the project.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



Environment Management and Safeguards

Stakeholders: From an environmental perspective, the primary stakeholders of the project include: (i) the community
residing along/close to the road, including farmers; (ii) road-side shop owners/vendors/businessmen; (iii) road users;
and (iv) trusts/committees of the religious properties and local market associations; and (v) workers employed by the
Contractors. The secondary stakeholders include local bodies like panchayats and municipalities, officials from Public
Works, Forest and Wildlife, Agriculture, Irrigation, Utility Departments and representatives from the Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs).

Consultations: Stakeholder consultation mechanisms have been central to the design and implementation of sub-
projects under GSHP. This includes procedures for dissemination of information and consultation with communities
in particular through various stages of the sub-project cycle. While design stage involvement requires stakeholder
participation in planning road alignment and providing for local level interventions (such as those related to
cultural/religious properties, provision of ramps/access and drainage), implementation phase requirements
encourage feedback for a more participatory monitoring. Guidance on consultations has been laid out in the
Environment Management Framework (EMF) to ensure proper stakeholders consultation at all key stages of sub-
project preparation and implementation. The consultation process is designed such that: (i) affected people are
included in the decision making process; (ii) links between communities and their natural resource base adjacent to
project locations are explored; (iii) public awareness/information sharing on project alternatives and benefits is
promoted and; (iv) views and design solutions are solicited. Over-all, the consultation strategy/process is designed to
enhance positive and manage negative impacts from the project.

Findings from the consultations are being considered in deciding the alignment/cross sections, drainage facilities,
safety and other design interventions. Follow-up consultations will also be conducted, as needed through pre-
construction and construction stages of the project. Outputs from this process have been/will be integrated into the
engineering design to the extent possible. Consultations on environmental issues and design propositions, with both
primary and secondary stakeholders are being conducted as part of the on-going EA studies. The public consultation
process so far has indicated that the people support the proposed project interventions. Some concerns have also
been highlighted by the people and these pertain to drainage; accidents and road safety; potential disturbances to
religious property, schools and water sources. These have been/are being addressed during design preparation, to
the extent possible.

Disclosure: Following the procedure and method adopted for the original project, the environment management and
safeguard instruments/documents for the new/additional works will be disclosed in line with Bank's policy on
Disclosure. As per the agreed procedure, the sub-project specific EAs and subsequent EMPs (and stand alone EMP in
case of SCDP) will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to clearance for bid invitation. The executive summary
of the documents will be translated in vernacular for information and use of key stakeholders and will be placed in
locations accessible to public. Further, the full document will be made available at R&BD's field offices (sub-project
level) for reference of interested individuals/groups and also uploaded on the Project Authority’s (Roads and Buildings
Department, Govt. of Gujarat) website.

Social Safeguards

Stakeholders: From the social perspective, primary stakeholders related to this project include: (i) the community
residing along/close to the road, including farmers and vulnerable groups (WHH, BPL, ST/SC/OBC), encroachers and
squatters; (ii) road-side shop owners/vendors/businessmen; (iii) trusts/committees of the religious properties and
local market associations; and (iv) labourers/workers employed by the Contractors. The secondary stakeholders
                       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



                  include local bodies like panchayats and municipalities, officials from Public Works, Land Administration,Labour
                  Welfare and representatives from the Community Based Organizations (CBOs) and Non-Governmental Organizations
                  (NGOs).

                  Consultations: Consultation on social issues will be an integral part of the preparation of RAP and SMP. The project
                  will support a continuous citizen engagement and feedback system to enhance stakeholder engagement through the
                  life of the project.

                  Disclosure: Following the procedure and method adopted for the original project, the social safeguard
                  instruments/documents for the new/additional works will be disclosed in line with Bank's policy on Disclosure. As per
                  the agreed procedure, the sub-project specific RAP and SMP will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to
                  clearance for bid invitation. The RAP and SMP will be translated in vernacular language and disclosed at public places.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        20-May-2013                                                         20-May-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
            India                                                              18-May-2013
            Comments
            The dates mentioned here and the responses to questions below are for the documents prepared for the original
            project. The main instrument - EMF remains valid for the new works as well. Documents (EAs and EMPs) for the
            corridors included under restructuring will be uploaded once the DPRs and EAs are prepared.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Date of submission for disclosure
21-Jul-2013                                                                   22-Jul-2013
“In country? Disclosure
                            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          India                                                                21-Jul-2013
           Comments
           The dates mentioned here and the responses to questions in below C are for the documents prepared for the original
           project. The RPF remains valid for the new works as well. RAPs for the corridors included under restructuring will be
           disclosed once they are prepared and cleared
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
21-Jul-2013                                                                     29-Jul-2013
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            India                                                               21-Jul-2013
            Comments
            The dates mentioned here and the responses to questions in below C are for the documents prepared for the original
            project. Since OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) will not be applicable to the corridors included under restructuring, no
            Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared.


       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                  Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                    Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                       Yes



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                      Yes

            Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                                    Yes
            impacts on cultural property?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    Yes
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Shigeyuki Sakaki


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
