The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017| Report No: ISDSR21357




                       Regional Vice President:     Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:     Arup Banerji
                Senior Global Practice Director:    Jose Luis Irigoyen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:        Juan Gaviria
                            Task Team Leader:       Jean-Francois Marteau
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P147499                                                     Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Jean-Francois Marteau                                       Croatia
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    30-Apr-2015                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GTD03

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    200,700,000.00                                              200,700,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Counterpart Funding                                                                               17,350,000.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                     183,350,000.00
    Total                                                                                            200,700,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the operational efficiency and the financial sustainability of the
    public railway sector in Croatia.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


 3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
         The Project consists of the following parts, in order to bring sustainability to the main railway undertaking in
Croatia (HZ Infrastructure (HZI), HZ Passenger Transport (HZP) and HZ Cargo (HZC). It also aims at reinforcing the role of
the Ministry of Sea, Transport and Infrastructure (MSTI) in its coordination and policy making function. This support
comprises mostly support to company reform, enabling investment and support to the implementation of each company’s
retrenchment programs and to the mitigation of the impact of these programs. The main changes related to the project
restructuring of June 2018 are : (i) for HZP, the purchase of 4 new Diesel Multiple Units (DMU) instead of rehabilitation of
aging rolling stock, and (ii) for HZI, the increase of technical assistance activities as well as the rehabilitation of the Savski
Marof Zagreb line, replacing multiple rehabilitation of small sections along the network. The project description is detailed
as follows:

Part A. Support to Sector Restructuring and Coordination

Finalizing asset management separation among the Railway Companies and clarifying the legal status of their main assets
, and Project coordination support, sector reform monitoring, financial advisor for the restructuring of HZC and definition
of railway services obligations with HZI and HZP, through the provision of consulting services, non-consulting services,
Training, and Operating Costs to MSTI.


Part B. Support to HZ Passenger Transport Restructuring

Retrenchment. Provision of HZP Retrenchment Payments, including job outplacement and retraining services, counseling
and advisory support.
Investment to contribute to the restructuring plan of HZP
       (a)     Purchasing new Diesel Motor Units (DMU) and rehabilitating rolling stock to improve efficiency of the
               fleet.
       (b)     Modernizing and integrating information technology.
       (c)     Preparing studies to adapt business processes to reorganize operations and improve energy efficiency of
               operations.
       (d)     Capacity building on management and restructuring.


Part C. Support to HZ Cargo Restructuring
          The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



1.       Retrenchment. Provision of HZC Retrenchment Payments, including job outplacement and retraining services,
         counseling and advisory support.


2.       Investment to contribute to the restructuring plan of HZC


         (a)     Rehabilitating rolling stock to improve efficiency of the fleet.
         (b)     Modernizing and integrating information technology.
         (c)     Capacity building on management and restructuring.


Part D. Support to HZ Infrastructure Restructuring and Enabling Investment to Increase System Efficiency



1.       Retrenchment. Provision of HZI Retrenchment Payments, including job outplacement and retraining services,
         counseling and advisory support.


2.       Installing railway safety crossings


3.       Undertaking other railway safety works, including:


         (a)     Reinforcing cuts and slope on the two corridors from Rijeka;


4.       Undertaking emergency infrastructure investments, including:


         (a)     Rehabilitating the Ogulin-Moravice line;
         (b)     Rehabilitating the Zagreb-Savski Marof line; and
         (c)     Replacing switches, electrical, and support systems (for safety and signaling) on international and national
                 corridors selected pursuant to criteria set forth in Supplemental Letter #4; and
         (d)     Constructing and improving the Borongaj, Rijeka-Brajdica, and Vinkovci railway stations.


5.       Capacity building on management and restructuring and consultant support for the implementation of the
         company restructuring.


The main infrastructure change is that the rehabilitation of Savski Marof – Zagreb line is now planed under Project Part D. This
infrastructure is part of the Corridor X and bears one of the heaviest traffic on the Croatian network

Sub-projects originally planned, but removed from the further financing are the following:

     -   The Rehabilitation of the Varazdin-Cakovec line, which was one of the high priority regional lines having significant
         passenger traffic as many as 45 trains per day. Rehabilitation would improve the current speed restriction at Varazdin
         station on the line and secure Cakovec station from closure. However, the traffic on Savski Marof Zagreb is much
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



          higher.
      -   Remediation of tunnels, Construction of train stops and pedestrian flyovers on several lines;
      -   Emergency bridges reconstruction. Works were planned to be done on steel bridges (originally two were envisaged –
          Lubostina and Klostar). Works included the remediation of existing abutments and the mounting of steel bridge frame.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Original Project envisaged environmentally relevant works on rolling sock and railway infrastructure.
    Periodic maintenance and rehabilitation of rolling stock aiming at improving efficiency of the fleet
    (component 2 and 3) included locomotives, passengers and freight carriages. The works were carried out in
    specialized workshops. Under Component 4, activities planned rehabilitation works for cuts and slope
    reinforcement on the corridors from Rijeka, rehabilitation and various emergency electromechanical and
    structure works in Zagreb, rehabilitation of the Ogulin - Moravice line and Varazdin - Cakovec line as well as
    railway crossings installations at various points. Project restructuring brings in changes under the Component
    4: the originally planned rehabilitation of Varazdin – Cakovec line is abandoned as well as reinforcement of
    tunnels, reconstruction of bridges sub-projects and some other while rehabilitation of Savski Marof – Zagreb
    line is added (triggering ESMF revision). The latter subproject is B+ category due to the location in the water-
    protection zone, however, it passes no nature protected areas and the station buildings to be renovated are
    not protected. The line rehabilitation entails work needed to reinstate the original railway characteristics
    (e.g. enable the speed of 120 km/h) including necessary electrotechnical works, works on elements of tracks
    (tracks, change of aggregate, foundations, sleepers, etc.), rehabilitation of platforms, and administrative
    buildings. Up to date, the detail design is being prepared/adjusted (the original rehabilitation scope was
    broader and included drainage). A site-specific ESMP, compliant to updated ESMF, will be prepared when the
    main design for Savski Marof - Zagreb is ready. The envisaged works on this section include, but are not
    limited to, replacement of elements of the open tracks, crossing tracks and switches, rehabilitation of
    shelters and adaptation of the two-station buildings. Across the rail section the installation of the tampon
    layer of minimum 30 cm thickness is envisaged. The project provides for the rehabilitation of the bridges,
    culverts, underpasses and pedestrian underpasses and for the installation of the synthetic flooring on the
    rail-road level crossings. No substructure, rehabilitation of the track structures overhaul will take place.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Natasa Vetma, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Jelena Lukic, Social Safeguards Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered        Explanation
                                                           The original as well as restructured project is
                                                           dealing with railways rehabilitations and
                                                           maintenance activities thus the project is
                                                           categorized as Category B project.
                                                           The Original Project investments have a number of
                                                           impacts to the environment ranging from minor to
                                                           moderately significant. The three borrowers (HZP,
                                                           HZC and HZI) have prepared a single commonly
                                                           prepared Environmental and Social Management
                                                           Framework (ESMF) providing guidance for
                                                           preparation of site specific ESMPs or ESMP
                                                           Checklists for smaller works (e.g. rolling stock
                                                           overhaul, repair of small tunnels, etc.). For works
                                                           which have started in 2014, and prior to the Board
                                                           approval, environmental audits were carried out.
                                                           Under restructuring, the project remains B category
                                                           as technical scope is unchanged: rehabilitation
                                                           works on Savski Marof – Zagreb line were
                                                           introduced, while some activities were dropped
                                                           (including, but not limited to rehabilitaiton of
                                                           Cakovec – Varazdin line, Reconstruction of
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                sectioning facilities with neutral sections, drainage
                                                           system, restoration of trunks). Potential adverse
                                                           impacts of Savski Marof– Zagreb section
                                                           rehabilitation activities are reduced by the fact that
                                                           works will be done by specialised railway
                                                           machinery. Main impact include noise, generation
                                                           of hazardous waste (old sleepers and stone
                                                           aggregate), OHS (works on electricity network and
                                                           traffic regulation in particular) and risk of accidental
                                                           spilling (in water-protection areas). For
                                                           rehabilitation works on Savski Marof – Podsused
                                                           line, site specific ESMP will be prepared pursuant to
                                                           WB SG policy and national environemntal
                                                           regulation requirements. The ESMP will be stand-
                                                           alone document or an annex to reduced-scope EIA
                                                           (Environmental Study), depending on the
                                                           opinion/requirement of the Ministry of
                                                           Environment and Energy (MoEE), in accordance
                                                           with the national EIA legislation.
                                                           Ogulin - Moravice section rehabilitation, completed
                                                           in December 2017, was not financed from the
                                                           Project therefore SG procedures did not apply. The
       The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



                                                           ESMF was revised/updated by the Cleint in line with
                                                           reconstruction incurred changes (as the Savski
                                                           Marof – zagreb line was not considered in the
                                                           original ESMF) and redisclosed on June 19, 2018.
                                                           Site specific ESMP will be prepared for
                                                           rehabilitation of Ogulin – Moravice railway line,
                                                           with opinion for MoEE on impact to Natura 2000.
                                                           For all other envisaged works (e.g. station buildings
                                                           rehabilitation, replacement of switches), ESMP
                                                           Checklists will be developped.
                                                           The project will continue financing the severance
                                                           payment for retrenchment and the package of
                                                           social mitigation measures for affected workers.
                                                           The implementing companies (HZP, HZC and HZP)
                                                           will prepare annual retrenchment plans in
                                                           accordance with good international practice,
                                                           national labor law and applicable collective
                                                           agreements. These retrenchment plans are subject
                                                           to World Bank No Objection.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No              Not applicable
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                           Rehabilitation works will be carried out within the
                                                           designated railway corridor and existing access
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                           routes will be used for material delivery therefore
                                                           there will be no adverse impact on natural habitats
                                                           The project is dealing with existing infrastructure
                                                           and no new sections construction is envisaged.
                                                           Thus no felling or impacts to forests from the
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No              Project are expected. Unintentional adverse
                                                           impacts are possible e.g. forest fires, however,
                                                           these are addressed through prevention measures
                                                           prescribed in ESMF and integrated to ESMPs.
                                                           Purchase of pest management agents and other
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No              type of activities that could cause changes on pest
                                                           management are not part of this Project.
                                                           Is not expected for the project rehabilitation works
                                                           to impact physical or cultural resources therefore
                                                           the policy is not triggered; however, due to possible
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No              earth works, ESMPs and ESMP Checklists will
                                                           include chance finds clauses. No buildings
                                                           introduced under the Restructuring are protected
                                                           in this respect.
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No              Not applicable
                                                           None of reconstruction and rehabilitation works to
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes             be carried out on bridges, railway tracks and
                                                           crossings;           signaling            upgrade;
       The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



                                                           construction/improvement works at stations and
                                                           stops are expected to involve either land
                                                           acquisition or negatively affect third parties.
                                                           Reconstruction and rehabilitation works will
                                                           remain within the railway corridor and will be
                                                           carried out on adjacent state owned land thus not
                                                           requiring land acquisition. No permanent physical
                                                           or economic displacement of affected population is
                                                           expected under the proposed HZI investments.
                                                           However, rehabilitation and reconstruction works
                                                           on slopes and cuts at the Rijeka-Skrljevo railway
                                                           section may require temporary use of private lands
                                                           for access and works on the sites which may lead to
                                                           temporary loss of lands.

                                                           Though permanent land acquisition is not expected
                                                           under the project at this time, as a precaution the
                                                           RPF has been prepared and designed to cover the
                                                           possibility that some unanticipated permanent
                                                           land acquisition will turn out to be necessary. The
                                                           RPF sets out the guiding principles for development
                                                           of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated
                                                           Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) that may be
                                                           required during project implementation.

                                                           The works carried out before project approval and
                                                           subject to retroactive financing have not triggered
                                                           any land acquisition or resettlement.

                                                           Dams or activities that would impact tem are not
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                           subject of the project.
                                                           For the purpose of rehabilitation works and
                                                           washing of rolling stock only existing water supply
                                                           and wastewater networks will be used, i.e. the
                                                           water will not be extracted directly from or
                                                           discharged into surface or ground water bodies.
                                                           These requirements are included to due diligence
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                   documents (EMPs and EMP Checklists in
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                  particular). Savski Marof – Podsused line is
                                                           stretched along Water Protection Zone as classified
                                                           in the Regulations on the Conditions for
                                                           Establishing the Sanitary Resources Protection
                                                           Zone. However, the works do not include drainage
                                                           or any other that could result in significant changes
                                                           in water regulation or risks for water quality.
                                                           No disputed areas are identified in the Republic of
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                           Croatia.
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The original and restructured project both trigger Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 policy. The project design
      classifies it as category B. The Borrowers: Croatian Railways Passenger Transport (HZP), Croatian Railway Cargo (HZC),
      Croatian Railways Infrastructure (HZI) will act as implementing agencies while the Ministry of Maritime Affairs,
      Transport and Infrastructure (MMATI, now Ministry of Sea, Transport and Infrastructure – MSTI) acts as project
      coordinator. Environmental due diligence will be applied through set of procedures and conditions defined in the
      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared by the Borrower. It presents ESMP templates
      for site specific ESMPs and ESMP Checklists for smaller scale works. The ESMF became the integral part of project’s
      Operations Manual.

      It is not expected that the project will have significant adverse impacts on the environment and human health
      (confirmed in the so far implementation). No activities considered Category A will be financed. Project activities range
      from complex reconstruction interventions that have short term, limited and low impact, to simple mechanical works
      in workshops. Hence, site specific ESMPs and ESMP Checklists were prepared for these activities, respectively, prior
      to commencement of works. HZI emergency repairs major impacts include earthworks and transport generated dust,
      generation of large quantities of construction and hazardous waste e.g. wooden sleepers, used stone aggregate and
      electronic waste and potential impacts to water from rehabilitation of bridges, culverts and earthworks in water-
      protection areas. Repair and overhaul works on rolling stock of HZPP and HZC takes place in workshops. Workshops
      are located in urbanised areas well connected to waste waters collection and (in some cases) treatment systems.
      Some of the workshops also have valid ISO 14001 certificate. Major impact envisaged is tied to quantities and
      management of generated hazarous and non-hazardous waste.

      Until restructuring (June 2018) 13 audit reports were prepared for activities that commenced prior to the Project
      including substations replacement, cathodic protection, replacing electric point machines with hydraulic replacement
      of switches, railway automatic communication center replacement, reconstruction of shelters. 14 ESMP Checklists
      prepared by HZI (for replacement of substations in Zagreb, Sisak-Moslavina County and Bjelovar-Bilogora County,
      rehabilitation of cuts at 5 locations within Rijeka – Sapjane and Zagreb – Rijeka sections, single ESMP Checklist for 50
      road-railway crossings), 5 by HZPP and 1 prepared by HZC for rolling stock rehabilitation and modernization.

      The sub-project Savski Marof – Podsused line rehabilitation, to be implemented under the Restructured project, is
      placed in the urbanized area and does not envisage new types of works compared to those already described in the
      existing ESMF. As the Project’s technical scope remains the same, the total Project categorization remains B. The
      existing ESMF will be revised and re-disclosed to introduce new sub-project, ensure its timely and adequate
      environmental review and enable public participation.

      Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 policy is triggered. Reconstruction and rehabilitation works are not expected to
      involve either land permanent acquisition or negatively affect third parties as the works will remain within the railway
      corridor and adjacent state owned land that is not occupied or used by third parties. thus not requiring land
      acquisition. However, rehabilitation and reconstruction works on slopes and cuts at the Rijeka-Skrljevo railway
      section may require temporary use of private lands for access and works on the sites which may lead to temporary
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



  loss of lands. At this time it is expected that land acquisition will only be temporary, but as a precaution a Resettlement
  Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed and designed to cover the possibility that some unanticipated permanent
  land acquisition will turn out to be necessary.

  The main social risk of the project is associated with retrenchment in HZI, HZP and HZC. The risks and impacts
  associated with retrenchment are covered under the umbrella OP 4.01 policy. Since 2015 (under the Original Project)
  the retrenchment was carried out in accordance with national labor law, applicable collective agreements and good
  international practice. Since 2016 the retrenchment was carried out on a voluntary basis. In addition to financing the
  severance payment, the Bank is financing the package of mitigation measures including counseling and training of
  retrenched workers. The national legislation and collective agreements provide sound protection of workers and
  include definition of collective dismissal, formula for the calculation of severance pay, options for selection criteria
  and provide additional protections for affected workers such as unemployment benefits, health insurance and job
  search and career counselling support. The National Labor Law and Collective agreements have provisions for the
  mandatory consultations with workers’ representatives (Works Council and unions). In instances of collective
  dismissals, the Croatian Employment Service needs to be informed and consulted upon.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The project supports a wide range of activities including overhauls and periodic maintenance of locomotives, electro-
  motor trains and passenger carriages, construction works such as rehabilitation of crossings, reconstruction of cuts
  and slopes. These activities will not have long-term, significant adverse impact to the environment and human health.
  Procedures, guidelines and measures included to ESMF are set to eliminate such projects, but also to minimize
  environmental impacts of all eligible activities.

  Activities of the project related to rolling stock will result in generation of large amounts of wastes ranging from
  municipal waste to potentially toxic and hazardous liquid and solid wastes. Works carried out under the Component
  4 relating to emergency rehabilitation are expected to produce impacts the main being generation of large amount
  of hazardous waste (mainly electronic waste, impregnated sleepers and contaminated stone aggregate) and mineral
  waste (from earth works). Although the responsibility for such wastes is assumed by contractor of works, the ESMF
  addresses these impacts by prescribing procedures and mitigation measures that will become a part of tender
  documentation and work contracts.

  Most of the project rehabilitation works is not expected to produce any impact to physical or cultural resources;
  however, there is a slight possibility of chance finds. Procedures in such cases are defined in due diligence documents
  and will become a part of tender documentation and work contracts.

  All rehabilitation works already identified will remain within the railway corridor and will not require any land
  acquisition. The same is true for rehabilitation works to be carried out on tunnels, bridges, drainage and replacement
  of sleepers, railway tracks, etc. No physical or economic displacement of affected population is expected under the
  proposed investments. However, the World Bank Operational Policy 4. 12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered
  as rehabilitation works for cuts and slopes may require temporary use of private lands for access and works on the
  sites which may cause temporary loss of lands. Though permanent land acquisition is not expected under the project
  at this time, but as a precaution the RPF has been developed and designed to cover the possibility that some
  unanticipated permanent land acquisition will turn out to be necessary. The RPF sets out the guiding principles for
  development of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) that may be
  required during project implementation.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)




  The works carried out before project approval and subject to retroactive financing have not triggered any land
  acquisition or resettlement, nor have the activities carried out before the restructuring or planned as part of the
  restructuring.

  The major retrenchment was carried out under the Original Project. In 2018 it is expected that between 50 – 100
  workers leave each company as a result of voluntary retrenchment and retirement.



3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The project excludes from funding all sub-projects classified as the A Category project and non-eligible sub-projects
  listed in the ESMF (IBRD list of non-eligible projects).

  Category B projects might vary in the potential impacts hence are divided in two sub-categories;

  Category B+ projects are considered those that carry potential impacts lesser than Category A, and are short term,
  but impacts that are still potentially adverse and significant. The magnitude and scope of these impacts are difficult
  to determine in the sub-project identification stage. Example of this might be a new train station on existing corridor.
  Category B+ projects would in this case require preparation of ESMP. ESMP implementation is responsibility of the
  Borrower. Projects that are categorized as B+ will undergo a prior review of WB environmental specialist.

  Projects classified under category B- are those including, simple reconstruction, maintenance and activities causing
  intermediate predictable or accidental emissions. These include railways rehabilitations and rehabilitations of rolling
  stock. ESMP checklist would be used for such activities.

  Environmental compliance of B+ and B- project implementation with Bank’s and national policies are regularly
  reported by the Borrower to PIU and the Bank as a part of general progress reporting, except in the case of HZPP.

  Projects classified as category C projects do not require further safeguards (mitigation or monitoring) actions.

  Workers affected by retrenchment will receive job search counseling, and training for pre-qualification.



4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Under the Original Project, the Borrowers have prepared an Environmental Management Framework (ESMF) and
  defines the environmental screening, mitigating, monitoring and auditing procedures for the project activities.

  The project activities underwent screening and categorization in accordance with the procedures set in ESMF,
  depending on which, environmental due diligence document was be applied. Depending on the activity, mitigation
  measures were address in one of the following: a) ESMP, b) simplified (checklist) ESMP.
  The relevant ESMP and the Checklists were made part of the bidding documentation for the rolling stock
  rehabilitation. The responsibility for implementation will lie on the Contractors. To ensure leverage on the
  Contractor’s environmental performance an appropriate clause was introduced in the contracts, specifying penalties
  in the case of noncompliance with the contractual environmental provisions.
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



  The Clients (implementing railway companies) have a different level of safeguards performance: HZC in charge for
  more complex works with higher environmental risk is in full compliance while HZPP carrying less works and of lesser
  environmental impact is struggling with the documentation preparation, supervision and reporting. HZI had timely
  prepared its environmental documentation, no significant incompliances were recorded and the major project issue
  – generated waste sleepers and aggregate is managed well (by energy recovery and disposal in licensed facilities).
  Both companies are investing efforts as improvements are required in responsibility distribution, placement of
  environmental department, and communication and information flow.

  For Savski Marof – Zagreb line rehabilitation a site specific ESMP was be prepared and for all other planned sub-
  projects, as are typical and not impacting any protected areas, ESMP Checklists will work to address the risks.

  Project activities that include retroactive financing went through the environmental auditing procedure as described
  in ESMF, under the Original Project. For these activities, site visits and environmental audits were conducted by
  respective environmental personnel in each company and a WB environmental specialist. The audits were a subject
  of WB No Objection.

  The Borrowers have various levels of capacity to carry out safeguards measures. While HZI and HZC have
  environmental departments, HZP does not have separate environmental department or office and the responsible
  persons for due diligence are sourced from technical sectors as well sa very little experience in environmental
  management. The WB environmental specialist provided support to the various Borrowers’ teams in site visits, review
  of due diligence documents and other support on a needs basis. In addition, the WB environmental specialist
  organized training on WB safeguards for environmental personnel, or identify possibilities for such in the region.

  For the Restructuring, the Borrower will revise and re-disclose ESMF accordingly. For the Savski Marof – Podrused lne
  rehabilitation sub-project, HZI will prepare and publicly consult ESMP based on the finalized main design and ESMF
  defined procedures. ESMP will be prepared as a stand-alone document or as a part of broader EA (e.g. reduced EIA),
  depending on the decision of the Ministry of Environmental and Energy.

  The three implementing companies (HZC, HZP and HZI) prepare annual retrenchment plans which are subject to WB
  No Objection. Applicable collective agreement provides clear formulas for the calculation of the severance payment,
  methods of retrenchment and selectin criteria. In addition, the WB financed social mitigation measures also include
  training of the companies' HR departments (HR Academy).


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders in the project are MSTI, HZI, HZP, HZC, the Ministry of Finance and overall community.

  The draft Environmental Management Framework document , including draft ESMP checklists, along with an
  announcement of the public consultation workshop was disclosed on March 5, 2015 in English and Croatian on the
  web-pages of MSTI, HZI, HZC and HZP, for two weeks. The ESMF was disclosed on infoshop on March 12. Joint
  ESMF/RPF public consultation meeting will be held on March 20, 2015. All comments, suggestions and questions will
  be addressed and included to ESMF in summarized form.

  Restructuring instigated revised ESMF was re-disclosed June 19, 2018 on web-pages of HZI.
                       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



                  The similar procedure will be followed for site specific ESMPs and audit reports as defined by the ESMF. All due
                  diligence documents will be disclosed on the HZI, HZC and HZP websites respectively, and hardcopy will be available
                  at their premises for at least two weeks. Public will be asked for comments.

                  The draft version of Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed on the HZI website on March 13, 2015 and
                  InfoShop on March 13, 2015.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
        02-Jul-2015                                                        20-Mar-2015
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            Croatia                                                          19-Mar-2015
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
13-Mar-2015                                                                 13-Mar-2015
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
          Croatia                                                            13-Mar-2015
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
         The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                      Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
 review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                        No

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                      No
 to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                      Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                      Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                      Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
           The World Bank                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)



    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                  Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Jean-Francois Marteau


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
