The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Sep-2019| Report No: ISDSR21477




                       Regional Vice President:   Victoria Kwakwa
                             Country Director:    Martin Raiser
                             Regional Director:   Ranjit J. Lamech
                   Practice Manager/Manager:      Binyam Reja
                            Task Team Leader:     Arturo Ardila Gomez, Jin Wang
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
                                                                 China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Arturo Ardila Gomez                                          China
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    27-Dec-2013                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    IEAT2


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                           250.66
    Total Financing                                                                                              250.66
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               120.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                        130.66
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                      130.66


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable Xining residents to travel between the city center and
    the western part of the city in a fast, efficient, and safe manner, through strategic improvements to Wusixi Road, a major
    transport and urban development corridor.



.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component 1: Urban Roads. This component will finance construction of short road sections, which are part of the
proposed integrated public transport corridor and are necessary for providing good quality public transport services in
the newly developed Xichuan District in the west of the city. Sufficient provisions for public transport and NMT will be
included to these roads. All road works will also include underground utilities, e.g. drainage and sewerage pipes, and
environmental protection measures.

Component 2: Public Transport. This component will finance improvements to public transport infrastructure,
operations, and complementary facilities on the proposed integrated public transport corridor on Wusixi Road. Major
improvements include: (i) construction of dedicated bus lanes and safe and accessible bus stops and terminals; provision
of bus priority signals, safe and accessible pedestrian crossings, pedestrian paths, bicycle lanes and other non-motorized
transport facilities; (ii) installation and operation of a new bus dispatching system utilizing intelligent transport systems
(ITS) and advanced public transport management; (iii) procurement of new clean, safe and user-friendly buses; and (iv)
construction of a public transport interchange at the western end of Wusixi Road which will provide fast, efficient, and
comfort transfers between intra- and inter- city bus services, and development of an advanced management and service
system for the interchange.

Component 3: Intelligent Traffic Management. This component will finance the development of an intelligent traffic
management system in support of the proposed integrated public transport corridor on Wusixi Road. It will include
investments in installing and operating: (i) a traffic command center; (ii) an area traffic control (ATC) system; and (iii)
equipment for advanced traffic monitoring, enforcement, and information services, such as closed-circuit television
(CCTV) monitoring cameras, traffic enforcement cameras, variable message signs, a data collection and analysis system,
and the fiber optical network.

Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building. This component will improve the city’s institutional capacity for urban
transport planning and management through financing the following activities: (i) strategic studies in support of
achieving the PDO and the city’s development goals; (ii) training and knowledge exchange for government officials and
technical staff involved in urban transport planning, public transport service planning and management, and traffic and
safety management; (iii) project management support including project monitoring and evaluation and technical
consultancies for implementation of the ICM approach; and (iv) public communication on the project, particularly on the
ICM approach.

Rationale and scope of restructuring. The proposed restructuring is aimed at achieving the following objectives: (a)
using loan savings to add to the scope to the Project, in alignment with the PDO; (b) providing adequate time to ensure
the completion of the construction of the PTI at Wangjiazhai and the amended Project scope; and (c) improving the
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



Project’s Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (M&EF). The project restructuring proposes the following changes to
the loan agreement in order to achieve these objectives: (a) extension of the loan closing date by 20 months; (b)
consolidation of the disbursement categories to Civil Works & Goods and Consulting Services, and reallocation of loan
proceeds among disbursement categories; (c) change in the scope of project activities aligned with the PDO; and (d)
updating of the Results Framework.

The following changes to the project scope are proposed:

      1) Change in the scope of activities. (1) Component 2 – Public Transport: two access roads to the PTI—Guihua Yi
         Road and Guihua Er Road—are dropped because they are not needed due to a change in location of this PTI. The
         PTI was originally at Yanxiaocun and will now be located at Wangjiazhai. Wangjiazhai is located at the western
         end of Wusixi Road, as stated in the PAD and Loan Agreement. This location is also more efficient because it is
         very close to the intersection of two roads financed by the project: the extension of Wusixi Road and the
         construction of Xicheng Avenue; (2) Component 4 – Institutional Capacity Building: three institutional capacity
         building analytical activities will be dropped, i.e., the Bus Route Optimization Study because it has been financed
         by the bus company, the Transit Metropolis Strategy because it received funding through the Transportation
         Bureau, and the Parking Strategy because it has been funded by the local government.
      2) Proposed additional activities. (1) Component 1–Urban Roads: upgrading of three existing roads in central
         Xining (Qiyi Road, Delingha Road and Bayi Road) following Integrated Corridor Management principles, (2)
         Component 2–Public Transport: addition of 73 bus-charging stations and 1648 on-board bus units (passenger
         flow analysis system); (3) Component 3–Intelligent Traffic Management: addition of video surveillance system,
         image forensics system, intelligent vehicle monitoring system, camera monitoring system, traffic signal system
         upgrade, and analytical activities for connecting two ITS platforms and signal-light improvements; and (4)
         Component 4–Institutional Capacity Building: inclusion of two new TAs: Study on Road Network Carrying
         Capacity and Evaluation of Xining Bus Metropolis Implementation Progress.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The proposed project is located in Xining, the capital of Qinghai Province in the western part of China. Xining
    is located in the eastern part of Qinghai province and in the Huang River Valley of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau
    with an average altitude of over 2200 meters. The urban population is about 1.2 million concentrating on the
    built up areas in a total size of 104 km2. The proposed roads projects are located in the western part of the
    Xining City, where current land use is farmland and rural residential area.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Zhefu Liu, Social Specialist
    Xin Ren, Environmental Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 The proposed project includes construction of
                                                                 three new urban roads with total length of 8.1km,
                                                                 one bus interchange hub or Public Transport
                                                                 Interchange (PTI) (including two short branch roads
                                                                 of 0.8km surrounding the hub) and improvement of
                                                                 a bus corridor. These physical construction
                                                                 activities will have potential adverse environmental
                                                                 impacts, e.g. nuisance of dust and noise,
                                                                 wastewater and spoil materials, disturbance to
                                                                 traffic and local communities along the roads, etc.
                                                                 Environmental impacts during operation mainly
                                                                 include noise, road safety, vehicle emission,
                                                                 disposal of waste and wastewater generated at the
                                                                 bus interchange hub etc. These potential impacts
                                                                 are common issues for urban infrastructure
                                                                 construction, and are small scale, site-specific, and
                                                                 can be readily mitigated with well-known
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                 engineering design and good construction
                                                                 management practice. The project is classified as a
                                                                 category B project.
                                                                 Under the Urban Roads Component, the
                                                                 restructuring proposes to add to the project scope
                                                                 6.2 km of existing roads in downtown Xining—Qiyi
                                                                 Road, Delingha Road, and Bayi Road—that are
                                                                 linked to the main public transport corridor (Wusixi
                                                                 Road) which is financed by the Project. These roads
                                                                 will be upgraded to bring them to the same
                                                                 standards as those of Wusixi Road, under the
                                                                 Integrated Corridor Management (ICM) principle.
                                                                 The location of the PTI changes to Wangjiazhai, also
                                                                 on the western end of Wusixi Road. The project
                                                                 continues to be category B, because the impacts
                                                                 are the same as for the original project. The EMP
                                                                 continues to be valid and will apply to these works.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                 The project is in the urban and peri-urban area of
                                                                 Xining and the areas already disturbed by intensive
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                                 human activities. The project will not convert,
                                                                 degrade or restore any natural habitats or critical
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



                                                                 natural habitats, and hence this policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                                                                 The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                    critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under the policy. Hence this
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered. The project is not
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                    expected to procure pesticides or impact on pest
                                                                 management practice.
                                                                 A number of individual family tombs are to be
                                                                 relocated, which has been adequately addressed
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                                 through the Resettlement Action Plan. In addition,
                                                                 chance-find procedures is included in the EMP.
                                                                 The main project area is located about 10-15 km
                                                                 away from the downtown area. The project will
                                                                 affect six villages by land acquisition and housing
                                                                 demolition. The task team conducted the screening
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No                    in those affected villages and concluded that no
                                                                 minority communities which are considered as
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples according to OP4.10 are inside
                                                                 or near these villages. Hence, OP 4.10 was not
                                                                 triggered.
                                                                 A resettlement action plan was prepared to
                                                                 mitigate the negative impacts on land acquisition
                                                                 and housing demolition.
                                                                 A due diligence review was conducted and reported
                                                                 the roads that link to the proposed roads under this
                                                                 project in the RAP.
                                                                 A resettlement policy framework was prepared to
                                                                 provide the resettlement procedures and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                                 guidelines for another two locally funded roads
                                                                 linked to the proposed roads under this project,
                                                                 which might be implemented prior to the Closure
                                                                 of the Bank loan.
                                                                 A RAP was prepared for the PTI at Wangjiazhai. The
                                                                 existing roads in downtown Xining that will be
                                                                 upgraded in the amended project scope do not
                                                                 entail resettlement.
                                                                 The project will not involve impacts to any dams in
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                                 the project area. This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                         The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers.
                                           No
(BP 7.50)                                                        The policy is not triggered.
          The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



                                                                       The project is not located in any disputed areas. The
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                       policy is not triggered.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     Environmental safeguards

     The project area is peri-urban area of Xining City where land use is farmland and rural residential areas. The
     environmental issues of the proposed project activities are mainly construction related impacts, e.g. nuisance of dust
     and noise, wastewater and spoil materials, disturbance to traffic and local communities along the roads, etc. Limited
     impacts during operation stage mainly include noise, road safety, vehicle emission, disposal of waste and wastewater
     generated at the bus interchange hub, etc.

     Among potential environmental impacts, the main sensitive environmental sites include a Huangshuihe River (where
     Xicheng Ave will cross) and a small Yunguchuan River (where Wusi Road will cross). To protect the two rivers, careful
     selection of bridge scheme and design were adopted to avoid in-water piers and maintain the original hydrological
     condition undisturbed.

     A few individual family tombs are to be relocated due to road construction. These graves were identified and
     consultations were conducted with concerned families. The relocation of these tombs under OP4.11 is addressed
     under OP4.12.

     The potential impacts of the project are common issues for urban infrastructure construction, and are small scale,
     site-specific and temporary, and can be readily mitigated with well-known engineering design and good construction
     management practice. There is no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts envisaged in the project.

     During the project restructuring, some changes are proposed with potential environmental and social implications,
     which mainly include location adjustment of Yanxiaocun bus terminal and additional renovation of existing roads in
     the city. The new location of the bus terminal in Wangjiazhai is a few hundred meters away from the Yanxiaocun site,
     and has the same environmental and land use context, i.e. open rural farmland with no other special environmental
     sensitive receptors around the site. The renovation work on the three roads is within the existing right-of-way, not
     requiring any land acquisition or resettlement. The proposed activities will have the same types of environmental
     impacts as the existing activities under the original project, and would not imply a change of environmental
     categorization of the project.

     Lessons learned include the importance of working with contractors to enforce Health and Safety standards and with
     local authorities on road safety during construction. The supervision effort in paying particular attention to these
     issues in the remaining works.
     The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



Social safeguards

Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 is triggered because collective land and private structures will be
required by the project. During the project preparation, the resettlement negative impacts were analyzed by the
institutes in charge of feasibility study and the RAP preparation to optimize the project design. The project designs
were refined to minimize the negative impacts to land acquisition and to avoid housing demolition as much as
possible. The project will require acquisition of 52.8 hectares of land, including 52.3 hectares of collective land, and
0.5 hectares of state-owned land. It will also require demolition of 150,661 square meters of structures. The number
of families affected by land acquisition will be 481 households with 1921 persons, among them 121 households with
527 people to be relocated.

A number of individual family tombs are to be relocated due to road construction. These tombs were identified and
consultations with concerned families were conducted. It is concluded that these scattered graves belong to
individual families, and do not have archaeological, paleontological, architectural, religious, aesthetic or cultural
significance. Following the consultation with the World Bank Physical Cultural Resources Advisor for recent projects,
it is agreed that these graves are considered as physical cultural resources as per OP4.11 Physical Culture Resources
and therefore OP4.11 is triggered. As individual household tombs are a common issue under infrastructure projects
in China, there are well-established national and local regulations governing the consultation, relocation and
compensation that have been fully incorporated into the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) process in line with OP4.12.

The RAP prepared by the project entity provides details regarding resettlement policy principles and regulations to
be followed, compensation rates and budget, mitigation measures to restore incomes where necessary and
institutional and monitoring arrangements. The draft RAP was disclosed at municipal website by March 26, 2013 and
the final RAP, including due diligence review to the identified linkage projects and the resettlement policy framework
(RPF) to address the linked projects that will be implemented prior to the Closure of the Bank loan, was advertised at
municipal website by June 15, 2013.

A resettlement office under Xining PMO was set up to supervise the resettlement implementation and the branches
of the resettlement offices in the district and county will implement the RAP. The Xining Land and Resources Bureaus
is responsible for land acquisition approval and carrying out resettlement supervision based on the national
requirement.

A due diligence review was conducted at appraisal and identified that one ring road funded by the municipal
government was to be completed in the Year 2014 and the land acquisition for the Public Transport Interchange (PTI)
at Yanxiaocun was completed prior to the project identification. The due diligence review confirmed that these
activities were carried out in accordance with Chinese land law, Qinghai provincial land administrative management
regulation and local regulation. The living conditions of the resettled people have been restored in compliance of the
substantive aspects of Bank involuntary resettlement. Overall, the RAP was carried out satisfactorily by the local
agencies. All displaced families are receiving compensation. Construction of the permanent housing is advancing
satisfactorily. Furthermore, independent external monitoring agencies have confirmed that the environmental
management plan (EMP) and the RAP are being implemented satisfactorily.

The implementation of the PTI was delayed due to change in location from Yanxiaocun to Wangjiazhai, which is also
on the western end of Wusixi Road, consistent with the original project description . The location change was
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



approved by municipal urban planning committee and land department according to regulation of urban planning
and land use planning. The approval process for the location change took almost three years.

The RPF guided the updated RAP to reflect this change in location of the PTI. The RAP was updated in 2017 and
disclosed locally early in 2018. Two additional villages were affected by land acquisition due to the new bus terminal
site at Wangjiazhai. About 11 hectares of farming will be required and 86 rural families, about 350 people, will be
affected. The resettlement works for the land acquisition will be managed by the same district and this work will be
completed within the project extension since the district has already accumulated experience from this Bank project.
In comparison to the impacts identified during project appraisal and project restructuring, the amount of land
acquisition is almost identical but housing demolition was avoided due to the new location. The updated RAP included
procedures for land acquisition, compensation rates, and process to be followed, including disclosure at village
committee and the resettlement implementation agency in Chengbei district, district since local farmers were not
used to get information from government website. The updated RAP also established that agreements reached with
each family would include the land compensation rates, the amount of land to be required, total amount of the
compensation to be paid. Both husband and wife must be present at the same time. These activities will be supervised
by village committee and representatives of the farmers, local legal court, a local bank who will pay cash to farmers
based on agreements reached, etc. The adopted information disclosure procedures have to be reached to both
national requirement and Bank requirement.

Under the Urban Roads Component, the restructuring proposes to add to the project scope 6.2 km of existing roads
in downtown Xining—Qiyi Road, Delingha Road, and Bayi Road—that are linked to the main public transport corridor
(Wusixi Road) which is financed by the Project. These roads will be upgraded to bring them to the same standards as
those of Wusixi Road, under the Integrated Corridor Management (ICM) principle.

For the added urban roads, due diligence reviews were conducted and concluded that no resettlement activities
including land acquisition and housing demolition are anticipated and all roads will be implemented on the right of
way of existing urban roads.

The updated instruments were disclosed between 2017 and 2018 and are still valid, because they cover the scope of
the relocation of the PTI and the added existing roads. There was a delay in processing this restructuring.. Based on
local practice and national requirement, relevant information and instruments were published prior to the
implementation.

There are levels of the Grievance Redressing Mechanism (GRM) in place to deal with complaints from displaced
families, such as the village committee, the district and PMO resettlement agency, and the municipal department.

Lessons learned are that the key challenges for resettlement are availability of counterpart funds and leadership in
agencies. During supervision, the task team has had a series of discussions to ensure funds are available and
authorities are committed to the implementation of the RAP. Eventually, the required funds became available and
the permanent housing is under construction. The task team will continue dialogues with municipal leadership and
enhance the leadership at implementation level to ensure all safeguards instruments will be carried out. Public
consultations will be carried out until the completion of the project. The assigned monitoring institute and farmer
representatives will collect concerns and complains from affected farmers and respond to GRM issues raised through
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



  hotline or municipal channels. That information will be disclosed in resettlement booklets and village information
  walls.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  There will be urbanization development in the project area according to the master plan of city development.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Alternatives of road section, bridge scheme have been considered during the feasibility study and EA preparation,
  with overall consideration of environmental, social, technical and economic factors.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  An EIA and EMP have been prepared for the project by an EA institute with previous World Bank project experiences.
  The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse environmental and social impacts, based on which a stand-alone
  EMP was developed to identify environmental management setup, mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting
  and budget estimate. The EMP includes (i) generic Environmental Code Of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for
  inclusion in the bidding documents and contracts; (ii) Specific mitigations measures for potential adverse impacts
  during operation; (iii) Institutional arrangement of Environmental supervision, monitoring plan and Reporting
  requirements and (iv) EMP implementation budget. The EIA and EMP were udpated in November 2018, when the
  restructuring of the project became imminent. The documents continue to be relevant.

  The main environmental concerns and mitigation measures include:
  •    Crossing sensitive sites: The project road Xichengdajie Avenue will cross Huangshuihe River (classified as water
  source protection area) via bridge. Alternative bridge schemes were studies with overall consideration of
  environmental, social, technical and economic aspects. The final scheme selected has no in-water piers to avoid
  disturbance of waterbody during construction. The Wusi Road will cross a small creek Yunguchuan, where two
  alternatives were compared. The selected culvert scheme maintained the original river channel with minimum
  disturbance. Strict construction management will be enforced during construction stage to minimize the potential
  impact on water quality and hydrology. In addition, a few individual family tombs are to be relocated due to road
  construction. These tombs were identified and consultations were conducted with concerned families. The relocation
  of these tombs under OP4.11 is being addressed under OP4.12.

  •    Construction related impacts: The main impacts of the project will be the nuisance related to construction
  activities, including dust, noise, wastewater and solid waste management, social disturbance, traffic safety etc.
  Cumulative impacts from Nanraocheng (South Perimeter Road), Wusi Xilu and expansion of Chaidamu Road are also
  considered in the EIA. These impacts are of temporary feature and can be readily mitigated with sound planning and
     The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



construction management. The key measures include: proper planning of road traffic diversion; coordination with
police department, and prior notice through public media; proper relocation of public utility facilities without
interrupting usual life of local community; arrangement of temporary access with adequate safety measures
(temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) for local residents, business, schools etc.; bulletin board
information disclosure; use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; installation of temporary noise
reduction facility if necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public notice as well as EPB
approval are required for activities that need continuous construction over nighttime; frequent water spraying on
construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and timely site clean
up after construction; careful balance of excavation and backfilling and fully reuse of spoil material; etc. The upgrading
of the added roads in downtown Xining entails the same impacts during construction.

EMP implementation will be managed by Xining PMO. An environmental management unit will be established in the
PMO with dedicated environmental staff. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign
qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP.

Social Safeguards:

The PMO contracted an experienced institute to guide the social safeguards documentation. The relevant agencies
to engage into the project implementation participated into the project preparation. During the project preparation,
the social safeguards consulting institute worked with the design institute in charge of project feasibility study on the
selections of the project locations. The analytical works were undertaken and the project negative impacts were
minimized, and the mitigation measures were developed according to the Bank requirement. Public consultations
were undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the engaged district/county to address the
importance of the safeguards policy. The project preparation was a well-done process to disseminate the Bank
requirement on social safeguards and combined the people concerns into the RAP and also important process to
provide on-job training courses to each engaged levels of the agencies in the district/county and as well as village
level.

An experienced monitoring institute, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, was contracted to monitori
the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed by the Bank twice a year as requested.

Though with little direct experience of Bank projects, the PMO and sub-project proponents are familiar with domestic
environmental and social safeguards polices which are close to Bank policies. Safeguards training and guidance are
provided to the PMO during the project preparation stage, and the Bank will closely supervise the project safeguards
performance during implementation stage.

The RPF guided the updated RAP to reflect this change in location of the PTI. The RAP was updated based on the task
teams request of October 2017. Two additional villages were affected by land acquisition due to the new bus terminal
site at Wangjiazhai. About 11 hectares of farming will be required and 86 rural families, or 350 people, will be affected,
which were consulted. The resettlement works for the land acquisition will be managed by the same district and this
work will be completed within the project extension since the district has already accumulated experience from this
Bank project. In comparison to the impacts identified during project appraisal and project restructuring, the amount
of land acquisition is almost identical but housing demolition was avoided due to the new location.
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



  Under the Urban Roads Component, the restructuring proposes to add to the project scope 6.2 km of existing roads
  in downtown Xining. For the added urban roads, due diligence reviews were conducted and concluded that no
  resettlement activities including land acquisition and housing demolition are anticipated and all roads will be
  implemented on the right of way of existing urban roads.

  For the renovation of three additional urban streets and location adjustment of bus terminal, supplementary EIAs
  have been prepared and the EMP has been updated accordingly following the templates of the existing EIA and EMP.

  During the implementation of the ongoing project, satisfactory environmental performance has been consistently
  observed and recorded in the supervision mission aide memoirs. Xining PMO has demonstrated strong commitment
  and effective institutional arrangement to ensure proper implementation of EMP. Such commitment and
  arrangement will remain throughout the project implementation. Resettlement is also working well. All resettled
  families are receiving compensation as stated in the RAP. Construction of the permanent housing is progressing
  satisfactorily.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the project areas and the adjacent areas
  as Laobaixing strongly requested through people’s meetings and media. The pro ject stakeholders are the local
  communities and the people in the engaged districts and counties. The affected people considered the project will
  give them opportunities to have better living environment and develop their businesses.

  During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations were conducted
  among project-affected public in the project area following to both national environmental and social policies as well
  as World Bank policies (OP4.01 and OP4.12). The main public concerns (e.g. land acquisition/resettlement
  compensation, noise, dust etc.) have been incorporated in the project design and RAP and EMP mitigation measures.
  Public consultation will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the district and county and also the independent
  monitoring agency, and the project information were disseminated to the displaced families for refining the project
  design, and the locations of the project.

  The EIA/EMP have been locally disclosed on Jan 30, 2013 (and again on April 25, 2013) in the website of Xining Urban-
  rural Development Commission and public offices of local villages, with announcement published in Xining Wanbao
  newspaper on Jan 31, 2013. The draft RAP has been locally disclosed at the municipal website since March 26, 2013.
  The final RAP/RPF was advertised at municipal website by June 15, 2013. The EIA/EMP and RAP/RPF have been
  disclosed in World Bank website on May 3, 2013.

  For the project adjustment and additional road renovation activities, supplementary EIA and updated EMP have been
  prepared following the national laws and regulations, as well as the World Bank policy requirements. Public
  consultation were conducted as part of the process. These updated EIAs and EMP have been locally disclosed on July
  31, 2017 and August 4, 2018 respectively, and were also disclosed in the World Bank’s website on Feb 26, 2018 and
  July 1, 2018 respectively. The RAP was updated also during 2017 and disclosed locally in Chinese on January 30, 2018.
  The updated RAP was disclosed in English in September 2019.
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



                   These documents continue to be valid, because the cover the scope of the restructured project and were timely for
                   the land acquisition and works financed by counterpart funds at the Wangjiazhai PTI.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                        Date of submission for disclosure
        01-Jul-2018                                                        01-Jul-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure


            Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
            China                                                             04-Aug-2018
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
02-Apr-2013                                                                 03-May-2013
“In country? Disclosure


          Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
          China                                                               26-Mar-2013
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
        The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                     Yes
and approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                  Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                     Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                     Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                     Yes
review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                     Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                     Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)



    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                           Arturo Ardila Gomez
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Jin Wang

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                     Peter Leonard                          20-Sep-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager               Binyam Reja                            22-Sep-2019

.
