The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2019| Report No: ISDSR26930




                        Regional Vice President:   Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Arup Banerji
                              Regional Director:   Steven N. Schonberger
                    Practice Manager/Manager:      Kseniya Lvovsky
                             Task Team Leader:     Cesar Niculescu
               The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
               Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                      Project Name
                                                                    Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                             Country
    Cesar Niculescu                                                 Romania
    Approval Date                                                   Environmental Category
    30-Oct-2007                                                     Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                   Is this a Repeater project?
    SCAEN


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                              127.62
    Total Financing                                                                                                 127.62
    Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00


    DETAILS   -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                   121.69
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       5.93
         IDA Credit                                                                                                     5.93
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                       5.50
         Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                              5.50
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The development objective of the project is to support the Government of Romania towards meeting EU Nitrate Directive
    requirements at a national scale.



.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Additional Financing (AF) for INPCP would finance the costs associated with the scale-up of the initial project
Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (INPCP) (P093775) nationwide, based on complementarity (to investments
and planned activities by the GoR, EC funds availability, other donor’s involvement) and demand-driven principles
(communes selected based on competitive application process), incorporating lessons learned thus far. It expands the
coverage to the entire country and takes into consideration the location specific requirements of its different farming
systems and agro-ecological regions.
The AF is financing works, goods, services and operating costs and comprises four components, which are largely the same
as in the INPCP with slight modifications:
Component 1: Investments in Local Communities to Reduce Nutrient Pollution: This component will provide support for
effective investments and management practices to reduce nutrient pollution from agricultural, livestock and human
sources. This component builds upon the experiences and lessons learnt from the on-going INPCP and includes support
for a menu of investments focusing on manure collection and composting facilities, manure management biogas
production from animal waste and adoption of code of good agricultural practices in about 100 communes highly exposed
to nitrate pollution in all 11 river basins in Romania, covering all the 8 development regions.
The financial support provided within the Additional Financing will be demand-driven, supported on competitive grounds,
based on the beneficiary communities’ requests and eligibility. The communes will propose sub-projects, selected from a
menu of investments based on agreed eligibility criteria and having the main objective to reduce water pollution with
nutrients. The selection and approval of sub-projects will be done on a competitive basis, for eligible activities and
applicants. A detailed Applicants’ Guidelines for the Competitive Investment Program will be also developed to prov ide
guiding principles and rules for its implementation at the local, regional and national levels, describing in detail the
eligibility criteria, selection and award procedure.
Under this component the Project will support investments and management practices to reduce nutrient pollution from
agricultural, livestock and human sources, such as:
          1.1 Developing local community storage, composting and handling systems, packing/pelleting stations and biogas
          facilities, all to promote better management of livestock and household waste;

          1.2 Planting of vegetative buffer strips, including tree planting and afforestation;

          1.3 Sewage and wastewater treatment activities; and

          1.4 Provision of equipment to upgrade the existing manure storage and/or composting facilities;
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



A menu of customized eligible investments for nutrient pollution reduction will be available, including facilities for
anaerobic digestion as co-generation installations/biogas stations using the animal waste as main source of energy.
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building: The Project will support activities that aim to
strengthen institutional capacity and coordination within relevant national and local governments, institutions, agencies
and stakeholders for regulating, implementing, monitoring and reporting the EU Nitrate Directive requirements. The
project will contribute to building capacity by providing equipment, other required facilities and specialized training for
MWF, ANAR, MARD, Agriculture Payments and Intervention Agencies (APIA), National and Local Environment Protection
Agencies, Environmental Guard, Public Health Directorates, and selected Research Stations and County Offices for Soils
and Agro-Chemistry. The financial support will include:
    1. Developing knowledge and training activities (through providers) and supporting on-farm demonstrations to
       improve the adoption and compliance by farmers of the Code of Good Agricultural Practices.
    2. Providing support to:
        (a)     ANAR to monitor and report to the MWF and EU on the quality of surfacewater and groundwater under
                the EU Nitrates Directive and the EU Water Framework Directive, through: (i) the acquisition of equipment
                for groundwater wells; (ii) the construction of groundwater wells; (iii) the acquisition of laboratory
                equipment and related software; and (iv) the provision of technical assistance for, inter alia, the carrying
                out of studies and the development of software;
        (b)     Institutions represented in the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Application of the EU Nitrates Directive
                (ICA).
    3. Carrying out of a comprehensive training program for the staff of the relevant national, regional and county level
       agencies on monitoring, control and reporting under the EU Nitrates Directive and EU Water Framework Directive.
    4. Improving the capacity building system able to support the scaling up, at the national level, of the implementation
       process of the EU Nitrate Directive and Water Framework Directive.
    5. Providing technical assistance to: (i) update the Code of Good Agricultural Practices and revise action programs;
       and (ii) carry out activities to promote the adoption by the farmers of the improved nutrient management
       practices set forth in the Code of Good Agricultural Practices.
    6. Support for the development of eight knowledge and training hubs (one in each development region) to promote
       adoption of good agricultural practices to reduce on farm nutrient pollution.
Component 3: Public Awareness and Information Support: The continuity of the awareness campaign and its replication
in other areas of the country is necessary. None of the activities proposed are new or different in their nature from those
currently being implemented under INPCP. In addition to information provision under the public awareness campaign, the
AF will provide some channels for direct citizen engagement (e.g., PMU contact information, Facebook, twitter). The
opportunities for providing feedback, the analysis of such feedback and the report back to communities on its results, will
be strengthened under the Additional Financing.
The public awareness campaign and associated activities will reflect the needs and interests of different groups, such as
Roma communities and gender groups. The surveys on knowledge, attitudes and behavior will be expanded to allow for
qualitative data collection and the consolidated results of the surveys will be shared with participating communities in a
user-friendly format. Participating municipalities will be requested to provide summaries of public consultation, including
the feedback received and the responses provided. One objective of this component will be to promote the financial
instruments that will be available within the AF to potential beneficiaries.
         The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



This objective will be reached through face-to-face meetings, where the beneficiaries will find out about the Calls for
Proposals sessions and will b taught how to prepare their proposals in order to be eligible.
Component 4: Project Management: This component will provide supporting the PMU in connection with Project
implementation, monitoring, reporting, evaluation and impact assessment through the provision of: (i) funds for
Incremental Operating Costs and for the acquisition of goods; (ii) non-consultant services and consultants' services
including, inter alia, audit and social surveys; and (iii) training.
The Additional Financing Project will be implemented by the existing PMU located within the MWF, enhanced with
specialists in evaluation and selection of sub-projects proposals. While the beneficiaries will have a more active role in
the sub-projects proposals and implementations, the PMU will have an extended role in providing information regarding
the project and monitoring all project’s activities, as well as ensuring the coordination of all in terventions aimed at
implementing the Nitrates Directive. This will involve a revision of the PMU procedures for clarifying the coordination
mechanism between PMU, the beneficiaries and other institutions involved in the implementation of the Nitrates
Directive.
The Applicant’s Guidelines, as part of the Project Operational Manual, will detail the role and competencies of the PMU
in the process of evaluation and selection of the sub-projects proposals under the first component. The PMU’s role in the
implementation of the other three components of the project will remain unchanged.
Most of this AF – about €35 million – is foreseen to continue the financing of small investments (manure storage and
collection concrete-made platforms at the commune level) in rural communities, bringing at the same time important
environmental and social-economic benefits.
SAFEGUARDS PERFORMANCE
INPCP-Additional Financing safeguards performance is satisfactory, and the PMU’s capacity in managing environmental
and social safeguards is sound. All small-scale investments/civil works (manure management reinforced concrete-made
platforms at the commune level and some composting facilities) are implemented in compliance with the World Bank
environmental safeguards, with health & safety requirements for such type of construction activities, and with proven
environmental safety. The PMU and the Bank’s environmental consultant developed ESMP review checklists that are
applied to evaluate the quality and completeness of the site-specific ESMP prepared by local beneficiaries. There was no
significant impact to environment and no social related aspect registered so far during the works execution, or during the
operation phase of executed investments under INPCP.
RATIONALE FOR RESTRUCTURING
After the deadline for the submission of Full Applications included in the domain of intervention D1 (“ Developing local
community storage, composting and handling systems, packing/ pelleting stations and biogas facilities, all to promote
better management of livestock and household waste?) and following a detailed analysis of received applications, a total
number of 89 proposed investments were selected at the end of 2018 for financing under Component 1 of INPCP.
The AF project is being restructured due to the need to trigger OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats which was not triggered at the
time of appraisal. At appraisal, it was assessed that all investments and other project interventions would occur on public
land within the beneficiary communes’ perimeter, and with no indication that it might be located next or within protected
areas and/or natural habitats. However, following a new safeguards analysis and considering the environmental
conditions and specific measures included in the permits issued by the local environmental protection authorities for each
new investment (platforms for animal waste management) selected to be financed under the project, it was concluded
that 9 out of 89 new investments have the proposed location in protected areas (Natura 2000 sites) established in
Romania, and hence OP 4.04 requires to be triggered.
.
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)




4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The proposed AF will scale-up the original project nationwide, and would allow for six more years the
financing of investments in local communities for reducing nutrient pollution, as well as support institutional
strengthening and capacity building for compliance and improved agricultural practices. A menu of
investments focusing on communal storage and handling systems to promote better management of
livestock and household waste, composting and packing/pelleting facilities, buffer strips, pastures
rehabilitation and afforestation to improve the protection of water bodies and adoption of code of good
agricultural practices in additional 100 communes highly vulnerable to nitrate pollution in all 11 river basins
in Romania. In addition, the AF project will continue to demonstrate the impact of small-scale sanitation
facilities on nutrient load reductions by supporting the construction of small sewage networks and compact
wastewater treatment plants for about three-four communities that already implemented measures to
mitigate the pollution with nutrients originating from agriculture, but where this is still imminent due to the
households having non-septic tanks from which effluent leaks directly into the groundwater.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Dariusz Kobus, Environmental Specialist
Mohamed Ghani Razaak, Social Specialist
Valerie Morrica, Social Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 The required mitigation measures for the AF
                                                                 project activities are standard and widely used in
                                                                 construction practices. They were already well
                                                                 prescribed in the Environmental Management Plan
                                                                 (EMP) which was prepared for the original project.
                                                                 Whereas the AF project will support the same types
                                                                 of activities as under the original project, the exiting
                                                                 EMP was updated, approved and disclosed in
                                                                 December 2015, and further applied also for this
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                 new project.
                                                                 As concluded by the environmental assessment
                                                                 carried out for the INPCP – AF preparation, the
                                                                 project is categorized as environmental Category B,
                                                                 and triggers only two safeguards policies: OP 4.01 –
                                                                 Environmental Assessment, and OP 7.50 – Projects
                                                                 on International Waterways. Moreover, at the time
                                                                 of appraisal, there was no indication to suggest that
                                                                 the Natural Habitats policy would be triggered for
The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



                                                          the investments envisioned under the project in
                                                          this second phase of implementation. However,
                                                          following a new safeguards analysis and
                                                          considering the environmental conditions and
                                                          specific measures included in the permits issued by
                                                          the local environmental protection authorities for
                                                          each new investment (platforms for animal waste
                                                          management) selected to be financed under the AF
                                                          project, it was concluded that 9 out of 89 new
                                                          investments have the proposed location in
                                                          protected areas (Natura 2000 sites) established in
                                                          Romania, and hence OP 4.04 has to be triggered.
                                                          The project’s EMP approved and disclosed in
                                                          December 2015 was updated adequately as to
                                                          include the specific conditions and requirements
                                                          related to the protection of natural habitats and
                                                          Natura 2000 sites as requested by the national
                                                          legislation and by the Bank safeguard policy – OP
                                                          4.04 Natural Habitats; this revised document was
                                                          re-disclosed locally and on the Bank’s website.
                                                          The EMP stipulates that all contracts for
                                                          construction works will include requirements for
                                                          implementation of the specific measures as per
                                                          EMP provisions, including protected areas and
                                                          good construction practices.
                                                          In addition to the overall project EMP which
                                                          identifies the range of issues expected, all sub-
                                                          investments will require an environmental
                                                          approval (agreement) from the local environmental
                                                          protection agency. The Project is expected to have
                                                          limited negative environmental and social impacts,
                                                          as physical works will be undertaken to only
                                                          construct local, small-scale facilities. The potential
                                                          environmental risks generated by the construction
                                                          and operation of a few investments (manure
                                                          management platforms) proposed for being
                                                          located within Natura 2000 sites relate to the
                                                          protection of bird species (disturbance to breeding
                                                          birds which may result in a decrease of the
                                                          populations over time due to construction noise
                                                          and human presence) and, in one location, to the
                                                          protection     of     butterflies    (attraction   of
                                                          common/invasive insects or other butterflies by the
                                                          presence of manure/compost).
                                                          The long-term environmental impacts anticipated
                                                          are positive and linked to the overall project
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



                                                                 development objective to reduce nutrients in
                                                                 surface and ground water bodies.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                 At appraisal, it was considered there would be no
                                                                 activities associated with the project that would
                                                                 take place within or in the close vicinity of
                                                                 protected areas or natural habitats. However,
                                                                 during the incipient stage of AF implementation,
                                                                 the selected list of priority investments for local
                                                                 communities (commune platforms for manure
                                                                 management) identified nine such facilities that are
                                                                 proposed to be located in the vicinity of within
                                                                 protected Natura 2000 sites.
                                                                 Natura 2000 network is the major outcome of
                                                                 European Union (EU) policies on biodiversity and is
                                                                 designed to protect species and habitats in
                                                                 accordance with the EU Habitats Directive
                                                                 (92/43/EEC 1992) and EU Birds Directive
                                                                 (2009/147/EC 2009). As EU member country,
                                                                 Romania set up Natura 2000 network which is
                                                                 covering about 23% from national territory in more
                                                                 than 600 sites. Presently, there are territorial
                                                                 administrative units (communes) in Romania
                                                                 completely or partially included in a Natura 2000
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes                   network. These deemed the need to implement
                                                                 environmental impact assessments before applying
                                                                 for development projects, including the ones
                                                                 financed under INPC-AF. For all the activities
                                                                 carried out in the perimeter and in the vicinity of
                                                                 the protected natural area, it is compulsory to
                                                                 respect the provisions of the management plans
                                                                 and the national regulations in force. Romania has
                                                                 the legislation on environmental impact
                                                                 assessment (EIA) fully aligned with EU policies, and
                                                                 the procedure for evaluating the impact on
                                                                 environment for any project (public or private)
                                                                 integrates the appropriate assessment of protected
                                                                 natural areas of Community interest, conservation
                                                                 of natural habitats, wild flora and fauna.
                                                                 The      Romanian      environmental       protection
                                                                 authorities concluded, based on a detailed
                                                                 assessment and ecological survey carried out in
                                                                 2018 by the local proponents at the level of
                                                                 feasibility study phase, that the proposed projects
                                                                 have no significant negative impact on the integrity
                                                                 of the protected natural areas. The same favorable
The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



                                                          conclusions were issued by the custodians of the
                                                          respective protected areas.
                                                          The environmental agreements issued by the local
                                                          EPAs are based on in-depth analyses of technical
                                                          documentations submitted by the project
                                                          proponents, on site visits of the proposed locations,
                                                          and include certain conditions for the execution
                                                          and operation of the proposed sub-projects in the
                                                          respective Natura 2000 sites. The environmental
                                                          agreements confirm that specific mitigation
                                                          measures to avoid impacts to the natural habitats
                                                          are included. The key most effective mitigation
                                                          measure regarding protection of birds is ban on
                                                          project construction during the nesting period
                                                          (April 1 – July 1). These measures were introduced
                                                          in the Ecological Surveys that assessed the
                                                          proposed project’s impact on natural habitats and
                                                          further in the site-specific ESMPs that were
                                                          prepared by the local consultants that also
                                                          prepared the feasibility studies for the respective
                                                          investments.
                                                          However, construction phase and to a lesser extend
                                                          operation phase can have potential negative
                                                          impacts on Natural Habitats.
                                                          Therefore, the new sensitive proposed locations
                                                          triggers application of OP 4.04 for mitigating the
                                                          potential impacts of the project on protected
                                                          habitats and species, and for proposing effective
                                                          measures that will prevent degradation of natural
                                                          habitats.
                                                          OP 4.04 will apply to all investments located within
                                                          or in a proximity to Natural 2000 sites.
                                                          The Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                                                          approved for the project was revised accordingly to
                                                          include specific mitigation measures to ensure
                                                          effective compliance with the policy requirements.
                                                          Site-specific ESMPs will be prepared to provide
                                                          effective mitigation measures that will prevent
                                                          degradation of natural habitats.
                                                          Therefore, it can be assumed that in all sub-projects
                                                          proposed for being located in Natura 2000 sites the
                                                          expected impacts on natural habitats are
                                                          considered to be minimal, and there will be no
                                                          significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                          natural habitats. No important bird species for
                                                          conservation will be affected by loss of breeding
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



                                                                 habitat, and no critical habitats were identified
                                                                 within the projects area of influence.
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                                 Although this safeguard will not be triggered, the
                                                                 environmental screening process will screen for the
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                    presence of physical cultural resources. In addition,
                                                                 chance find procedures will be included in all works
                                                                 contracts.
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No
                                                                 The proposed investments will continue to take
                                                                 place exclusively on municipally owned land.
                                                                 Robust screening mechanisms are in place to avoid
                                                                 impacts covered under OP 4.12 pertaining to
                                                                 formal or informal users. The Guide for Applicants,
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No
                                                                 Concept Note and Full Applications to be used by
                                                                 participating communes and municipalities include
                                                                 a description of status and current uses of the land
                                                                 (including for tree planting) to ensure impacts
                                                                 covered under OP 4.12 are avoided.
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                                 The project will support activities that take place on
                                                                 transboundary waterways as defined in OP 7.50.
                                                                 (i.e. the whole territory of Romania drains into the
                                                                 Black Sea and Danube River Basins). It is anticipated
                                                                 that investments will not (i) cause appreciable harm
                                                                 to the other riparian as it will not adversely change
                                                                 the quality or quantity of water flows, and (ii) it will
                                                                 not be appreciably harmed by the other riparian
                                                                 possible water use. The Project will serve existing
                                                                 populations that are already consuming water from
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                         the same river basins. There will be no increase in
                                           Yes
(BP 7.50)                                                        water abstraction or consumption, no new agro-
                                                                 processing facilities which may involve intake of
                                                                 water from the Danube River or its tributaries
                                                                 funded under the Project. . Exception to the
                                                                 notification requirements of OP 7.50 has been
                                                                 granted because the proposed activities do not
                                                                 attempt to modify waterways nor significantly
                                                                 increase water abstraction volumes, leaving the
                                                                 water rights of other riparian countries unaffected.
                                                                 On the contrary, in terms of the “potential
                                                                 pollution? issue, the project activities are designed
        The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



                                                                      to a betterment of the quality of their waters. Also,
                                                                      in terms of the “use of? issue, the project
                                                                      investments will involve separating, proper storing
                                                                      and recycling of animal waste so that its discharge
                                                                      into the water bodies that drain into the Danube
                                                                      River or the Danube River itself is reduced.
                                                                      Animal waste treatment facilities funded under the
                                                                      project will not involve any intake of river water.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The project (additional financing) has no significant and/or irreversible impact. Its only minor impact will be temporary
   nuisances resulting from construction activities, and may include: (i) increased pollution due to construction waste;
   (ii) generation of dust, noise, and vibration due to the movement of construction vehicles and machinery; (iii)
   associated risks due to improper disposal of construction waste, or minor operational or accidental spills of fuel and
   lubricants from the construction machinery; (iv) improper reinstatement of construction sites upon completion of
   works. All these potential environmental impacts are readily identifiable, small in scale, and minimal in impact and
   can be effectively prevented, minimized, or mitigated by including into the work contracts specific measures to be
   taken by contractors. The project design aims to have a positive effect on the environment as measured by improved
   water quality.
   A limited number of sub-projects (manure management platforms) are going to be located within nature protected
   areas Natura 2000. Despite the fact that both the construction phase and the operation phase of the sub-projects are
   expected to have minor impacts on the environment, natural habitats and species, application of OP 4.04 was added
   to eliminate degradation of natural habitats and protected species. OP 4.04 will apply to sub-projects located within
   or in a short proximity to Natura 2000 sites, and it will be reflected in the respective site-specific ESMPs.
   Since the project supported activities will take place on transboundary waterways, OP 7.50, will be triggered.
   However, project interventions are not expected to adversely affect water quality or quantity to downstream riparian
   states. It is anticipated that activities will not (i) cause appreciable harm to the other riparian states as it will not
   adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows, and (ii) will not be appreciably harmed by other riparian
   states possible water use. Exception to the notification requirements of OP 7.50 has been granted because the
   proposed activities do not attempt to modify waterways nor significantly increase water abstraction volumes, leaving
   the water rights of other riparian countries unaffected.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   The long-term environmental impacts anticipated are positive and linked to the overall project development
   objectives to reduce nutrients concentrations in surface and ground water bodies.
             The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
             Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

       n/a


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The required mitigation measures for the AF project activities are standard and widely used in construction practices.
       They were already well prescribed in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which was prepared for the original
       project. Whereas the AF project will support the same types of activities as under the original project, the exiting EMP
       was updated, approved and disclosed in December 2015, and further applied also for this new project. Triggering of
       OP 4.04 will be limited to a few sub-projects located within or in a short proximity to Natura 2000 sites. It will require
       additional specialist input to the site-specific ESMPs in terms of ecological survey, assessment of impacts on protected
       habitats and species, and respective mitigation measures preventing degradation of natural habitats and species.
       Therefore, with the project restructuring for triggering the OP/BP 4.04 safeguard policy, the approved EMP was
       updated adequately as to include the specific conditions and requirements related to the protection of natural
       habitats and Natura 2000 sites as requested by the national legislation and by the Bank safeguard policy – OP 4.04
       Natural Habitats; this revised document was re-disclosed locally and on the Bank’s website.
       The actual EMP stipulates all contracts for construction works will include requirements for implementation of the
       specific measures as per EMP provisions and good construction practices.
       Environmental issues including mitigation measures would be supervised periodically by the PMU M&E Staff
       supported by the technical support staff located in each of the Water Basin Directorates, and by specialized
       consultants. The local (county) environmental protection agency and water inspectorate would also be involved in
       supervision of construction work and operations. The project will rely on the Romanian laws (fully aligned with the
       EU environmental acquis) governing the process for environmental permitting and review.
       The implementing agency (MWF through the PMU) is responsible for project preparation and implementation given
       its long experience with Bank-financed operations, capacity in following Bank procurement, financial management
       and safeguard procedures. the PMU has built a positive track record in safeguards monitoring and compliance
       throughout the implementation of actual project. The PMU will carry out project implementation in close cooperation
       with the participating communes and key counterparts and will be responsible for managing the implementation of
       the project, including the continuous monitoring and evaluation, the control of safeguards compliance, as well as
       routine communications with the World Bank.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Key stakeholders are commune residents/farmers in nitrate vulnerable zones, local commune administrations, and
       county administrations who are responsible for the promotion of investments to help improve environmental
       conditions and raising awareness of the local population on behavior change. During sub-projects preparation
       consultations will be conducted in the respective participating communes.
       PMU will carry out public consultations for groups that may be impacted by subprojects before finalization of site-
       specific ESMPs. These groups are usually represented by those who live near construction site, as well as by
       representatives of local NGOs, and other stakeholders. PMU will conduct at least one public consultation with groups
       affected by the activity prior to completion of the individual, site-specific ESMPs.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
20-Sep-2019                                                    30-Sep-2019
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 Romania                                                          27-Sep-2019
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                  Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                    Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                     No
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
 critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                            Yes
 acceptable to the Bank?



 PIW_TABLE
 OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                              NA
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)



    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
    has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP                          Yes
    prepared and sent?

    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                           Yes



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Cesar Niculescu


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Nina Chee                                 07-Oct-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Kseniya Lvovsky                           07-Oct-2019

.
