The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-April-2019| Report No: ISDSR24972




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Martin Raiser
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Guangzhe Chen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Binyam Reja
                            Task Team Leader:      Jin Wang, Yang Chen
              The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P148129                                                      China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Jin Wang                                                     China
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    21-Dec-2015                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GTR10


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                          224.27
    Total Financing                                                                                             224.27
    Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               100.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                        124.27
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                      124.27


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The PDO is to leverage the Tianjin metro system and to promote walking and biking in the urban core (in Heping and
    Nankai) in order to make transport greener and safer in Tianjin and draw lessons for other large cities.




    Proposed New PDO
    The PDO is to leverage the Tianjin metro system and to promote walking and biking in the urban core (in Heping, Hebei
    and Nankai) in order to make transport greener and safer in Tianjin and draw lessons for other large cities.
.




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

              The Project consists of the following closely related components to achieve the overall objective.

              Component 1: Green Transport Improvement in Heping and Nankai Districts. This component supports the
              redevelopment of the streetscape in certain parts of Heping and Nankai Districts to create a connected,
              vibrant and sustainable urban space (spanning over about 7.2 square kilometers). The main interventions
              include: the creation of an integrated pedestrian and bike network with infrastructure investments along
              about 42 streets (26 streets in Heping District and 16 streets in Nankai District) for a total length of about 50
              km, street pavement updates, drainage improvements, street facilities, and landscape improvements. As part
              of restructuring, this component is extended to a new Central district, Hebei District, which will include
              infrastructure investment along about 46 streets with a total length of about 35 km. The restructuring extends
              the coverage of the improvements to the Hebei District, but does not change the type of interventions
              originally conceived. There has been no land acquisition under the project to date and the extension to Hebei
              district is not anticipated to lead to land acquisition. This component is renamed Component 1: Green
              Transport Improvement in Heping, Hebei and Nankai Districts.

              Component 2: Metro Access Improvement. This component supports civil works for selected intersection
              improvements and interconnection facilities (bike parking, bus connection/terminal, taxi connection,
              landscaping, and park and ride) at 111 metro stations along existing Tianjin Metro Lines 1, 2, 3, 5, and 9, as
              well as Line 6 (under construction). Since the metro construction is ongoing in parallel, some of the
              improvements originally foreseen under the project have been executed by other agencies (for example,
              landscaping works around the metro station has been completed by Tianjin Amenities and Landscape
              Commission) and will result in savings of around US$32 million under this component.

              Component 3: Public Bike Sharing System Pilot. This Component was designed to finance the establishment
              of a pilot public bike sharing (PBS) system in the core urban area of Tianjin, as well as in areas along metro
              lines, to support last mile accessibility. This component will be cancelled as part of the project restructuring.
              Activities of this component will be carried out through private capital financing of dockless bike sharing
          The World Bank                                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



            systems (such as Mobilke, Ofo, etc.), supporting the last mile accessibility in a sustainable way. 1 The
            cancelation of the PBS pilot will not impact the achievement of the PDO.

            Component 4: Bus Terminal Development. This component comprises the development of bus terminals,
            including the pavement of terminals, as well as bus stops, bus parking, car parking, bike parking and service
            buildings. It also supports the equipment within bus terminals for bus operation. Five terminals were included
            in the component. Three bus terminals will be dropped as part of the restructuring: (i) the Beichen S&T Park
            bus terminal is located within an area impacted by a new master plan for northern Tianjin High-tech Zone,
            with an uncertain approval date; (ii) for the Liuyuan bus terminal, the initial approach of converting the bus
            terminal into a “bus terminal + commercial? mixed land use mode cannot be realized because the approved
            land use for the bus terminal is categorized as public transport use only; and (iii) for the Caozhuang bus
            terminal, the proposed bus terminal has land use conflict with a newly planned Beijing-Shanghai high-speed
            railway. The cancelation of the three bus terminals will not impact the achievement of the PDO, as the city
            has been developing substantial additional bus facilities in parallel. This component is renamed Component 3:
            Bus Terminal Development, due to the cancellation of the former component 3 (PBS Pilot).

            Component 5: Technical Assistance (TA). This component supports five technical studies on: (i) sustainable
            green urban transport development; (ii) parking management improvement schemes; (iii) the effectiveness
            of the public bike sharing system implementation; (iv) multi-channel financing mechanisms for urban
            transport; and (v) surveys and support for the analysis of and reporting on the project impact. The first two
            TAs have been completed. The Tianjin Municipality has started adopting and implementing the strategies and
            recommendations identified in these two TAs. Given the city’s interest and commitment, a second phase with
            more specific policy suggestions and pilot implementation is proposed for both TAs as part of the
            restructuring. The TA on the effectiveness of public bike sharing is no longer relevant, as the original
            Component 3 (PBS Pilot) is proposed to be cancelled. The multi-channel financing mechanism for urban
            transport is also proposed to be cancelled, as it is now funded through the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
            Sustainable Integrated Approach Pilot Project. Two new TAs on performance evaluation and analysis of
            economic activity in the NMT zone and the preparation of Project Implementation and Completion Report are
            added to replace the final TA on project impact. Overall, it is proposed to increase the allocation for this
            component by US$510,000. This component is renamed Component 4: Technical Assistance (TA), due to the
            cancellation of the former component 3 (PBS Pilot).




.


1
 According to a survey report on public bike sharing system carried out under the Bank-financed Changzhi Sustainable Urban
Transport Project
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The proposed project is located in the city of Tianjin, about 150 km southeast of Beijing. It is a renowned
historic, cultural and port city in China and one of the four municipalities directly under the Central
Government. The municipality spreads over a total area of 11,916 km2, with a total population of 15.2
million and a GDP per capita of US$16,718 in 2014. The physical activities of the proposed project are all
within the central urban built-up area. The street re-pavement under component 1, mass transit access
improvement and public bike stations will all be constructed within the right-of-way of existing streets and
existing green belt/parking spaces. Bus terminals will be constructed in existing parking lots or bus terminals.
There is no land acquisition expected. Given the urban context, there is no sensitive ecological environment
site (e.g. natural habitat, protected area etc.) within the area of influence of the project.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Peishen Wang, Environmental Specialist
Meixiang Zhou, Social Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered            Explanation
                                                               The project will include construction activities for
                                                               the renovation of urban streets (e.g. re-pavement,
                                                               drainage improvement, street facility and
                                                               landscape improvement), access improvement
                                                               around mass transit stations (pedestrian access and
                                                               parking spaces and green belt) and construction of
                                                               bus terminal buildings. The project will have
                                                               potential environmental and social impacts during
                                                               the construction stage including increased truck
                                                               traffic due to material transportation, noise and
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                   dust pollution, pedestrian and business disruption,
                                                               waste management issues, and safety concerns.
                                                               The environmental concerns during operation
                                                               stage will mainly be environmental compliance of
                                                               bus terminals/ hubs in terms of waste
                                                               management, and traffic safety.

                                                               Based on project design, all the construction
                                                               activities are of limited scale, will be relatively short
                                                               to implement (mostly a few months for each road),
                                                               and will take place within the right-of-way of
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



                                                               existing urban streets, parking spaces, green belt
                                                               and bus terminals, . There is no land acquisition
                                                               required and there is no sensitive ecological
                                                               environment site (e.g. natural habitat, protected
                                                               area and parks etc.) within the area of influence of
                                                               the project. The main sensitive environmental
                                                               protection receptors are the residential
                                                               communities, hospitals, schools and kindergartens
                                                               along the urban streets that are subject to
                                                               noise/vibration and dust impacts. The main
                                                               environmental and social impacts are those related
                                                               to the construction stage, and are expected to be
                                                               site specific, temporary in nature, well understood
                                                               and can be readily mitigated with good
                                                               construction management and known mitigation
                                                               measures. Therefore, the project is classified as a
                                                               category B project. An Environmental Impact
                                                               Assessment (EIA) and a stand-alone Environmental
                                                               Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared for
                                                               the project as per requirements of OP4.01 and an
                                                               update has been prepared and disclosed for the
                                                               restructuring.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               The project activities are all within the urban built-
                                                               up area of Tianjin. Based on EIA findings, there is no
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                               natural habitat involved in the project area of
                                                               influence. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                                               The project activities are all within the urban built-
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                  up area. There is no forest involved, therefore this
                                                               policy is not triggered.
                                                               The project will not involve procurement of
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                  pesticide or have any impact on pest management
                                                               practice. This policy is not triggered.
                                                               There are 54 historical buildings identified along
                                                               the original project streets and 28 along the new
                                                               district. Though the road renovation will be within
                                                               the existing right-of-way without directly
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 encroaching the boundary of these buildings, the
                                                               construction activities have the potential impact on
                                                               the safety of these buildings. Precautionary
                                                               measures are developed in the EMP. In addition,
                                                               chance-find procedures are included in the EMP.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



                                                               The project activities will be all implemented in the
                                                               urban area of this city with a long history. There are
                                                               some Hui people in Tianmu Town at the north part
                                                               of the project area in this city. But these Hui people
                                                               have already been well integrated with the majority
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No                 Han people and have urbanized livelihoods and
                                                               speak mandarin Chinese. The team concludes that
                                                               there is no indigenous people in the project site
                                                               according to the social screening by the task team
                                                               and social assessment done by a third party.
                                                               Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                                               Based on information provided in the FSR, all land
                                                               required for construction of bus terminals, bicycle
                                                               parking lands, bus depots and connections to metro
                                                               stations has been state-owned under the municipal
                                                               government since before 2009. During project
                                                               preparation, great efforts were made to avoid
                                                               involuntary resettlement impacts through
                                                               optimized selection of project sites and specific
                                                               locations of civil works. Nevertheless, involuntary
                                                               resettlement cannot be fully ruled out by project
                                                               appraisal. There might be location adjustment for
                                                               bus depots, parking plots or road intersections
                                                               which might require occasional and small amount
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes                of demolition of ground structure during project
                                                               implementation. This can only be confirmed as the
                                                               project implementation goes on at the specific
                                                               project sites. Besides, the exact locations of
                                                               intersections, entrances and exits of bus stations,
                                                               overpasses and underpasses cannot be fully
                                                               determined until detailed technical design is
                                                               finalized. The Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is
                                                               triggered to provide flexibility in implementation in
                                                               case such needs arise. In case any involuntary
                                                               resettlement occurs in this project during
                                                               implementation, a resettlement policy framework
                                                               (RPF) has been prepared to guide any future land
                                                               acquisition and resettlement.
                                                               The project will not involve impacts to any dams in
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                               the project area. This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                       The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers.
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                      The policy is not triggered.
                                                               The project is not located in any disputed areas. The
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                               policy is not triggered.
          The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     Environmental safeguards

     The project includes construction activities for the renovation of urban streets (e.g. re-pavement, drainage
     improvement, street facility and landscape improvement), access improvement around mass transit stations
     (pedestrian access and parking spaces and green belt) and construction of bus terminal buildings. The type of project
     impacts are not impacted by the restructuring since only similar activities will take place. The project will have
     potential environmental and social impacts during the construction stage including increased truck traffic due to
     material transportation, noise and dust pollution, pedestrian and business disruption, waste management issues, and
     safety concerns. The environmental concerns during operation stage will mainly be environmental compliance of bus
     terminals/ hubs in terms of waste management, and traffic safety.

     Based on project design, all the construction activities are of limited scale, will be relatively short to implement
     (mostly a few months), and will take place within the right-of-way of existing urban streets, parking spaces, green belt
     and bus terminals. Based on information available at this stage, there is no land acquisition required and there is no
     sensitive ecological environment site (e.g. natural habitat, protected area and parks etc.) within the area of influence
     of the project. The main sensitive environmental protection receptors are the residential communities, hospitals,
     schools and kindergartens along the urban streets that are subject to noise/vibration and dust impacts. These include
     54 historical buildings along the project streets as part of the original project and an additional 28 as part of the
     restructuring. The construction activities will not directly intrude into the boundaries of the identified historical
     buildings. With precautious protection measures developed in EMP, the impacts on such buildings can be effectively
     mitigated.

     The main environmental and social impacts are those related to the construction stage, and are expected to be site
     specific, temporary in nature, well understood and can be readily mitigated with good construction management and
     known mitigation measures. Therefore, the project is classified as a category B project. An Environmental Impact
     Assessment (EIA) and a stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared as per requirements
     of OP4.01.

     Social safeguards

     The project will bring in significant positive social impacts through better prioritized street layout by supporting more
     effective public transport, and improving connectivity and accessibility to metro stations and other public transport
     facilities. The project will include small civil works in components 1 to 3, to support the construction or improvement
     of bus terminals and bus stops to ease transfers to and from metro stations, car parking lots, bike parking facilities
     and access roads to those facilities. Based on information provided in the FSR, all land required for such construction
     has been under the control of the municipal government since before 2010. During project preparation, great efforts
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



  were made to avoid involuntary resettlement impacts through optimized selection of project sites and specific
  locations of civil works. Up to now there has not been land acquisition related to the project, nor is land acquisition
  expected as a result of the restructuring, indicating that the project remains low risk on this aspect.

  Nevertheless, involuntary resettlement cannot be fully ruled out at the time of project restructuring. There might be
  location adjustment for bus depots, parking plots or road intersections which might require occasional and small
  amount of demolition of ground structure during project implementation. This can only be confirmed as the project
  implementation goes on at the specific project sites. Besides, the exact locations of intersections, entrances and exits
  of bus stations, overpasses and underpasses cannot be fully determined until detailed technical design is finalized, it
  is foreseeable such civil works will only need small pieces of sites all in urban area of the city. The Bank concluded
  that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered to provide flexibility in implementation in case such needs
  arise.

  The project construction may cause temporary inconvenience in accessing local markets, shops and public facilities
  during the construction period. The possible negative impacts will be very lim ited and can be minimized and mitigated
  through proper project design and construction management.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  There will be further urbanization development in the project area according to the master plan for the city.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  N/A


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To address the environmental safeguards issues, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a stand-alone
  Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared for the project as per requirements of OP4.01 and an
  update was prepared for the restructuring. The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse environmental and
  social impacts, based on which a stand-alone EMP was developed to identify the environmental management setup,
  mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting and a budget estimate. The preparation of EA documents followed
  the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as Bank's safeguards policies and EHS General
  Guidelines. The EMP specifies the institutional arrangement of environmental management and supervision,
  mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation. An
  update was prepared and disclosed for the restructuring on July 16, 2018, and indicates similar types of impacts can
  be expected.

  The environmental concerns of the project are mainly related to construction activities, including nuisance of
  construction noise and dust, traffic disturbance due to large quantity of material transportation, safety of pedestrian,
  waste management, business disturbance. These impacts are of temporary feature and can be readily mitigated with
  sound planning and construction management. The key mitigation measures during construction stage include:
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)




-     Social disturbance: proper planning of road traffic diversion; coordination with police department, and prior
notice through public media; proper relocation of public utility facilities without interrupting usual life of local
community; arrangement of temporary access with adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net,
night light etc.) for local residents, business, schools etc.; bulletin board information disclosure.
-     Physical cultural resources: restricted construction activities within the right-of-way and avoid encroachment in
the protection boundary of the buildings; safety monitoring to the protected buildings; chance-find procedures.
-     Noise: use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; installation of temporary noise reduction facility if
necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public notice as well as EPB approval are required for
activities that need continuous construction over nighttime.
-     Dust: installation of fences around construction areas; frequent water spraying on construction site and access
road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and timely site clean up after construction;
proper maintenance of construction machines and vehicles; etc.
-     Waste management: careful balance of excavation and backfilling and fully reuse of spoil material; proper
disposal of spoil waste following the city's regulations; proper treatment of wastewater and sewage before discharge
into municipal sewage network; timely collection of garbage and disposal through municipal collection/disposal
system, etc.
-     Ecological environment: Minimization of area of disturbance and damage of green space; relocation of trees;
new plantation of trees and green space to off-set the green space loss; timely removal of spoil material to minimize
soil erosion; proper disposal of spoil material according to city's regulations etc.

The EMP and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) implementation will be managed by the Tianjin PMO which will
assign dedicated environmental and social staff. The Tianjin PMO has prepared and implemented two prior World
Bank projects and therefore it has extensive experience with World Bank safeguards policies and procedures. The
first phase of implementation has been satisfactorily implemented. The PMO will be directly responsible for ensuring
the EMP and RPF implementation, with support from a project management company. A safeguards (including
environmental and social) management unit will be established with dedicated both environmental and social staff
as required. The EMP mitigation measures will be incorporated into bidding documents and thus the contracts, and
implemented by the contractors. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified
environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP.

To identify specific social risks and impacts and design proper measures to mitigate negative social impacts and
promote positive social impacts, a social assessment was done by a professional consulting team. As part of the social
assessment activities, intensive consultation was undertaken with local residents (including no less than 30% women)
in project sites and other stakeholders like vulnerable people, drivers and transport policemen. Results of the public
consultation are incorporated in project design, covering road safety improvement, public participation,
consideration of needs for the poor and elderly road users. The PMO will coordinate another three rounds of public
consultation to reflect opinions of the public upon the project implementation.

In case any involuntary resettlement occurs in this project, a resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared
to guide future land acquisition and resettlement. The RPF sets detailed principles and procedures as well as other
crucial requirements for handling involuntary resettlement. Implementation of the RPF will be followed by Tianjin
PMO and closely monitored, internally and externally, during the supervision stage of the Project. A RAP will be
prepared if and when required based on the RPF implementation during project implementation.
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The project will bring significant benefits to the people in Tianjin by improving quality of mass transit, regular buses
       and non-motorized transport. The key project stakeholders are the general public of Tianjin City, especially the local
       communities along/near the project roads and sites.

       During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations were conducted in
       the project area following both national environmental and social policies as well as World Bank policies (OP4.01 and
       OP4.12). Consultations were conducted through a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings among the
       concerned communities with equal gender participation. Information about the project, potential environmental and
       social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to the public during consultation. Main concerns
       from the public include traffic and accessibility impact during construction, nuisance of noise (particularly night-time
       construction), dust and traffic safety. These concerns were addressed in the EIA, and necessary mitigation measures
       were developed in EMP and the project design.

       The EIA/EMP for the original project were locally disclosed on July 23, 2015 in the website of Tianjin Environmental
       Impact Assessment Center, with announcement published in Bohai Morning newspaper. The final EIA/EMP were
       disclosed again in the same website on September 8, 2015. The RPF was locally disclosed on Tianjin government Rural-
       Urban Construction Bureau website on August 18, 2015, and the final RPF was disclosed in the same website on Sept.
       18, 2015. The supplemental EIA/EMP for the Hebei District for the project restructuring has been disclosed since July
       16, 2018.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
17-Sep-2015                                                       08-Nov-2018
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure


 Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
 China                                                               16-Jul-2018
 Comments
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
18-Sep-2015                                                                 15-Oct-2015
“In country? Disclosure


          Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
          China                                                              18-Sep-2015
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                              Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes



           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
           Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                  Yes

            Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                                Yes
            impacts on cultural property?



           IR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
            Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                                Yes
            (as appropriate) been prepared?

            If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                                Yes
            review the plan?



           PDI_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)



    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Jin Wang
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Yang Chen

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Peter Leonard                             02-May-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Binyam Reja                               03-May-2019

.
