The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 4-Apr-2019| Report No: ISDSR24657




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Rodrigo A. Chaves
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Ann Jeannette Glauber
                            Task Team Leader:      Dinesh Aryal
              The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program-
    P127813
                                                                Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI)
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Dinesh Aryal                                                Indonesia
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    21-Feb-2014                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GENE1                                                       Yes


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                          57.38
    Total Financing                                                                                             57.38
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                  47.38
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                   10.00
         Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                          10.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



    Current Project Development Objective
    To strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems monitoring and research to produce evidence-based resource
    management information.


    Proposed New PDO
    To strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems monitoring and research to produce evidence-based
    resource management information, and to improve management effectiveness of priority coastal ecosystems
.




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Context
Indonesia lies within the Coral Triangle, a region containing the greatest coral ecosystem biodiversity on earth. These
ecosystems contribute to the wellbeing of more than 60 million people who live in Indonesia’s coastal areas. Fisheries
underpin food security and incomes for coastal communities. Meanwhile, the global marine tourism sector is growing
rapidly. Nature-based marine tourism has tremendous potential to contribute to economic growth, sustainable
development, and poverty alleviation in Indonesia.

In recent years, however, the expansion of global trade networks and greater demand for products derived from coral
reef ecosystems has increased rates of exploitation and related environmental damage. Destructive fishing practices,
including bomb and cyanide fishing, as well as coral mining, improper anchoring, land-based runoff pollution, and marine
plastic debris, threaten Indonesia’s coral reef ecosystems. These pressures are compounded by the rapid increase in
population and development, especially in coastal areas, and the global issue of climate change.

Recognizing both the economic and ecological value of coral reefs and these growing threats, the Government of
Indonesia (GoI) embarked on a program to protect coral reefs and associated ecosystems in 1998. The program, Coral
Reef Rehabilitation and Management Project, was designed with three phases, the third of which is the Coral Reef
Rehabilitation and Management Project – Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI). This phase commenced in 2014 and
aims to institutionalize management and monitoring approaches for coral reef and other marine ecosystems established
under the previous phases of COREMAP to ensure long-term sustainable impact.

COREMAP-CTI was initially structured as a collaborative project between the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries
(MMAF) and the Institute of Indonesian Sciences (LIPI). In 2017, the project was restructured with LIPI as sole executing
agency, with modifications to activities to reflect the mandate and functions of LIPI as a research institution. The led to
the suspension of GEF-financed activities, which focused on reef management. A second restructuring was started in 2018
to introduce the Planning Agency, BAPENSAS, through the Indonesian Climate Change Trust Fund (ICCTF), to be a co-
implementing agency with LIPI, and restart GEF-financed reef-management activities.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



B. Project Objective and Activities
The newly restructured project has the objective: To strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems monitoring
and research to produce evidence-based resource management information, and to improve management of priority
coastal ecosystems. It has four project components, namely: (1) Institutional Strengthening for Coastal Ecosystem
Monitoring; (2) Support for Demand-Driven Ecosystem Research; (3) Management of Priority Coastal Ecosystems; and (4)
Project Management.
Component 1, Institutional Strengthening for Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring, is implemented primarily by LIPI and aims
to strengthen coastal ecosystem monitoring to reflect national and international standards. It implements a robust
monitoring system focused on coral, reef fish, mega benthos, seagrass and mangroves at designated sites across
Indonesia, and establishes remote environmental data loggers and a national data network. This component also involves
construction activities, including the upgrading and renovation of research infrastructure and facilities owned by LIPI. In
addition, one activity strengthens technical capacity by providing scholarships for GOI staff for formal education programs
at overseas universities in marine-related fields (sub component 1.2., implemented by BAPPENAS, through Center for
Planner’s Development, Education and Training, CPDET).
Component 2, Support for Demand-driven Coastal Ecosystems Research, is implemented by LIPI and supports research
that in the medium-term will contribute solutions towards nationally significant coastal challenges. Research includes the
following themes: climate change, biodiversity, threatened species, marine debris/pollution and outer islands, among
others, with research priorities set through consultation with a variety of government and other potential users. As part
of this demand-driven competitive coastal ecosystems research grants will be awarded to at least 10 research teams per
year. Component 2 also includes targeted training for at least 100 researchers per year and develops national and
international training at the existing MarBEST training Center.
Component 3, Management of Priority Coastal Ecosystems, is implemented by BAPPENAS, through ICCTF. It aims to
improve the management of priority coastal ecosystems in and around four targeted marine protected areas (MPAs) in
Eastern Indonesia: Raja Ampat (two MPAs), Sawu Sea and Waigeo Barat. The activities will be implemented through
subgrants to NGOs and other eligible organizations. It will support the implementation of priority actions under the Marine
Protected Areas (MPA) management plan, including capacity building and construction/rehabilitation of small
infrastructure (a manta-ray sight station, a hiking trail, a tourist jetty, and information centers), to accelerate progress
towards “Blue? management effectiveness status. It will also support implementation of the Papua Barat integrated
coastal zone management plan, accelerate the implementation of three new National Plans of Action for threatened
species, pilot community rights-based approach to coastal resources and coral reef fish management, and build
community stewardship of coastal resources including community patrols to reduce overfishing.
A fourth component is dedicated to project management, including monitoring and evaluation of project performance,
compliance monitoring on safeguards and fiduciary management, and coordination with partners.


.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The proposed restructuring will revise the Project Development Objective (PDO), the implementation
    arrangements, implementation modalities, project design, and closing date. Nonetheless, based on the
    safeguards assessment, the EA category will stay the same (Category B, Partial Assessment) and it will not
    trigger a new safeguard policy. The scope or nature of project activities in the second restructuring will be
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



similar with the scope of original COREMAP prior to the first restructuring. The safeguard policies will be
applied to the proposed infrastructure-related activities (as presented under sub-component 1.3 and sub-
component 3.1), and for the support implementation of West Papua provincial integrated coastal zone
management plan (sub-component 3.2). The infrastructure-related activities include
improvements/construction of manta rays sight station, construction of hiking track and small jetty in P.
Wayag for ecotourism support, construction of information center and installation of solar panels to support
and accelerate the implementation of priority actions under the Marine Conservation Areas (MCA)
management plan, which may be carried out by a third party (i.e., NGO) as part of the awarded sub-grants by
ICCTF-BAPPENAS. Additional infrastructure works consist of renovating/upgrading LIPI’s existing research
buildings including the: i) Marine Species Conservation Technical Unit, Bitung, North Sulawesi; ii) Marine Bio-
Industry Technical Unit, Mataram, Lombok; iii) facilities at LIPI’s Ancol Headquarters; and iv) Pulau Pari field
station as the MarBEST Regional Training and Research Center. The renovations/upgrades of LIPI’s research
buildings: i) Training Facilities in Jakarta Jalan Raden Saleh; ii) Marine Species Conservation Technical Unit,
Tual; and iii) Field Research Station, Ternate, North Maluku were completed in 2018. In line with impacts
experienced to date under the Project, the restructured project is not expected to generate any large-scale,
significant or irreversible environmental and social impacts. The Project will continue following the same
principles in that no severe environmental impacts are tolerated, no natural habitat will be lost or severely
damaged, no indigenous people are adversely affected, and no involuntary resettlement will be taken place
due to land acquisition.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Ninin Kania Dewi, Social Specialist
Agustina Parwitosari, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered           Explanation
                                                               The objective of the restructured project is to
                                                               strengthen institutional capacity in coastal
                                                               ecosystems monitoring and research to produce
                                                               evidence-based        resource      management
                                                               information, and to improve management
                                                               effectiveness of priority coastal ecosystems. If
                                                               properly implemented, the project is likely to
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                   improve the coastal ecosystems, particularly the
                                                               management of coral reef habitats at the local
                                                               level.

                                                               The infrastructure-related activities include
                                                               improvement or construction of ecotourism
                                                               infrastructure such as manta-ray sight-station,
                                                               hiking trail, tourist jetty, information centers to
The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                                                       support and accelerate the implementation of
                                                       priority actions under the Marine Conservation
                                                       Areas (MCA) management plan, which may be
                                                       carried out by a third party (i.e., NGO) as part of the
                                                       awarded sub-grants by ICCTF-BAPPENAS. The other
                                                       physical activities are renovations/upgrades of
                                                       existing LIPI monitoring, learning and research sites
                                                       and assets. Any adverse impacts associated with
                                                       the construction activities are considered to be
                                                       minor to moderate, reversible, and site-specific. As
                                                       such, the project is not expected to generate
                                                       significant adverse and/or irreversible long term
                                                       direct, induced or cumulative environmental and
                                                       social impacts that are sensitive, diverse or
                                                       unprecedented.

                                                       Mitigation measures will be carried out in line with
                                                       best practice measures, as identified in the
                                                       Project's Environmental and Social Safeguards
                                                       Framework (ESSF). The ESSF, which was prepared
                                                       to set out procedures required by the Project to
                                                       minimize adverse environmental and social impacts
                                                       that may occur during implementation, was
                                                       updated and publicly consulted in July 2018. The
                                                       updated ESSF reflects the changes in the role of
                                                       implementing agencies (i.e., LIPI and BAPPENAS
                                                       including ICCTF-BAPPENAS), and the changes to the
                                                       project design, which is similar to the original
                                                       COREMAP design prior to the 2017 restructuring.
                                                       The ESSF provides a negative list and a set of
                                                       environmental and social screening procedures to
                                                       guide implementation. It also comprises an
                                                       Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                       (ESMF), Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                                                       Framework (LARPF) and an Indigenous Peoples
                                                       Planning Framework (IPPF). The LARPF establishes
                                                       principles and procedures to guide project
                                                       implementers in managing land acquisition
                                                       activities, and guides preparation of associated
                                                       action plans (LARAP) for any investments involving
                                                       land acquisition. The LARAPs provide mitigation
                                                       plans to ensure that affected peoples will not be
                                                       worse off due to project activities and that they will
                                                       be      consulted    during      preparation     and
                                                       implementation.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                                                              The safeguard policies will be applied to
                                                              Component 3 for the infrastructure-related
                                                              activities (sub component 1.3 and sub component
                                                              3.1) and for the support implementation of West
                                                              Papua provincial integrated coastal zone
                                                              management plan (sub-component 3.2). Under this
                                                              sub-component 3.2, NGOs and other eligible
                                                              organizations through ICCTF-BAPPENAS awarded
                                                              sub-grants, will provide technical assistance and
                                                              actions for the implementation of a marine spatial
                                                              plan and integrated coastal zone management plan
                                                              for West Papua province. The activities, such as
                                                              rehabilitation of select coastal ecosystem habitats,
                                                              will generate positive impacts. Environmental and
                                                              social safeguards will be mainstreamed in the other
                                                              activities related to developing a technical plan on
                                                              MPA carrying capacity, management guidelines
                                                              (SOPs), and conducting training and public
                                                              outreach in support of ICZM. The World Bank
                                                              Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                              Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in
                                                              Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds
                                                              Administered by the Bank dated January 2014 will
                                                              serve as the reference. No specific safeguard
                                                              instruments will be prepared for the TA, however
                                                              the World Bank policies will be complied with in the
                                                              approach and outputs of the technical advisory
                                                              activities.
Performance Standards for Private Sector                      No private sector will be involved in the project
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03                                         implementation.
                                                              The overall impacts on Natural Habitats as a result
                                                              of restructured project interventions are expected
                                                              to be positive.

                                                              The outcome of rehabilitation of coastal ecosystem
                                                              habitat, improved coastal ecosystems monitoring
                                                              and research information as well as improved
                                                              management effectiveness of priority coastal
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes                ecosystems will enable end users to improve
                                                              resource management and conservation actions,
                                                              thereby protecting natural habitats and ensuring
                                                              their sustainable use.

                                                              The project will not finance any civil works activities
                                                              in prohibited, critical natural habitats, nor will any
                                                              of its interventions result in the significant
                                                              conversion of natural habitats. This project’s
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                                                              existing negative list will apply. The project
                                                              operation manual provides specifications for
                                                              management of small to moderate civil works to
                                                              avoid any degradation or conversion of natural
                                                              habitats.
                                                              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                              involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                              critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                              habitats as defined under the policy. No net loss of
                                                              mangroves would occur as a result of project
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                              activities, to the contrary, the project would
                                                              support management interventions to protect the
                                                              ecological integrity of these systems and allow
                                                              communities to benefit from the ecosystem
                                                              services they provide.
                                                              The project will not procure any pesticides, nor will
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                              any use of pesticides result from the project.
                                                              Project     activities    affecting     archeological,
                                                              paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                              natural values as defined under the policy will not
                                                              be eligible for support. Standard appropriate
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                              clauses will be included in all construction contracts
                                                              regarding the procedures to be followed in the
                                                              event of chance finds of culturally significant
                                                              artifacts.
                                                              The restructured project, in particular sub-
                                                              component 3.2, may include activities with an
                                                              IP/ethnic minority presence. Findings from
                                                              COREMAP 2 and CTI indicate that no adverse
                                                              impacts on IPs were identified during the course of
                                                              implementation. The project will need to ensure
                                                              involvement of indigenous groups, particularly in
                                                              areas where the IP groups are a minority.
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes
                                                              The project will ensure that information reaches IP
                                                              groups and they are afforded equal opportunity to
                                                              benefit from project activities. The Indigenous
                                                              Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) embedded in
                                                              the ESSF provides the guiding principles and
                                                              procedures that will be applied during activity
                                                              preparation and implementation.
                                                              The project activities, in particular sub-component
                                                              3.1, involving small to moderate civil works that will
                                                              be undertaken in existing facilities. The project
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                              activities in sub-component 3.1 and 3.2 may
                                                              require limited land acquisition. The project will
                                                              keep a record of all such transactions and ensure
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                                                                      that no individual will be negatively affected by
                                                                      land acquisition. No access restriction is expected
                                                                      from the proposed project activities, which focuses
                                                                      on coastal ecosystems monitoring and research
                                                                      and the implementation of marine spatial plan and
                                                                      integrated coastal zone management plan,
                                                                      therefore no impacts to community livelihoods are
                                                                      expected.

                                                                      The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                                                                      Framework (LARPF) embedded in the ESSF states
                                                                      the principles and procedures to guide project
                                                                      implementers in dealing with land acquisition
                                                                      activities. The LARPF guides preparation of action
                                                                      plans (LARAP) for any investments involving land
                                                                      acquisition. The LARAP will provide a mitigation
                                                                      plan to ensure that affected peoples will not be
                                                                      worse-off due to project activities and that they will
                                                                      be      consulted    during      preparation     and
                                                                      implementation.

                                                                      The project will not finance construction or
                                                                      rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No
                                                                      performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                                      construction.
                                                                      There are no known project components involving
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                             international waterways as defined under the
                                                No
 (BP 7.50)                                                            policy. None of the project sites will be in the
                                                                      international water boundaries.
                                                                      The project is not located in any known disputed
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
                                                                      areas as defined under the policy.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The proposed restructured COREMAP CTI project aims to strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems
      monitoring and research to produce evidence-based resource management information, and to improve
      management effectiveness of priority coastal ecosystems. The safeguard policies will be applied to the proposed
      infrastructure-related activities (as presented under sub-component 1.3 and sub-component 3.1), and for the support
      implementation of West Papua provincial integrated coastal zone management plan (sub-component 3.2). Under this
      sub-component 3.2, NGOs and other eligible organizations through ICCTF-BAPPENAS awarded sub-grants, will provide
      technical assistance and actions for the implementation of a marine spatial plan and integrated coastal zone
      management plan for West Papua province. The activities, such as rehabilitation of select coastal ecosystem habitats,
         The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



  will generate positive impacts. Environmental and social safeguards will be mainstreamed in the other activities
  related to developing a technical plan on MPA carrying capacity, management guidelines (SOPs), and conducting
  training and public outreach in support of ICZM.

  The infrastructure-related activities include improvement or construction of ecotourism infrastructure, such as
  manta-ray sight-station, hiking trail, tourist jetty, information centers to support and accelerate the implementation
  of priority actions under the Marine Conservation Areas (MCA) management plan, which may be carried out by a
  third party (i.e., NGO) as part of the awarded sub-grants by ICCTF-BAPPENAS. Additional infrastructure works consist
  of renovating/upgrading LIPI’s existing research buildings including the: i) Marine Species Conservation Technical Unit,
  Bitung, North Sulawesi; ii) Marine Bio-Industry Technical Unit, Mataram, Lombok; iii) facilities at LIPI’s Ancol
  Headquarters; and iv) Pulau Pari field station as the MarBEST Regional Training and Research Center. The
  renovations/upgrades of LIPI’s research buildings: i) Training Facilities in Jakarta Jalan Raden Saleh; ii) Marine Species
  Conservation Technical Unit, Tual; and iii) Field Research Station, Ternate, North Maluku were completed in 2018.

  In line with impacts experienced to date under the Project, the restructured project is not expected to generate any
  large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental and social impacts. The safeguard issues and impacts associated
  with the project are expected to be minor to moderate, reversible and site-specific. The Project will continue following
  the same principles in that no severe environmental impacts are tolerated, no natural habitat will be lost or severely
  damaged, no indigenous people are adversely affected, and no involuntary resettlement will be taken place due to
  land acquisition. The physical activities are limited to improving strategic infrastructure and renovating/upgrading
  research center/offices, thus the environmental and social impacts are expected to be minor to moderate, reversible
  and site-specific. Such impacts can be managed locally by adopting screening criteria, good engineering design and
  construction practices. Nonetheless, because of the national scope of the Project, it is essential to ensure sufficient
  attention is paid to the application of safeguard guidelines and adequate monitoring.

  The majority of social and environmental outcomes generated by the restructured project are expected to be positive.
  The activities indicated in the project as a result of the restructuring have been simplified, consequently any adverse
  impacts will be less compared to the original project. However, since the project will finance small civil works and
  Indigenous Peoples (IP) groups are present in several of the participating districts, there is no consideration to change
  the safeguard policies triggered (Environmental Assessment/OP 4.01, Natural Habitats/OP 4.04, Indigenous
  Peoples/OP 4.10 and Involuntary Resettlement/OP 4.12). There is no change in the Category B categorization, which
  means no significant adverse environmental or social impacts are anticipated.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  No potential indirect nor long term adverse impacts are expected as a result of the project restructuring.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  N/A.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



Mitigation measures will be carried out in line with best practice measures, as identified in the Project's
Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF). The ESSF, which was prepared to set out procedures required
by the Project to minimize adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during implementation, was
updated and publicly consulted in July 2018. The updated ESSF reflects the changes in the role of implementing
agencies (i.e., Indonesian Institute of Sciences/LIPI and Indonesian Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS, including its Indonesian Climate Change Trust Fund/ICCTF), and the changes to the project
design, which is similar to the original COREMAP design prior to the 2017 restructuring. The ESSF provides a negative
list and a set of environmental and social screening procedures to guide implementation. It also comprises an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
(LARPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). The LARPF establishes principles and procedures to
guide project implementers in managing land acquisition activities, and guides preparation of associated action plans
(LARAP) for any investments involving land acquisition. The LARAPs provide mitigation plans to ensure that affected
peoples will not be worse off due to project activities and that they will be consulted during preparation and
implementation. The IPPF provides general principles and procedures that will be applied during preparation and
implementation.

Borrower Capacity: The proposed restructuring also introduces BAPPENAS, including its working unit ICCTF-
BAPPENAS, as new implementing agency. From 2015 to 2018, ICCTF-BAPPENAS has financed 63 programs (with 42
currently ongoing) throughout Indonesia with funding from APBN, USAID, UKCCU and Danida. The programs included
various small-scale infrastructure projects, examples of which include the construction of an information/training
center and mangrove walkways for ecotourism, all of which are not considered having any significant negative
environmental impacts, according to ICCTF-BAPPENAS’ independent expert. Generally, ICCTF-BAPPENAS cannot
finance any large-scale and permanent infrastructure, any program generating significant environmental and social
impacts, any program requiring involuntary resettlement, any program contravening the principles of Environmental
and Social Safeguards, nor any activities related to supporting a political agenda.

The safeguards institutional capacity assessment that was conducted within the framework of this restructuring,
found that ICCTF-BAPPENAS currently has no dedicated person/team responsible for environmental and social
management issues. Rather, program officers are reportedly performing the safeguard-related matters on top of their
regular operational duties. However, ICCTF-BAPPENAS has started including environmental and social safeguards
considerations in the project cycle, which involves using an independent expert to evaluate incoming proposals. This
process was recently initiated at the request of a donor agency (UKCCU). According to the expert, all 63 existing
projects to date have been categorized as C, unlikely to generate significant environmental impacts.

Generally, environmental and social safeguards considerations in ICCTF-BAPPENAS projects are guided by its
Environmental and Social Safeguards guidelines and other documents. The guidelines consist of a screening checklist
to be signed by the project proponent on potential environment and social impacts that covers issues on: i) indigenous
and local communities; ii) biodiversity; iii) land acquisition and resettlement; iv) stakeholder support; v)
environmental documents and permits; vi) human rights; vii) labor standards; and viii) gender. In case of any such
issues to be identified during screening, the program will be rejected. Environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS)
requirements, however, have not been included in the agreement/cooperation document between ICCTF-BAPPENAS
and the NGOs implementing the projects. As such, there is no contractual requirement for the implementing NGO to
manage any safeguard-related issues as part of ICCTF-BAPPENAS support. A system must be developed for ESHS
requirements to be included in the agreement/cooperation document between ICCTF-BAPPENAS and the NGO
implementing the projects. The capacity building section in the ESSF has therefore been updated to include action
plans toward addressing the aforementioned gaps in institutional capacity.
                         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




                  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                    Project stakeholders include the implementing agencies (LIPI, BAPPENAS, ICCTF-BAPPENAS), its partner institutions
                    and network, academia, research agencies and other government agencies, district and provincial governments and
                    Indonesian citizens with an interest in coastal ecosystem monitoring and research. The project will build the
                    institutional capacity of implementing agencies’ staff and that of a number of associated national and sub-national
                    entities associated with carrying out coastal ecosystems monitoring and research activities so as to generate robust
                    monitoring and research information. This will involve a range of training, certification and collaborative research
                    activities with partner institutions.

                    The ESSF, which was prepared to set out procedures required by the Project to minimize adverse environmental and
                    social impacts that may occur during implementation was updated and disclosed prior to stakeholder consultation on
                    June 2018. The stakeholder consultation was held in Makassar in July 2018 attended by local government, NGOs and
                    Academia. Input from the stakeholder consultation has been accommodated in the ESSF document. The final ESSF in
                    Indonesian version will then be re-disclosed in the project sites (LIPI’s and ICCTF-BAPPENAS’ sites) as well as the
                    English version in the Image Bank. The re-disclosure will be done upon joint approval of both LIPI and ICCTF-BAPPENAS
                    management and formal submission of the document to the Bank.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                          Date of submission for disclosure
        31-Aug-2018                                                          31-Aug-2018
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            Indonesia                                                           31-Jul-2013
            Comments
            The revised ESSF reflecting the scope, scale and nature of the restructured project will be disclosed in country on the
            Borrowers' websites and at the Bank's InfoShop upon completion of Stakeholder Consultation.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process
                            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Date of submission for disclosure
31-Aug-2018                                                                   31-Aug-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          Indonesia                                                            31-Aug-2018
           Comments
           Disclosed together with the revised ESSF.
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
31-Aug-2018                                                                     31-Aug-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            Indonesia                                                           31-Aug-2018
            Comments
            Disclosed together with the revised ESSF.



       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                  Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                    Yes
           and approve the EA report?

           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                       Yes



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
         The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                              Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                              Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                              NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                              Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                              Yes
 review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                              Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups               Yes
 and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                              Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                              Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                              Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                              Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




    Task Team Leader(s)                   Dinesh Aryal


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager              Ann Jeannette Glauber                 08-May-2019

.
