The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2018| Report No: ISDSR24866




                       Regional Vice President:    Axel van Trotsenburg
                              Country Director:    Jesko S. Hentschel
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Juergen Voegele
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Preeti S. Ahuja
                            Task Team Leader:      Tomas Ricardo Rosada Villamar
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P106685                                                     AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Tomas Ricardo Rosada Villamar                               Argentina
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    11-Jun-2015                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GFA04


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             76.50
    Total Financing                                                                                                76.50
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 52.50
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          24.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        16.60
         Local Communities                                                                                           7.40


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



    Current Project Development Objective
    To increase the socio-economic inclusion of rural poor (small producers, indigenous people, and rural workers) by: (a)
    strengthening their organizational, planning and management capacity to achieve poverty-reduction goals; (b) improving
    their access to communityinfrastructure and services; and (c) piloting a new model for developing sustainable access to
    markets.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The “Argentina: Socio-Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas Project? comprises the following four components:

          Component 1 finances the provision of technical support to communities and organizations of small
           producers, indigenous peoples, and rural workers, to improve their organizational, planning, and
           management capacity. In addition, it also includes the preparation of studies, strategies and planning
           instruments for local development.
          Component 2 finances demand-driven rural investment subprojects that aim to improve the living
           conditions of the targeted poor rural communities. Subprojects include small-scale investments such as
           rehabilitating rural community infrastructures, improving agricultural production on farm, and
           providing household water and sanitation systems.
          Component 3 finances the pilot of productive alliances, through subprojects carried out by producer
           groups.
          Component 4 finances all project management activities, including administration, monitoring and
           evaluation, and environmental and social management.


The Project’s main target group consists of rural population groups with high levels of poverty and/or vulnerability to
poverty, which include small family producers, rural workers, and indigenous peoples.

The lending instrument is an Investment Project Financing of US$52.5 million over a five-year period.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



Consistent with the CPS, the Project area includes regions characterized by both high levels of rural poverty
and strong concentration of smallholder producers and/or indigenous peoples. Accordingly, the initial area of
intervention will comprise the regions of North-East Argentina (Noreste Argentino, NEA) and North-West
Argentina (Noroeste Argentino, NOA). With the restructuring, Component 3 will be expanded to all
participating provinces in the Project. The implementation experience has shown that there is both demand
and capacity for productive alliances in provinces beyond NEA, representing an opportunity to consolidate
the productive alliances model in the rest of the country. For Components 1 and 2, Project resources are
allocated to participating provinces based on their relative distribution of small producers and indigenous
communities. Within each Participating Province, Project resources are allocated in priority to micro-regions
that demonstrate above-average presence (both in relative and absolute value) of target beneficiaries. The
criteria for allocation of resources by provinces and areas are spelled out in the Operational Manual.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Claudio Luis Daniele, Environmental Specialist
German Nicolas Freire, Social Specialist
Eleonora Beatriz Camalli, Social Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered         Explanation
                                                               The Project aims to have an overall highly positive
                                                               socio-economic impact and increase the socio-
                                                               economic inclusion of rural poor by improving the
                                                               efficiency of agricultural productivity. The inclusion
                                                               of medium-scale rural investments under
                                                               Component 2 and physical interventions under
                                                               Component 3 could have negative, yet small-scale
                                                               and localized impacts on the environment.
                                                               Subproject investments include rehabilitation of
                                                               existing roads; irrigation systems; water systems;
                                                               rural electricity supply; and other small-scale
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                   infrastructure, land use change and improving
                                                               agricultural production (with an increased pressure
                                                               over natural resources). Because these subprojects
                                                               involve mostly medium or small-scale activities, the
                                                               incremental environmental impacts are expected
                                                               to be limited, site-specific and reversible, and the
                                                               mitigation measures rather straightforward to
                                                               design and implement. Since the type, scale and
                                                               localization of specific subprojects was unknown at
                                                               appraisal, the General Directorate of Sectoral and
                                                               Social Programs and Projects (DIPROSE) of the
                                                               Government Secretariat of Agroindustry prepared
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



                                                              an Environmental and Social Management
                                                              Framework (ESMF), detailing the environmental
                                                              screening process and a negative list that excludes
                                                              any sensitive environmental sites from being
                                                              financed by the Project. Cumulative impacts are not
                                                              expected to be significant.

                                                              During Project restructuring, the ESMF has been
                                                              updated to reflect potential impacts associated
                                                              with the medium scale investments to complement
                                                              the original ESMF focused on small-scale
                                                              investments, and it includes new guidelines to
                                                              mitigate and compensate environmental and social
                                                              impacts of the specific subprojects, including waste
                                                              management, safety and risk control measures for
                                                              workers and adjacent communities, environmental
                                                              protection measures to prevent negative impacts
                                                              on soil, air, flora, fauna, water sources, and
                                                              landscape, among others. According to the
                                                              provincial/local regulation, the inclusion of medium
                                                              scale works must be accompanied by the applicable
                                                              procedures of Environmental Assessment for
                                                              obtaining the corresponding environmental
                                                              license. The Project does not finance any
                                                              subproject considered as a Category A under the
                                                              World Bank definition.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No                 N/A
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                              Most Project activities are implemented in areas
                                                              already under agricultural production. However,
                                                              the potential impacts on critical natural habitats are
                                                              explored as part of the subproject screening
                                                              process. Subprojects could be located in areas close
                                                              to critical natural habitats or protected areas, but
                                                              subprojects that imply significant degradation or
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes                conversion of natural habitats are not eligible for
                                                              Project finance. Subprojects within national or
                                                              provincial protected areas are neither eligible for
                                                              funding. Areas with other conservation statuses
                                                              (Ramsar sites, Birdlife IBAS, Biosphere Reserves,
                                                              etc.) are also considered ineligible unless the
                                                              proposed investments are compatible with the
                                                              criteria established in the ESMF.
                                                              Most Project activities are implemented in areas
                                                              already under agricultural production. The Project
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes
                                                              screening mechanism identifies subprojects with
                                                              potential impacts on forests or their management.
      The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



                                                             Subprojects impacting forests or involving
                                                             establishment of plantations require a deeper
                                                             environmental analysis and adequate mitigation
                                                             measures.
                                                             Integrated pest management is part of subproject
                                                             activities under Components 2 and 3. Any
                                                             procurement of pesticides needs to comply with
                                                             the requirements of OP 4.09 that specifies the type
                                                             of pesticides ineligible for World Bank financing.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 Yes
                                                             Guidelines that define the restriction or prohibition
                                                             of the use of agrochemicals are included in the
                                                             ESMF. In addition, the ESMF requires the
                                                             preparation of Integrated Pest Management Plans
                                                             and includes respective guidelines.
                                                             The Project does not finance any subproject with
                                                             potential negative impacts on physical cultural
                                                             resources. However, particularly because of
                                                             interventions in indigenous peoples’ areas, chance
                                                             finds of cultural artifacts can appear during
                                                             implementation. To handle such findings,
                                                             Argentina has a well-developed legislative and
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes               normative framework that will be applied in such
                                                             cases. DIPROSE also has proven experience and
                                                             appropriate procedures to address chance finds in
                                                             line with these procedures and rules. The ESMF
                                                             includes screening criteria to evaluate potential
                                                             impacts on cultural resources and provides
                                                             guidance and procedures for managing chance
                                                             finds.
                                                             The policy is triggered because indigenous peoples
                                                             are present in many of the targeted provinces and
                                                             a specific part of the Project is expected to benefit
                                                             IP communities. For this reason, and given that the
                                                             exact location of subprojects is not known before
                                                             implementation, DIPROSE prepared an Indigenous
                                                             Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), including a
                                                             Social Assessment, which is part of the ESMF. Based
                                                             on the principle of free, prior, and informed
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes
                                                             consultation, a first draft of the Project preparation
                                                             documents (including Project objectives, approach,
                                                             activities, mechanisms and the draft IPPF) were
                                                             made available and presented to organizations
                                                             representative of IPs, namely: the Indigenous
                                                             Participative Council (“Consejo de Participación
                                                             Indígena?) and the Meeting of Indigenous People
                                                             Territorial Organizations (“Encuentro de las
                                                             Organizaciones        Territoriales     de    Pueblos
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



                                                              Originarios, ENOTPO?). Both organizations
                                                              reviewed the documents in order to provide their
                                                              advice and inform about their level of support.
                                                              ENOTPO and the National Family Producers Forum
                                                              (“Foro Nacional de Agricultura Familiar, FONAF?)
                                                              reviewed and commented on the Project
                                                              documents revised for the restructuring and
                                                              provided their broad support to the Project. During
                                                              Project restructuring, the IPPF has been updated to
                                                              reflect potential impacts associated with the
                                                              medium scale investments and different
                                                              consultation processes for the related works as
                                                              required in OP 4.10. Actions agreed upon with
                                                              indigenous peoples’ representatives during Project
                                                              preparation and included in the original IPPF did
                                                              not undergo any changes in this restructuring.
                                                              Although involuntary resettlement is not foreseen,
                                                              it is possible that involuntary economic
                                                              displacement and/or loss of assets may be
                                                              generated during small infrastructure works,
                                                              including the following: (i) rehabilitation of
                                                              irrigation or water systems; (ii) rehabilitation of
                                                              feeder roads; and (iii) small rural infrastructure.
                                                              Given the demand-driven nature of Project
                                                              activities, it would be difficult to anticipate the
                                                              number of people that would be impacted by
                                                              Project investments. For this reason, DIPROSE
                                                              prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                              to minimize and mitigate any potential adverse
                                                              social impacts resulting from Project investments.
                                                              The RPF, which is part of the ESMF, provides the
                                                              overarching framework by which potential
                                                              resettlement issues are addressed if necessary. In
                                                              cases in which resettlement issues would affect
                                                              indigenous peoples, the RPF addresses them in a
                                                              form consistent with the IPPF. During Project
                                                              restructuring the RPF has been updated to reflect
                                                              potential impacts associated with the medium
                                                              scale investments and the corresponding
                                                              mitigation and compensation measures.
                                                              While the Project does not finance building of any
                                                              large dam, it is possible that irrigation or water
                                                              supply subprojects financed under Components 1
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)             Yes                 and 3 might depend on the storage and operation
                                                              of an existing dam for their supply of water and may
                                                              not function if the dam failed. The ESMF stipulates
                                                              that financing of such subprojects requires a
           The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



                                                                          preliminary specialized dam safety assessment,
                                                                          including a review and evaluation of the operation
                                                                          and maintenance procedures of the existing dam
                                                                          and the presentation of a written report including
                                                                          the applicable findings and recommendations for
                                                                          any remedial work or safety related measures.
                                                                          During Project restructuring the World Bank re-
                                                                          examined the applicability of OP 7.50 and
                                                                          determined that it becomes relevant for the
                                                                          Project. While OP 7.50 was not triggered during
                                                                          preparation, the medium scale infrastructure
                                                                          works may involve the expansion, rehabilitation
                                                                          and/or improvement of ongoing water conduction
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                                 systems, which could, in turn, rely on bodies of
                                                  Yes
 (BP 7.50)                                                                water that discharge into the Plata River basin.
                                                                          However, water abstraction has been estimated to
                                                                          be negligible in relation to the discharge flows of
                                                                          the respective transboundary rivers. Thus, the
                                                                          exception to the notification requirement under
                                                                          paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 was requested and got
                                                                          authorized by the Regional Vice President on May
                                                                          3, 2019.
                                                                          The policy is not triggered because the Project is
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No                      not implemented in areas known to involve
                                                                          disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      While OP 7.50 was not triggered during preparation, in view of a forthcoming Level Two restructuring of the Project
      and inclusion of new specific activities, notably medium-scale infrastructure that would include water conduction
      systems, the Bank team has re-examined the applicability of said Policy and has determined that it would become
      relevant for the Project.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      With the restructuring and inclusion of medium-scale infrastructure, particularly water conduction systems, OP 7.50
      becomes applicable to this Project, as these may take and conduct water from tributary streams to the Uruguay and
      Paraná rivers, which are part of the Plata River basin. However, due to the size and location of the new medium-scale
      works and, also, due to the minimal water abstraction of potential future subprojects to be financed, it is the task
      team’s determination that the incremental rate of abstraction into the above-mentioned international waterways or
      their tributaries is likely to be minimal. Their impact will be limited and localized. As such: (i) the proposed activities
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



       are not likely to adversely affect the quantity or quality of the water flowing to downstream riparians; and (ii) the
       Project will not be affected by other riparians’ possible water use. Therefore, the team has requested an exception
       to the notification of riparians.


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
       PISEAR considers a variety of small to medium scale subproject investments in a diversity of environmental and social
       settings. Based on the ESMF, the corresponding environmental and social assessment identifies the applicable
       alternatives for each case to minimize adverse impacts.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       Concerning OP 7.50, no special measure has been put in place because the incremental rate of abstraction into the
       international waterways or their tributaries is likely to be minimal.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The Social Assessment of the Project was based on an assessment of PROINDER’s experience, consultations with, and
       relevant documents about small producers, indigenous peoples, and rural workers. Based on the principle of free,
       prior, and informed consultation, a first draft of the Project preparation documents (including Project objectives,
       approach, activities, mechanisms and a draft of the Indigenous People Planning Framework, IPPF) were made
       available and presented to organizations representative of indigenous peoples, namely: the Indigenous Participative
       Council ("Consejo de Participación Indígena") and the Meeting of Indigenous People Territorial Organizations
       ("Encuentro de las Organizaciones Territoriales de Pueblos Originarios, ENOTPO"). Both organizations reviewed the
       documents to provide their advice and inform about their level of support. ENOTPO and the National Family
       Producers Forum ("Foro Nacional de Agricultura Familiar, FONAF") advised on the Project documents and expressed
       their broad support to the Project, as formally recorded in the minutes of the respective consultation meetings. These
       organizations were consulted again before the start of Project implementation to present the changes that were
       introduced following their previous participation and to receive new questions and comments. During these meetings
       the organizations again expressed their support to the Project.

       During Project preparation, relevant social risks (equitable access to opportunities and benefits created by the
       Project) were taken into consideration with the effective participation of community and IP leaders throughout the
       decision-making process. During implementation, the Project has been addressing these issues, as planned, by
       systematically mainstreaming participatory methodologies in all Project activities to respond to the needs of
       beneficiaries. The ESMF defines the participatory mechanisms to be adopted.

       The key stakeholders are identified for each investment subproject as a result of the corresponding social evaluation.
       The ESMF includes the consultation and dissemination instruments (PPI, PRI, etc.) that must be adapted and applied
       for each subproject to minimize adverse impacts as needed.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
                      The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
        22-Mar-2019                                                    02-Apr-2019
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            Argentina                                                        01-Apr-2019
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                             Date of submission for disclosure
22-Mar-2019                                                             02-Apr-2019
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
          Argentina                                                      01-Apr-2019
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  Date of submission for disclosure
22-Mar-2019                                                                  02-Apr-2019
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            Argentina                                                        01-Apr-2019
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



 Comments




PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure

22-Oct-2014                                                      23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
 Argentina                                                        23-Oct-2014
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                     Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                     No
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
 critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                            Yes
 acceptable to the Bank?



 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)



Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                          Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                         No

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project       NA
team include a Pest Management Specialist?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)




SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                No

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                    No
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                    No
been made for public awareness and training?



PIW_TABLE
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                              No

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP            Yes
prepared and sent?

Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                             Yes



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                    Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                    Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
           The World Bank                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           AR Socio-Economic Inclusion In Rural Areas (P106685)




III. APPROVALS


                                          Tomas Ricardo Rosada Villamar
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Francisco Javier Obreque Arqueros

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager              Garry Charlier                      23-May-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
