The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Nov-2018| Report No: ISDSR26134




                        Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                               Country Director:    Elisabeth Huybens
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Charles Joseph Cormier
                             Task Team Leader:      Alassane Agalassou
              The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity
    P144135
                                                                  Building Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Alassane Agalassou                                            Gabon
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    17-Sep-2015                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE07


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                               60.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                  60.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                      60.00


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objectives (PDO) are to expand access to water and energy services in targeted rural areas and
    to establishmechanisms to improve sustainability of service provision.
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



    Proposed New PDO
    The project development objectives (PDO) is to expand access to water and energy services in targeted rural areas.
.


    A. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

1. The project has the following three components:
       a. Component A: Expansion of access to basic services in rural areas which is to be
           achieved through: (i) the rehabilitation and construction of rural electrification
           infrastructure, including installation of solar home systems and mini-grid solutions; (ii) the
           construction and installation of wells and water pipes for drinkable water; and (iii) the
           provision of the required goods and equipment.

            b. Component B: Implementation support, supervision and monitoring and
               evaluation (M&E) which is to be achieved through: (i) carrying out a program of activities
               aimed at ensuring sustainability in the electricity and water sector, through capacity
               building and technical assistance in technical, financial and contractual areas to key
               selected actors(ii) (a) the development and completion of a master plan for access to
               basic services in the Borrower's rural areas covering, inter alia, rural electrification and
               water supply and related technical options on a village-by-village basis; (b) the
               development of related environmental and social impact studies; and (c) the provision of
               engineering expertise for implementation support purposes (iii) the development and
               implementation of a communication, education and awareness program in targeted rural
               areas, including the implementation of a health campaign aimed at raising awareness of
               the benefits of clean water (iv) support to the Borrower in the areas of Project
               coordination, supervision, financial management, procurement, monitoring and
               evaluation, audits, and preparation and supervision of implementation of the safeguards
               instruments and preparation of related surveys, including through the provision of
               training, operating costs, goods and services for the required purpose.

            c. Component C: Capacity building and sectoral technical assistance which is to be
               achieved through: (i)strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic
               (MERH), National Council for Water and Electricity (CNEE), Regulatory Agency for Water
               and Electricity Sectors (ARSEE) and private operators to better manage the energy
               sector by developing and implementing a module-based training program (including on-
               the-job daily training and workshops) in the areas of, inter alia, planning, operation and
               maintenance, and management of basic rural services. (ii) carrying out a program of
               activities aimed at assisting the MERH in strategic decision making and implementation
               in related sectors through, inter alia: (a) the provision of technical assistance; (b) the
               development of electricity and water codes; (c) updating of the national electricity
               transmission and generation master plan; and (d) the preparation of analytical and sector
               work focused studies
        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



2. While the implementation of Components B and C has progressed since 2017 when the loan
   agreement was declared effective, the implementation of Component A has not advanced as the
   borrower was unable to meet the disbursement conditions in the Loan Agreement which sought
   to secure funding to subsidize service providers for operations and maintenance (O&M operators)
   providing electricity and water and the hiring of the first operator of basic services in rural areas.

3. The Project was designed to be a cornerstone operation for a larger rural water and electrification
   program to be financed by the Government of Gabon (GoGA) and other donors and to finance
   broader sector analytics to support the GoGA’s efforts to establish sector reforms and
   sustainability of overall service provision in the water and energy sectors. As such, the project
   was originally designed to finance a new model creating a market for basic water and energy
   services in rural areas based on two pillars: (a) delegation of responsibility for service provision to
   specialized operation and maintenance (O&M) operators; and (b) sustainable long-term financing
   combining cost recovery and subsidies. The original project’s focus is on villages located outside
   of the Gabonese Energy and Water Utility’s (Société d’Energie et d’Eau du Gabon) (SEEG)
   perimeter that are too distant from urban and peri-urban areas to be connected to the water and
   electricity networks within a five-year timeframe as of 2015. The Project will support the provision
   of water and electricity services to households and to public buildings (for example, schools,
   clinics, community centers, police stations, and religious buildings). Street lighting will also be
   supported under the Project.


B. PROJECT STATUS

 Overall

 4.    Progress towards achievement of the PDO has been very slow due to lack of progress in
 Component A (Expansion of access to basic services in rural areas), which represents 75 percent
 of the financing, as the disbursement conditions of that component could not be met. Overall the
 progress towards achievement of the PDO and Implementation Progress are Moderately
 Unsatisfactory. The Overall Safeguards Rating is Moderately Satisfactory. The Disbursements of
 the Project are approximately 23.9% (US$14million) after two years of implementation. Most of the
 disbursements have occurred in the latter half of FY18.


DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES

1. The proposed changes under this restructuring are: (a) changes to the technical design of the
   original Project; (b)changing the scope of activities specifically some activities will be dropped,
   and new ones added including new activities under Component C (c) changing the PDO of the
   Project; and (d) reallocation of the proceeds of the Loan.

 2.     Changes to the technical design of the Project: The Project was originally designed to finance
 a new model to create a market for basic water and energy services in rural areas based on two
 pillars: (i) delegation of responsibility for service provision to specialized O&M operators; and (ii)
       The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



sustainable long-term financing of O&M combining cost recovery and subsidies for O&M. The O&M
operators were to be competitively selected and were to be in charge of installing equipment
(including rehabilitation of old systems), carrying out O&M, and recovering payment for service in
their regional service areas. In addition, the Projects focus was on villages located outside of the
SEEG perimeter that are too distant from urban and peri-urban areas to be connected to the water
and electricity networks.

3.     This design will be changed under the restructuring. The Project will not delegate responsibility
for service provision to specialized O&M operators. Going forward, SEEG, will be responsible for
O&M of basic services provision. This includes maintaining assets constructed under component A
and applying national tariffs principles to the provision of electricity and water services.. The Project
will finance activities in localities where the SEEG grid can be extended and decentralized localities
that will be managed by SEEG. This means some initial localities that are too distant from SEEG
coverage will be dropped under the restructuring.

4.    Changes to the sustainability mechanism of assets financed by the Project: The newly adopted
mechanism will be based on the “centralized? approach through extension of SEEG’s concession
to villages that will be connected through extension of existing networks under SEEG or
decentralized electrified localities. Once connected, these localities are included de facto within the
concessionary area and their management is transferred to the SEEG. The Regional Directorate of
SEEG will oversee operation and maintenance of rural localities inclusive of the assets financed
under this project through its decentralized departments in each province of Gabon. These
departments are responsible for operation and maintenance of water and electricity assets and the
delivery of basic services to customers in urban and rural areas in each province of Gabon. These
departments will be reinforced to better carry out operation and maintenance activities in all project
areas.

5.    Changes to the PDO: The original PDOs are to expand access to water and energy services
in targeted rural areas and to establish mechanisms to improve sustainability of service provision.
The restructuring proposes to drop the focus on ‘establishing mechanisms to improve sustainability
of service provision’. This change speaks to the change in the technical design of the Project (as
discussed in paragraphs 17-18 immediately above). The restructured PDO is to expand access to
water and energy services in targeted rural areas. Changing the PDO will be accompanied by
revisions to the original results indicators and targets in the Results Framework.

6.     Changes to Component A: (a) This Component will no longer finance the installation of solar
home systems since remote small localities with few people have been dropped under the new
design. In addition, since O&M operators will not be utilized, SEEG will be technically involved in
the implementation of these activities. The new design will adapt the rural electrification model and
project areas accordingly by integrating grid extension electrification under this component,
incorporating additional new localities and dropping other localities in the pilot areas; and (b) the
Component will finance new activities related to the rehabilitation and extension of water networks
in rural localities operated by SEEG to provide sufficient potable water to the rural population; and
(c) will support human capital development through financing water points and latrines to schools
and health centers.
           The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)




    7.     Component B: No activity will be dropped.

    8. Component C: No activity will be dropped. A new activity will be financed under this
    Component, namely, the provision of advisory services for the SEEG reforms. This new activity help
    GoGA to have onboard a reputable international advisory firm to support SEEG’s reforms.

    9.    Implementation Arrangements: The institutional arrangements will be revised to include
    SEEG in the Steering Committee of the project and as technical focal point for implementation of
    activities under Component A. SEEG will provide technical assistance for network extension
    activities and mini-grids and water supply activities. The PIU will continue to be responsible for the
    Project’s technical and fiduciary aspects.

    10. Safeguards implementation from 2014 to 2018: The borrower prepared an Environmental
    and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the parent project. The ESMF reviewed and approved
    by the Bank and disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s InfoShop on October 9, 2014. The ESMF sets
    forth guidelines and procedures for the environmental and social screening process and the
    preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for sub-projects/site specific
    ESIA. As per ESMF requirements, the environmental and social screening of some subprojects in 44
    localities (these localities are no longer considered in this restructuring) was carried out in
    December 2017 and ToR for an ESIA submitted for NO on January 12, 2018. However, the
    preparation of these instruments is still pending for the purpose of structuring and change of project
    areas and civil works were not undertaken. Grievance Redress Mechanism was elaborated by the
    PIU and will integrate a communication plan and specific gender and GBV’s arrangements to ensure
    that all stakeholders are actively involved in project’s activities and are fully aware of all grievance’s
    uptake channels and management mechanisms. To bolster implementation of the safeguard
    instruments, the PIU, in July 2018, recruited an Environmental Specialist and a Social development
    Specialist on a full-time basis.
.

    3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Location: Rural Areas and peri-urban areas of the Republic of Gabon. The project exact activities location is
    not known yet.



    4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    FNU Owono Owono, Social Specialist
    Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Specialist
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered             Explanation
                                                                 The original project was categorized as B and the
                                                                 proposed restructuring will not trigger new
                                                                 safeguards policies, and is therefore categorized as
                                                                 B. Potential environmental and social risks and
                                                                 impacts of the project for the most part are
                                                                 expected to remain minimal, site-specific and
                                                                 manageable to an acceptable level.
                                                                 The Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) has been updated to consider
                                                                 additional activities and new locations and related
                                                                 environmental and social issues. The ESMF includes
                                                                 standard methods and procedures, and along with
                                                                 appropriate institutional arrangements for
                                                                 screening      projects      activities,    reviewing,
                                                                 implementing, and monitoring specific ESIAs to
                                                                 prevent adverse risks and impacts, as well as
                                                                 cumulative impacts. The updated report was
                                                                 disclosed in country and at the Bank’s Imagebank
                                                                 on May 16, 2019.
                                                                  This project will develop a master plan for access
                                                                 to basic services in the Borrower’s rural areas
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                 covering, inter alia, rural electrification and water
                                                                 supply. The envisioned Master plan is likely to have
                                                                 environmental and social impacts when
                                                                 implemented through future programs or projects.
                                                                 Terms of References for the master plan for access
                                                                 to basic services           will then incorporate
                                                                 environmental and social considerations. There will
                                                                 be an agreement/agreed ToRs with the client on
                                                                 the need and process to incorporate environmental
                                                                 and social considerations into the master plan
                                                                 development process.

                                                                 Once the location and scope of the investments to
                                                                 be financed under component 1 will be decided by
                                                                 the Government of Gabon, as needed, RAPs will be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed to the Bank's satisfaction,
                                                                 and payment of eventual compensation (to be
                                                                 financed by the Government) completed prior to
                                                                 commencement of any works.
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                 No risks and impacts on natural habitats are not
                                                                 anticipated. There will be no (in) direct degradation
                                                                 or loss of natural habitats (whether in a park or
                                                                 not), because targeted areas under the
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                    restructured Project are not located in national
                                                                 parks.



                                                                 They are not anticipated risks and impacts on
                                                                 forests because this project does not entail the
                                                                 construction of High voltage transmission lines ,
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                    which require largest Right of Way width .The
                                                                 restructured Project will not finance activities in
                                                                 areas designated as Forests.


Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                    This project will not involve pest management.
                                                                 This policy is triggered as the Component 1 of the
                                                                 project will support the construction of wells and
                                                                 water pipes to scale up access to drinkable water.
                                                                 Holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
                                                                 forests, etc. may be affected. Activities will involve
                                                                 excavations and earth movement. The ESMF has
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                   included clear procedures that will be required for
                                                                 identification, protection of cultural property from
                                                                 theft, and treatment of discovered artifacts, and
                                                                 that will be included included in standard bidding
                                                                 documents. It also provides procedures for
                                                                 handling      with     “chance      finds?      during
                                                                 implementation project activities
                                                                 This policy was triggered as it is known that Baka
                                                                 are settled in Gabon in general and some may be in
                                                                 the project area. Since the exact location of the
                                                                 activities is not yet defined, the borrower has
                                                                 prepared an Indigenous People Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF) for the original project that has
                                                                 been updated and will guide the project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes
                                                                 implementation in the areas that the screening
                                                                 process will reveal Indigenous People Presence.
                                                                 The updated IPPF was disclosed in country and at
                                                                 Imagebank on May16, 2019.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



                                                                       The Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered as
                                                                       some households may be in the vicinity of lines to
                                                                       be constructed and land may need to be acquired
                                                                       that results in involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                       restrictions of access to livelihoods and resources.

                                                                       A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                       prepared and disclosed in-country on October 9,
                                                                       2014 and at the Bank’s InfoShop on October 10,
                                                                       2014. An updated report was disclosed in country
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)        Yes                    on May16,2019 and at the Bank’s Imagebank on
                                                                       May 16, 2019.

                                                                       Once the location and scope of the investments to
                                                                       be financed under component 1 will be decided by
                                                                       the Government of Gabon, as needed, RAPs will be
                                                                       prepared and disclosed to the Bank's satisfaction,
                                                                       and payment of eventual compensation (to be
                                                                       financed by the Government) completed prior to
                                                                       commencement of any works.

                                                                       This project does not involve the construction of
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No
                                                                       new or rehabilitation or use of existing dams.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                No                     Activities do not affect international waterways
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No                     Activities will not be implemented in disputed areas
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The potential environmental and social impacts of the infrastructure investments under the proposed Project are
      expected to be generally minimal. Localized impacts may occur, thus requiring appropriate mitigation. In light of
      envisioned Project activities, there are two Environmental World Bank Safeguard policies applicable to this operation:
      Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Physical Cultural Heritage (OP. 4.11).
      Two social safeguards policies are triggered for the project and will guide the implementation of the project:
      Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
      The ESMF prepared by the client identifies social and environmental impacts that are likely expected during the works
      and exploitation phases. The most likely are the following:
      Social impacts :
      •    social conflicts related to inadequate sites choice;
      •    disruption of the free movement of people;
      •    Disruption of socio-economic activities;
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



  •    Risk of social conflicts due to non-local access to jobs;
  •    Risk of loss of private land;
  •    Spread of the SIT/HIV/AIDS;
  •    Risk of involuntary resettlements and loss of socio-economic assets;
  •    Risk of accidents in work;
  •    risk of injury (electrocution);
  •    risk of labor influx
  •    risk of Gender Based Violence ( GVB

  Environmental impacts :
  •    disturbance and degradation of natural habitats (forests)
  •    Trees cutting along the transmission lines;
  •    risk of local soil erosion.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The project activities are not anticipating long term and large scale indirect impacts. The most likely indirect impact
  that can be anticipated is the SIT/HIV/AIDS spreading. The people that are contaminated could spread the disease.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The access to rural electrification and rural water infrastructures remain very weak (15% and 39% respectively) with
  regard of the Government set specific quantitative targets to be reached by 2025 (80% access for both rural
  electrification and rural water infrastructure). As the project intends to contribute to reach the government target,
  no project alternatives exist.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To address safeguards issues the borrower has prepared three safeguards key instruments that will guide the project
  implementation:
  1- the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019.
  The ESMF prescribes project arrangements for the preparation, review, approval and implementation of the activities
  that will be financed under the project.
  2- an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) which was approved and disclosed on October 9, 2014. The
  IPPF was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019. The IPPF provides information on the location of Indigenous people
  in areas likely to be affected by the project. The IPPF provides information to "judge the positive and negative impacts
  of the project on Indigenous Populations?
  3- A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which was approved and disclosed both in Country and the Bank’s
  Infoshop was updated and disclosed on May 16, 2019 . The RPF identifies principles to be followed in the event of
  temporary land acquisition, the damage or removal of assets such as crops and trees, and the acquisition of land.
  4-A Grievance Redress Mechanism was elaborated by the PIU and will integrate a communication plan and specific
  gender and GBV’s arrangements to ensure that all stakeholders are actively involved in project’s activities and are
  fully aware of all grievance’s uptake channels and management mechanisms.
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



       The Borrower has also organized an extensive public consultation during the whole safeguards instruments
       preparation process and the consultation will continue throughout project implementation.

       The Implementing Agency of the project has already implemented World Bank projects. The structure has an
       acceptable capacity to implement world bank safeguards policies. In addition, it was agreed that for this project,
       environmental and social daily implementation of the project will be carried out by one (01) an Environmental
       Specialist recruited and One (01) Social Development Specialist who will be recruited by the Project Coordination
       Unit of the project, while the whole environmental and social issues will be supervised by the General Directorate of
       Environment and Protection of Nature none as «Direction Générale de l’Environnement et de la Protection de la
       Nature (DGEPN)». (DGEPN) will receive all relevant support from CNTIPPEE(PIU) to ensure satisfactory supervision
       of social and environmental issues of the project.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The key stakeholders that will be part of the project are those who will be located in the five provinces that expect to
       host the project activities (Estuaire, Moyen-Ogoué, Ngounié, Nyanga, Ogoué Ivindo). This includes :
       •    Persons affected by loss of assets ;
       •    Local collectivities ;
       •    Local and traditional authorities ;
       •    Local Organizations ;
       •    Local Associations ;
       •    Local public administrations ;
       •    National and international organizations ;
       •    National and International NGOs.
       The Borrower has already organized an extensive public consultation during the whole safeguards instruments
       preparation process and the consultation will continue throughout project implementation.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
16-May-2019                                                       16-May-2019
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
 Gabon                                                               16-May-2019
                            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     Date of submission for disclosure
16-May-2019                                                                     16-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                                 Date of Disclosure
          Gabon                                                                   16-May-2019
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       Date of submission for disclosure
16-May-2019                                                                       16-May-2019
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
            Gabon                                                                 16-May-2019
            Comments




        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                    Yes

           If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                      Yes
           and approve the EA report?
        The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?        Yes



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                       Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                          Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                          Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                          Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                          Yes
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                          Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                          Yes
review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                          Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups            Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                          Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (P144135)



    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                    Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                    Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                    Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                     Alassane Agalassou


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Hanneke Van Tilburg                      04-Jun-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Charles Joseph Cormier                   04-Jun-2019

.
