The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2017| Report No: ISDSR23676




                       Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director:    Paul Noumba Um
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Guang Zhe Chen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Catherine Signe Tovey
                            Task Team Leader:      Chloe Oliver Viola
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P154861                                                     Zimbabwe National Water Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Chloe Oliver Viola                                          Zimbabwe
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    29-Jan-2016                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GWA01

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    20,000,000.00                                               20,000,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Trust Funds                                                                                       20,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                             20,000,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The proposed project development objective is to improve access and efficiency in water services in selected growth
    centers and to strengthen planning and regulation capacity for the water and sanitation sector.




.
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)




    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    The Zimbabwe National Water Project has three components:

    1. Growth Center Water and Sanitation Improvements—this component is financing investments in water supply and
    sanitation in (1) Guruve, (2) Lupane, and (3) Zimunya, and has planned investments in (4) Gutu, (5) Madziwa, (6)
    Mataga, (7) Nembudziya.

    2. Technical Assistance to strengthen the capacity of the relevant national and local institution to ensure the
    sustainability of investments and improve overall planning, regulation, and reform of the sector in line with the
    National Water Policy.

    3. Project Management to support a Project Implementation Unit set up by the Zimbabwe National Water Authority to
    implement the project.



    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The sources of water for the seven schemes covered under the project vary from boreholes, rivers, and
    existing dams. The source rivers and dams are multi-purpose, combining domestic water supply, animal
    drinking, irrigation water, and environmental uses under a stakeholder-driven water allocation and
    management system of the sub-catchment councils. The exact footprint of the project is limited to existing
    transmission routes while the distribution networks are limited to the servitude areas provided in the
    development layouts. During project appraisal, physical inspections showed that the building lines were clear
    and no physical structures would obstruct installation. However, during implementation small infrastructure
    (private pit latrines and septic tanks) were found to occupy some of the right of way (ROW) for the
    distribution systems in Guruve. Eleven sanitation structures and one grey water drain were destroyed. An
    additional six pit latrines are located in the ROW, but will remain standing until replacement structures are
    provided. To avoid livelihood impact, the Implementation Team has ensured that the affected households
    are able to use sanitation facilities adjacent to homes until such time that replacement facilities are finalized.
    The impact has not and will not lead to relocation of any households. To direct project implementation in
    accorance with World Bank’s operational policy on resettlement, an abbreviated Resettlement Policy
    Framework (RPF) was developed post-approval to guide the project team and avoid adverse impact in all
    project locations. A remedial RAP was prepared to guide mitigation of project impact for 19 affected
    households in Guruve. The land on which the project treatment plants and ancillary works will be located
    belongs to the RDCs and ZINWA. In two of the seven scheme-related RDCs (Gutu and Zimunya), the
    sanitation services are managed by ZINWA through stabilization ponds. In the other five RDCs, the sanitation
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



systems vary from septic tanks for institutional and low density areas to pit latrines in some high-density
areas. The increased water supply in Gutu and Zimunya is likely to result in direct increase in effluent
generated. In the case of Zimunya, the current stabilization ponds are underutilized and the expected
increase in effluent generation is within the existing treatment system capacity; in Gutu the ponds will be de-
sludged and have weeds removed to increase capacity.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong, Social Safeguards Specialist
Majbritt Fiil-Flynn, Social Safeguards Specialist
Mwansa Lukwesa, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered          Explanation
                                                              The ZNWP is a category B project currently under
                                                              implementation and involves the rehabilitation and
                                                              expansion of existing rural water supply
                                                              infrastructure that have posed low to moderate
                                                              environmental      and    social   risks/impacts.
                                                              Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                              (ESMPs) where developed to meet both the
                                                              Zimbabwe Environmental Management Agency
                                                              (EMA) and World Bank requirements. The ESMPs
                                                              were cleared by EMA and are included in the
                                                              construction company's contract. The ESMPs were
                                                              also cleared by the World Bank's Regional
                                                              Safeguards Advisor, and disclosed on the World
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                  Bank's external website.

                                                              The project's environmental and social
                                                              risks/impacts relate to (1) rehabilitation of
                                                              excavated areas, (2) soil erosion and siltation, (3)
                                                              potable water quality, (4) contamination of water
                                                              from waste water and septic tanks, and (5)
                                                              encroachment of septic tanks and latrines on water
                                                              lines in Guruve. The implementing agency, ZINWA,
                                                              has a dedicated safeguards specialist that oversees
                                                              the contractors and is responsible for managing the
                                                              social and environmental risks and impacts.


 Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                            No
 Activities OP/BP 4.03
       The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



                                                   This policy was triggered as raw water in the project
                                                   areas is abstracted from rivers and dam that
                                                   constitute natural habitats for aquatic life. The
                                                   project’s impact on natural habitats was assessed
                                                   as part of ESMP preparation for each subproject. In
                                                   all project areas, the water transmission pipelines
                                                   will not disturb any sensitive ecosystems like
                                                   wetlands and marshes. The transmission mains will
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           Yes
                                                   follow planned alignments, some of which traverse
                                                   areas of natural vegetation although most would
                                                   follow existing pipeline routes and road rights-of-
                                                   way. In all project areas, the expected impacts on
                                                   natural habitat are considered to be minimal. The
                                                   water abstraction systems will prevent fish
                                                   entrainment through the use of fine mesh wire at
                                                   the inlet pipes.
                                                   The policy on forests was not triggered as the
                                                   developments under construction works have not
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No       resulted in loss of forests. Vegetation loss on the
                                                   project has been minimal around the project
                                                   footprint.
                                                   The policy on pest management was not triggered
                                                   as the project does not involve the direct or indirect
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No       use of pesticides. There will be periodic manual
                                                   (non-chemical) removal of aquatic weeks from
                                                   around water intake areas.
                                                   Consultation with traditional leaders and the
                                                   National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe
                                                   confirmed during appraisal that there are no known
                                                   physical cultural resources within the project areas.
                                                   The project areas are known and show that they
                                                   have already been affected by earlier development
                                                   activities, such that any physical cultural resources
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No      would likely have been observed and reported
                                                   earlier. Arrangements for close liaison with the
                                                   traditional leaders, the Zimbabwe Republic Police,
                                                   District Administrator, National Museums and
                                                   Monuments of Zimbabwe and the RDCs Chief
                                                   Executives have been made for smooth
                                                   management of chance finds procedures and
                                                   implementation of the ESMPs.
                                                   There are no people within the project area who
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                   meet the Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
                                                   Rehabilitation and expansion of water treatment
                                                   works will be on existing ZINWA and RDC
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                   landholdings. Some of the targeted areas are new
                                                   developments that are being developed and not yet
       The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



                                                   inhabited. However, there is minor encroachment
                                                   in some of the rights-of-way in Guruve for the
                                                   water distribution lines by sanitation facilities. The
                                                   local council approved these facilities as temporary
                                                   facilities in the absence of RDC provision of water
                                                   borne sanitation. An abbreviated RPF has been
                                                   prepared to guide implementation in all locations,
                                                   and a remedial RAP will guide mitigation of impacts
                                                   in Guruve.
                                                   The policy is triggered because some of the water
                                                   supply schemes (Mataga, Lupane, Gutu, and
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              Yes     Zimunya) predominantly use existing dams as
                                                   sources of water supply. Dam safety inspections for
                                                   the above dams were carried out and approved.
                                                   The shared international watercourses applicable
                                                   to Zimbabwe and its neighbors are the: (a) Zambezi
                                                   River, (b) Limpopo River, (c) Save River, (d) Mazowe
                                                   River, and Pungwe River. The raw water sources for
                                                   the seven water supply schemes under the project
                                                   are not directly from an international waterway,
                                                   nor are they directly from a tributary to an
                                                   international waterways. The raw water sources
                                                   are from internal river systems, dams, and
                                                   underground sources that are indirectly and
                                                   distantly connected to the international waterways
                                                   through a minimum of three other larger
                                                   tributaries, and a minimum of one hundred
                                                   kilometers from the international waterways. This
                                                   remote relationship between the targeted water
                                                   source and the potentially affected international
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           Yes     waterways, together with the scope of the
(BP 7.50)
                                                   abstraction volumes give adequate room for
                                                   natural volumetric recharge; making the impact of
                                                   intended raw water abstraction truly negligible
                                                   compared to the remaining flow downstream.

                                                   As an example, the Zimunya water supply scheme
                                                   would abstract 0.05 megaliters per day from
                                                   Zimunya Dam (912 mega liters capacity) on Mpudzi
                                                   River which, in turn, discharges into Odzi River
                                                   which eventually discharges into Save River (an
                                                   international waterway). The dam capacity is
                                                   almost 20,000 times the daily abstraction rate,
                                                   making the abstraction negligible in comparison
                                                   with the source. The Mpudzi river flows are small
                                                   when compared with what is discharged into the
                                                   Odzi and Save Rivers by other downstream
The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



                                            tributaries (Nyazvidzi, Tanganda, Devure and
                                            Nyanyadzi just to mention a few) to these two
                                            rivers. The water supply station is more than 200
                                            kilometers away from the nearest border point
                                            between Zimbabwe and Mozambique along the
                                            Save River. The above situation of negligible impact
                                            on downstream flows is reflected in all the
                                            subproject areas.

                                            Zimbabwe is a signatory to the SADC Protocol on
                                            Shared Water Courses. Article 4 of the Protocol
                                            requires notification of the riparian states
                                            whenever the member state is implementing a
                                            planned activity that has significant negative effect
                                            on the water course member states. The
                                            requirement hinges on the “significance? of the
                                            impact of the proposed activity. In this project, the
                                            anticipated negative impact on the quantity or
                                            quality of any international water course is
                                            expected to be insignificant. ZINWA has in place
                                            mechanisms to measure or estimate the impact of
                                            the project in terms of flows while the
                                            Environmental       Management        Agency      has
                                            mechanism in place to measure the pollution
                                            impacts of the proposed project on international
                                            waterways. These two organizations, together with
                                            the Ministry of Water, Environment and Climate,
                                            are part of the institutional arrangement under the
                                            SADC Protocol to ensure adequate monitoring and
                                            reporting of impacts of individual riparian states’
                                            activities on international waterways. The
                                            institutional arrangement includes the ZAMCOM
                                            for Zambezi River, LIMCOM for Limpopo River and
                                            the Save River Management Strategy. This
                                            institutional arrangement is consistent with the
                                            requirements of OP 7.50 Paragraph 3 on
                                            Arrangements.

                                            During appraisal, and following consultation with
                                            the MEWC, review of the project scope, and review
                                            of the SADC protocol on shared water courses in
                                            relation to the requirements of OP 7.50, it was
                                            concluded that an exception to riparian notification
                                            would be sought--while OP 7.50 is triggered, the
                                            project falls under the exception to the riparian
                                            notification set out in Paragraph 7(a) of the Policy.
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



                                                                        The exception was approved by the Regional Vice
                                                                        President on October 13, 2015.
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No                     The project is not located in a disputed area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      There are no large scale, significant, or irreversible negative impacts accompanying this project, owing to its small
      scale and rehabilitation focus. The project is being implemented on existing water supply and treatment schemes.
      Safeguards have been rated Satisfactory over the life of the Project, except for the resettlement issues identified (and
      the subject of this first restructuring).

      The environmental risks/impacts identified at the project sites relate to siltation, rehabilitation of excavated areas
      after completion of works, reported high fluoride levels in boreholes around Nembuziya (independent laboratory
      tests however found the fluoride levels to be at acceptable levels), the presence of water hyacinth at the raw water
      abstraction point around Guruve, and the management of river bank cultivation. These risks/impacts are being
      managed satisfactorily by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the Project Implementation Teams (PITs).

      While physical inspections of the seven project areas at appraisal confirmed that there would be no involuntary
      resettlement, project areas have subsequently been further developed and the Guruve RDC approved temporary,
      small sanitation structures erected in the right of way on two project sites in Guruve following project appraisal. OP
      4.12 was therefore triggered. An RPF was prepared to guide PITs in all project areas and an abbreviated RAP to guide
      mitigation for households impacted by project activities in Guruve. The resettlement impact is limited to sanitation
      facilities in 19 households and will be mitigated through providing upgraded facilities as specified in the RAP and
      subject to the affected households' acceptance. All affected households are also project beneficiaries and will be
      connected to piped water services. The works required under the RAP are under contract with the contractor already
      on site in Guruve and the remedial work is expected to be completed by 31 May 2018.

      There are tremendous positive impacts in the form of improved water supply for a combined population of more than
      50,000 people across the seven project areas. These positive impacts will especially be felt by the women and girls
      who usually have the responsibility for fetching water, sometimes over long distances.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      The increase in the water supply has a direct relationship with increase in wastewater. Indirectly, the proposed project
      will increase the potential for water pollution from sewage. The project has carried out a sanitation needs assessment
      for the local authorities; it is anticipated that the sanitation needs arising from the increased water supply will be
      assessed and plans to address them will be made. The results of the sanitation assessment were disseminated during
      a workshop, and a further workshop is being planned for May 2018.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



  Trench digging for pipeline installation has potential for erosion in the absence of adequate rehabilitation, and the
  ESMPs provide for adequate rehabilitation through specific requirements for civil works contractors to follow.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  In accordance with the recommendations of Zimbabwe’s Environmental Management Agency (EMA), the project’s
  water treatment plants will discharge their effluent indirectly, through irrigation of crops, or discharged onto grassy
  lawns.

  If encroachment in the right-of-way or any other project location is identified during the screening process, the project
  team and/or contractor will first seek to avoid. If avoidance is not acceptable, ZINWA will, following consultation with
  the potentially affected households, prepare resettlement action plans for remedial works or compensation.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Measures to address safeguards issues include the following: ZINWA formulated an ESMP for each of the seven
  project areas. The ESMPs were reviewed and cleared by both the Zimbabwe Environment Management Agency (EMA)
  and the World Bank Safeguards Advisor. The ESMPs covered all applicable World Bank Safeguard Policies. ZINWA has
  conducted dam safety inspections on all project-related dams (Lupane, Zimunya, Mataga and Nembudziya). These
  dam safety reports were submitted to the World Bank. ZINWA has put in place a Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
  that includes several safeguards expert personnel at head office level. There is a Project Implementation Team (PIT)
  at each of the seven catchment offices responsible for the day to day running of the project on the ground.

  OP4.12 was triggered retroactively for the project and at the time there was little experience with resettlement
  activities and Bank requirements. However, ZINWA subsequently transferred experienced staff to the PIU who have
  worked diligently and in a participatory manner with the affected households. The PIU was trained to screen and
  supervise the implementation of the RPF in all project locations and has received ongoing guidance on the RAP from
  the World Bank to be fully capable of overseeing all matters related to resettlement. The PIU subsequently screened
  all project locations for impact and guided impact avoidance to the satisfaction of the World Bank team. The PIU has
  also successfully trained the PITs to identify and avoid resettlement impact. A citizen engagement strategy and a
  gender strategy are under preparation to further improve management of social risk and impact.

  The personnel at both the head office and the catchment offices are qualified, with a minimum bachelor of Science
  degree in natural sciences. The headquarters personnel all have a minimum of 5 years in water quality management
  and participate in Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for ZINWA projects. These personnel are also
  involved in the review of other developers’ ESIAs through ZINWA stake holding to the Environment Management
  Agency (EMA) ESIA processes. The project team is satisfied that ZINWA has capacity to plan, implement and monitor
  the safeguards issues pertaining to the project.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Stakeholder listing and consultation was conducted extensively with the approval of the regulatory authority (EMA).
  The stakeholder listing included clusters of government departments, local leadership, local RDCs, NGOs where
  applicable, womens groups and targeted beneficiaries. Each of these clusters participated in the formulation of the
  respective ESMPs and will be continually involved in the monitoring process for the ESMP implementation. Following
  the completion of each safeguards instrument, they were distributed to each catchment office, EMA, District
                         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



                   Administrator and the RDC. Meetings were held with the local communities and beneficiaries as part of disclosing the
                   environmental safeguards documents.

                   There will be ongoing consultation with water users to avoid resettlement impact and provide for efficient allocation
                   during water shortage periods. Separate consultations related to the resettlement impact in Guruve and
                   implementation of the RAP are ongoing and will continue until the RAP is fully implemented. Key stakeholders were
                   consulted during project preparation and will continue to be part of the citizen engagement agenda, throughout the
                   project's life cycle. Arrangements for continuing stakeholders engagement have been put in place as part of the
                   responsibility of the respective Project Implementation Teams (PITs).

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                         Date of submission for disclosure
        30-Sep-2015                                                         02-Oct-2015
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Date of submission for disclosure
12-Jan-2018                                                                   20-Mar-2018
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
          Zimbabwe                                                             15-Mar-2018
           Comments
        The Resettlement Policy Framework has been disclosed in all project locations. The Resettlement Action Plan was
        disclosed in Guruve with a Stakeholder Meeting.
        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                 Yes
        The World Bank                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
and approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?    Yes



NH_TABLE
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                      No
natural habitats?

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures              NA
acceptable to the Bank?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                      Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                         No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                      No
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



SD_TABLE
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                  Yes

Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                      Yes
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                      Yes
been made for public awareness and training?



PIW_TABLE
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                No

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP              Yes
prepared and sent?
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)



    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                          Yes



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                     Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                     Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                     Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                     Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                             Chloe Oliver Viola
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Christiaan Heymans

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                       Nathalie S. Munzberg                      25-Apr-2018

    Practice Manager/Manager                 Catherine Signe Tovey                     07-May-2018

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
