The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)




                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Restructuring Stage



       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-June-2018| Report No: ISDSR24350




                    Regional Vice President:      Victoria Kwakwa
                           Country Director:      Michel Kerf
             Senior Global Practice Director:     Karin Erika Kemper
                 Practice Manager/Manager:        Iain G. Shuker
                          Task Team Leader:       Cary Anne Cadman
            The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                Project Name
                                                              Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program -
    P151777
                                                              Solomon Islands
    Task Team Leader(s)                                       Country
    Cary Anne Cadman                                          Solomon Islands
    Approval Date                                             Environmental Category
    22-Dec-2014                                                Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                              Is this a Repeater project?
    GEN2A

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                        Total Financing
    9,750,000.00                                              9,750,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                    9,750,000.00
    Total                                                                                          9,750,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the Project is to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic and coastal
    fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend.



.
         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)




3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The restructured Solomon Islands: Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (SI PROP) Project is organized
in three components, as follows:
Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries The objective of this component is to strengthen
the capacity of the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources (MFMR) to sustainably manage its shared tuna
fisheries.

Towards this objective, activities supported under this component include:

 i.      Design, construction and outfitting of an enforcement center in Noro.

 ii.     Electronic Monitoring System for Long Line Vessels: design, supply and installation of equipment,
         including ICT hardware and software, for an Electronic Monitoring System (EMS) in up to 25 long
         line vessels; training in the usage of the EMS equipment; and, legal advice to inform necessary
         refinements to the supporting policy and regulatory framework.

 iii.    Expansion of the Observer Program: expansion of the number of observers trained and certified to
         Pacific Islands Regional Fisheries Observer (PIRFO) standards; expansion of the number of de-
         briefers trained and certified to PIRFO standards to the recommended 1:5 ratio; and, operating costs of
         the observer management offices.

 iv.     Expansion of the Compliance Officer Program: expansion of the number of compliance officers
         trained and certified.

 v.      Design (only) of the Honiara enforcement center may be considered for financing under this
         component if a viable site is identified and firmly secured for construction by MFMR within a suitable
         period permitting full design to be produced prior to project closure.

Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries This component supports Solomon Islands to
sustainably manage defined coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits.

Specifically, this component will finance the following activities:

 i.      A nationwide frame survey to provide a baseline study of the country’s coastal fisheries.

 ii.     Fisheries Resource Assessments and Fisheries Environmental Risk Assessments.

 iii.    Development, implementation and monitoring of fisheries management plans for key species,
         including technical assistance to review relevant regulations and ordinances.
              The World Bank                                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



Component 3: Project Management This component supports active day-to-day project management activities,
including: financial management, procurement, safeguards and monitoring and evaluation tasks associated with
efficient project implementation through to closure. This component specifically finances the Project Support
Unit staffing complement and their operating costs necessary to execute the project effectively.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE
         SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF KNOWN)

    The Solomon Islands has a population of 623,3001 citizens spread across 10 provinces with over 70 distinct
    languages. Over 90 percent of the country’s territory is ocean, with an Exclusive Economic Zone of more than
    1.3 million square kilometers. This area includes tremendous natural resources, such as tuna fisheries that
    provided an estimated US$51 million2 in revenues to the government in 2014, as well as supported local
    processing and livelihoods. The coastal fisheries throughout the archipelago support food and livelihoods, with
    a per capita fish consumption roughly twice the global average.

    The Solomon Islands coastal zone contains some of the most biologically diverse ecosystems in the world. Its
    estuaries, beaches, mangroves, coral reefs, sea grasses, algal beds and many small island ecosystems support a
    wealth of marine resources. Many economically important marine fish, invertebrates and seaweed are found
    within these ecosystems.

    Traditionally, Solomon Islanders have derived about 90% of their protein from the sea. Today, many continue
    to do so. Fishing and gleaning of coral reefs provide important sources of animal protein.

    IUCN listed six priority areas for conservation and protection: Are’Are Lagoon and Maramasike Passage,
    Arnavon Islands, Indispensable Reef, Marovo Lagoon, Ortega Passage and Rennell Island. With the exception
    of Rennell Island, all are representative of the marine environment. Despite these recommendations very little
    scientific work has been carried out in these areas


    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Joyce Onguglo, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
      Safeguard Policies                                      Triggered                  Explanation
                                                                                         The aim of the project is to help improve coastal
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP                                                   and marine fisheries environmental and
                                                              Yes
     4.01)                                                                               resource quality in the Solomon Islands in order
                                                                                         to increase the sustainable economic benefits

1
    http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/solomon-islands-population/
2
    http://www.tunapacific.org/2018/03/02/solomons-makes-399m-from-tuna-alone-in-2017/
The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



                                                       generated by the goods and services from
                                                       healthy coastal and marine ecosystems. As
                                                       such, the overall impact of the project is
                                                       expected to be highly positive and none of the
                                                       eligible investments include activities that
                                                       would generate significant risk or irreversible
                                                       adverse impacts in the coastal or oceans
                                                       fisheries targeted by the program. However,
                                                       some investments under Components 1 and 2
                                                       may generate minor to moderate site specific
                                                       and time bound adverse environmental impacts
                                                       that can be readily mitigated through standard
                                                       mitigation measures, when screened properly.

                                                       At the regional level, the PROP project
                                                       managed by the Forum Fisheries Agency
                                                       envisages regional TA for sustainable financing
                                                       of large scale marine protected areas, which
                                                       may lead to potential minor environmental
                                                       impact downstream. The Interim Guidelines on
                                                       the Application of Safeguard Policies to TA
                                                       Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and TFs
                                                       Administered by the Bank is applied.
                                                       Mechanism for administering safeguards in TA
                                                       activities will include integration of safeguard
                                                       policy requirements into the Terms of
                                                       Reference of studies. As such, the safeguard
                                                       documentation prepared for the project applies
                                                       equally to the TA component(s) and Terms of
                                                       References for the TA activities will be
                                                       approved by the Bank to ensure the consultancy
                                                       outputs comply with the Bank safeguard
                                                       policies.

                                                       The specific project investments that may
                                                       generate minor to moderate adverse impacts
                                                       include: small scale infrastructure works for
                                                       fisheries enforcement and works to allow for
                                                       inspection of fish catch at landing sites and
                                                       restocking of beche-de-mer as well as
                                                       establishment of the associated small scale
                                                       drying facilities. Potential adverse impacts will
                                                       be limited to waste management, construction
                                                       noise, and health and safety of workers.
      The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



                                                             The original PROP Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared
                                                             to guide investments that may generate any
                                                             adverse environmental impact. A screening
                                                             form is used to screen for environmental and
                                                             social impacts. The ESMF will be updated to
                                                             reflect the revised scope of works.
Performance Standards for Private
                                        No
Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                             Project activities will not involve significant
                                                             loss or degradation of natural habitats. Most of
                                                             the project activities will be in coastal and
                                                             marine (within the EEZ) areas of the Solomon
                                                             Islands, which are known sites rich in
                                                             biodiversity. All activities are designed to
                                                             enhance positive and sustainable returns to
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)         Yes                  these important habitats.

                                                             The project ESMF contains measures to
                                                             properly manage the risks of any unforeseen
                                                             adverse environmental impact on natural
                                                             habitats, including critical natural habitats, as
                                                             well as measures to enhance the project's
                                                             positive environmental outcomes
                                                             The project may involve activities that affect
                                                             mangrove forests. All impacts are expected to
                                                             be positive, but to ensure suitable management
                                                             of any unforeseen adverse impacts, the original
                                                             ESMF includes a screening form to ensure that
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                  Yes
                                                             the negative impacts on mangrove forests of any
                                                             downstream activities from the project TA are
                                                             addressed, and any positive impacts enhanced.
                                                             The TOR for the studies proposed will integrate
                                                             OP 4.36 policy requirements.
                                                             The project will not purchase, distribute, apply
Pest Management (OP 4.09)               No
                                                             or dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                                                             The project will not involve any major civil
                                                             works. It will support the construction of an
                                                             enforcement center for fisheries surveillance
                                                             (under Component 1) in Noro, Solomon Islands
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                         and possibly support design (only) of an
                                        No
4.11)                                                        enforcement center in Honiara. Additionally,
                                                             small scale infrastructure works are foreseen to
                                                             allow for inspection of fish catch at landing sites
                                                             and restocking of beche-de-mer and
                                                             establishment of the associated small scale
      The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



                                                             drying facilities. Given the small scale works
                                                             involved, the policy is not expected to be
                                                             triggered. A chance finds procedure is included
                                                             in the ESMF and ESMP.
                                                             The policy is triggered for the Regional PROP
                                                             as some countries participating in the program
                                                             have Indigenous Peoples (IPs).

                                                             The policy applies to Solomon Islands as IPs are
                                                             present in the country. But since they are the
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)       Yes
                                                             overwhelming majority of project beneficiaries,
                                                             a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is not
                                                             required. The elements of an IPP will, however,
                                                             be integrated into the project design. Guidance
                                                             for integrating elements of the IPP into overall
                                                             project design is included in Annex B of ESMF.
                                                             Project activities may require small-scale
                                                             coastal land acquisition. It is expected that
                                                             market-based or voluntary donation will be the
                                                             common approach. Any voluntary land
                                                             donations will meet the World Bank
                                                             requirements through the application of the
                                                             Voluntary Land Donation Protocol appended to
                                                             the ESMF in Annex D.

                                                             Although it is considered unlikely, certain
                                                             project activities may involve the involuntary
                                                             acquisition of land and/or removal of assets.
                                                             Accordingly, the policy will be triggered and a
                                                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF,
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP                            presented in Annex C has been prepared.
                                        Yes
4.12)                                                        Subsequently,      Abbreviated     Resettlement
                                                             Action Plans will ensure that all affected
                                                             persons are compensated for involuntary
                                                             acquisition of land and/or removal of assets at
                                                             full replacement cost.

                                                             In case of downstream establishment of the
                                                             MPAs, which could potentially restrict access to
                                                             resources, IAs will select appropriate safeguard
                                                             instrument(s) according to the responsibilities
                                                             defined in the ESMF (and in particular the
                                                             Annex on Process Framework).

                                                             To address potential restriction of access to
                                                             resources, a Process Framework (PF) has been
      The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



                                                               prepared in compliance with requirements
                                                               stated in OP 4.12 (See Annex E of the ESMF).
                                                               Neither this project nor the possible
                                                               downstream investments from project’s TA will
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)             No
                                                               involve building dams nor depend on an
                                                               existing dam.
                                                               Following discussion with LEGEN and the
                                                               RSA, it was agreed that there will be no impacts
Projects on International Waterways
                                          No                   from this project or its possible downstream
(OP) (BP 7.50)
                                                               investments on international waterways as
                                                               described under OP 7.50.
                                                               Any project activities in areas which may be
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP
                                          No                   disputed will be declared ineligible and not
7.60)
                                                               included in the project.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A.   SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

1. Describeany safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe
  any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

  The overall impacts of the project are expected to be highly positive and none of the investments include
  activities that would generate significant risk or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts. The
  project includes investments for both physical works and soft activities such as technical assistance. The
  physical investments and soft activities will be implemented at sites across the country. Some technical
  assistance will be implemented at a regional level led by the regional PROP managed by the Fisheries Forum
  Agency.

  Examples of the type of activities (salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis), which
  have the potential to incur adverse environmental or social impacts are as follows:

  - Component 1, Subcomponent 1: design and construction of an enforcement center for fisheries surveillance
  in Noro and may include design (only) of an enforcement center in Honiara. The construction works in Noro
  may generate minor site-specific and time-bound adverse environmental impacts that can be readily mitigated
  through standard mitigation measures, if screened properly.

  - Component 2, Sub-component 2 may include support to restock beche-de-mer if deemed a viable method
  to sustainably restore stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock would be used. Support
  would include supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore habitats. This activity will not involve
  introduction of non-native species nor involve the purchase, distribution, use or disposal of bactericides
  during implementation. However, investments in the area of small enterprise development associated with
  bêche-de-mer valued added processing may include installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers)
  for drying.
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



  The scale and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and the types of mitigation
  activities are well-known and proven. As such, the project is classified as Category B.


2. Describeany potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
  area.
  The specific impacts of project activities will be identified during the preparation of the individual
  subprojects. The ESMF provides guidance for the project implementation agency on the preparation of
  appropriate safeguard instruments to respond to the potential impacts found during the preparation. The
  ESMF will be updated to account for the reduced scope of works in the restructured project.


3. Describe   any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




4. Describemeasures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
  borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

  An updated ESMF will be prepared to reflect the restructured nature of this and the other PROP projects in
  order to outline the process by which potential adverse impacts will be identified and robust instruments
  prepared for each subproject by each of the project implementing agencies.

  Project implementation will involve a single agency as the national focal point entity: the Solomon Islands
  Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resource (MFMR).

  The Project Coordinator has been provided with training on the requirements of the existing ESMF. The
  World Bank will continue to provide necessary training and development of staff to the Project Support Unit
  following restructuring to build their capacity and provide support during actual scoping and implementation
  of subprojects.

  The Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA)
  Activities in Bank- Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank will apply for the TA
  provided by the project. Accordingly, Terms of References for the TA activities will be approved by the Bank
  to ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the Bank safeguard policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
  policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

  The ESMF requires an inclusive, participatory community needs assessment process, screening criteria, and
  forms to document broad community support and consensus on priority subprojects. Subproject Consultation
  and Action Plans will be developed in the early part of implementation of each subproject. Community
  consultations will be facilitated and documented by suitably qualified personnel in the Project Management
  Unit. Ongoing monitoring and community consultations by such personnel will assess whether broad
  community support is maintained during implementation.
         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)




     Project stakeholders include both men and women from affected communities whose livelihoods are
     implicated and/or who depend on migratory and coastal fisheries; the private sector (fishing industry from
     harvesting through to value chains / processing and investment); the public sector (national ministries,
     regulatory and trade promotion authorities); and international bodies including regional fishery bodies. The
     numbers and specificity of stakeholders can only be determined once the precise nature and location of the
     activities under each subproject are identified.

     ESMF Disclosure: The final version of ESMF was disclosed on October 23, 2014 and is available through
     the World Bank website (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/docsearch?query=E4664), as well as
     through the website of the FFA. The ESMF will be updated to reflect the revised scope of works after the
     restructuring and will be circulated for review and approval. The revised version of the updated ESMF will
     be disclosed and available on the Bank’s website in due course.

SCLOSRE_TABLE
B.   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                               Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                               23-Oct-2014
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                     Date of Disclosure
 Solomon Islands                                             23-Oct-2014
 Comments




RESETTLE_TABLE
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                                23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



 Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
 Solomon Islands                                              23-Oct-2014
 Comments


INDIGENOUS_TABLE
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                                   23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
 Solomon Islands                                              23-Oct-2014
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
 C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                           Yes
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM)
                                                                                             Yes
 review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                             Yes
 credit/loan?


 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                                              No
  critical natural habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
  other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation                  N/A
  measures acceptable to the Bank?

 IP_TABLE
       The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous              No
Peoples?


IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
                                                                                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                 Yes
Manager review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                    No

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that
                                                                                 TBD
leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)


FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
                                                                                 No
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                 No
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                 N/A
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank
                                                                                 Yes
for disclosure?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-             Yes
affected groups and local NGOs?


ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
           The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Solomon Islands (P151777)



    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
    been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard            Yes
    policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                     Yes
    cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
    monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard                Yes
    policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
    borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal             Yes
    documents?



III.APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                    Cary Anne Cadman


    Approved By
    Practice Manager/Manager               Iain Shuker
.
