The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2019| Report No: ISDSR26220




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Rodrigo A. Chaves
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Julia M. Fraser
                            Task Team Leader:      Tendai Gregan
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development
    P123994
                                                                Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Tendai Gregan                                               Indonesia
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    08-Jul-2013                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GEE02                                                       Yes


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                             159.03
    Total Financing                                                                                                159.03
    Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                 137.60
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                           21.43
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                         21.43


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The development objective of the proposed project is to meet growing electricity demand and increase access to
    electricity in the Project Area through strengthening and expanding the capacity of the power transmission networks in
    the Project Area in a sustainable manner.


    Proposed New PDO
    The development objective of the project is to meet growing electricity demand in the Project Area through
    strengthening and expanding the capacity of the power transmission networks in the Project Area in a sustainable
    manner.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


    1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project consists of a single component with two parts as described below. The revised cost estimate of the
restructured project is about US$159.03 million in which $127.60 million is to be provided by IBRD and the
rest by PLN.

      •   Extension and rehabilitation of selected existing substations in the Project Area, including adding one
          or more new transformers and associated equipment; and/or replacing existing transformers with new
          transformers and associated equipment with higher capacity; and
      •   Construction of selected new substations in the Project Area, including installation of transformers and
          associated equipment.

    The project will be implemented in phases. The first phase will consist of sub-projects (Group 1) which have
    been fully appraised and are ready for implementation upon approval of the project by the World Bank's
    Board of Executive Directors. The second phase will consist of sub-projects (Group 2) which will be brought
    forward by PLN when their preparation is complete. Each sub-project of Group 2 will be appraised by the
    Bank’s team against of a set of eligibility criteria and will be accepted for financing only after the app raisal
    confirms that it meets the criteria. Sub-projects will be financed on a first-come, first-appraised basis until all
    IBRD funds allocated to the project is fully committed.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



The subprojects are located in various urban, peri- urban and rural areas in Java, Bali, Sulawesi, Kalimantan,
and Sumatra islands. For expansion and rehabilitation subprojects, the key activity is to install new
transformers and associated equipment or replace existing transformers and associated equipment with new
ones with higher capacity in the existing substations. Rehabilitation does not require land acquisition and will
be implemented within the premises of these substations. While most of expansion subprojects do not
require land acquisition, some subprojects will require limited additional pieces of land, which is normally
adjacent to the existing substations. For new substations, the key activity is to construct new substations
which have one or two transformers and associated equipment, a control room and ancillary equipment.
Typically, a new substation requires a short transmission line (up to 5 km long) to connect the substation to
the existing network and in few cases, upgrading of an existing road. A new substation requires an enclosed,
leveled site free of any vegetation or human habitation (except for substation operators), typically measuring
about 150m x 150 m. For substations that involve construction of connecting transmission lines or upgrading
of existing access road, these structures require additional permanent and temporary land acquisition. New
subproject sites can be, and normally are, selected flexibly within a certain area to minimize the scale of such
structures and avoid or minimize impacts on environment or land acquisition. Site visits and screening
undertaken by the task team has determined that Indigenous Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are not present
in, nor have collective attachment to the project area under the proposed subprojects of Group 1. Similarly,
no natural and or critical habitats will be impacted by the subprojects of Group 1. However, as PLN can
update, replace or propose new subprojects in the second group, these subprojects may be located in areas
that indigenous people communities are present, or have impacts on natural habitats. Each subproject will
be evaluated against the project safeguard checklist in the ESMF. No subproject will be approved for funding,
if any of the following could occur: significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats and temporary
or permanent relocation or any other type of impact on PCR.



2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Ninin Kania Dewi, Social Specialist
Agustina Parwitosari, Environmental Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                         Triggered          Explanation
                                                               The following impacts are identified during
                                                               construction for rehabilitation and expansion of
                                                               substations: (i) increased level of dust and noise
                                                               from the use and movement of machinery; (ii)
                                                               nontoxic solid waste during construction; (iii) oil
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                   spill or leakage from machinery or transformers;
                                                               (iv) prohibition of PCB and (v) worker health and
                                                               safety from existing EMF. Impacts during operation
                                                               include (i) oil leaks from transformers; (ii) fire and
                                                               emergency preparedness; (iii) solid wastes and (iv)
                                                               worker health and safety. Other issues for
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



                                                             equipment upgrade and additions that have been
                                                             identified include managing potential legacy soil
                                                             contamination and storing and disposing of old
                                                             transformers. For new substations, in addition to
                                                             the above impacts, other issues include the
                                                             management of vegetation clearance and sediment
                                                             and erosion control.

                                                             Land acquisition processes, including public
                                                             consultation and satisfactory compensation for the
                                                             population residing in the project area is the main
                                                             social issue under the project.           Since land
                                                             acquisition is limited, impacts on the individual
                                                             project affected people (PAP) is normally modest
                                                             and limited in the acquisition of small pieces of land
                                                             or cutting down of a few trees. There will be no
                                                             worker camps.        The social nuisances from
                                                             construction (noise, dust, traffic, etc.), will be
                                                             managed under the EMP.

                                                             A due diligence audit was conducted during
                                                             preparation of the Indonesia Power Transmission
                                                             Development Project (IPTD) aiming to identify any
                                                             potential environmental and social liabilities of the
                                                             existing substations where the Bank will finance
                                                             expansion or upgrading subprojects, any physically
                                                             connected projects, and other potential corporate
                                                             reputation risks, such as the potential climate
                                                             changes impacts of the project. The due diligence
                                                             audit confirmed that PLN has acceptable
                                                             environmental, health and safety policies in place
                                                             and no potential environmental and social liabilities
                                                             were identified in the existing substations.

                                                             Supervision of the on-going two transmission
                                                             projects with PLN shows that close supervision and
                                                             monitoring of contractor performance is needed to
                                                             ensure the Standard Operating Procedures are
                                                             followed.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                             Site visits and initial screening undertaken by the
                                                             task team has determined that the proposed
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                subprojects in PLN's list for the first group will not
                                                             cause conversion of degradation of critical or other
                                                             natural habitats. Most project activities will take
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



                                                             place at the existing sites of the substations or in
                                                             the vicinity of the existing substations.
                                                             However, newly proposed subprojects by PLN for
                                                             the second group may have impacts on natural
                                                             habitats. Eligibility criteria for financing subprojects
                                                             will include provisions that subprojects having
                                                             impacts on natural habitats will be excluded from
                                                             the project financing.
                                                             Site visits and screening undertaken by the task
                                                             team has determined that the proposed
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                             subprojects proposed by PLN for the first and
                                                             second group will not cause impacts on forest.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                             It is expected that the proposed project will not
                                                             involve      any     sites      with    archeological,
                                                             paleontological, historical, religious or of unique
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                             natural value as defined under the policy.
                                                             However, chance finds procedures would be
                                                             included as part of the EMP and ESMF.
                                                             Site visits and screening undertaken by the task
                                                             team has determined that Indigenous Peoples as
                                                             defined by OP 4.10 are not present in, nor have
                                                             collective attachment to the project area under the
                                                             proposed list of subprojects under the first group
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes                and second group.
                                                             However, newly proposed subprojects by PLN in
                                                             the second group may be located in areas where
                                                             indigenous communities are present. An
                                                             Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) will
                                                             be developed during preparation.
                                                             A new power substation requires an enclosed
                                                             leveled site, typically of less than 2 hectares. Some
                                                             substations may need construction of a short
                                                             transmission line connecting to existing
                                                             transmission lines, upgrading of existing or
                                                             construction of short new access roads. Land for
                                                             these structures may require temporary and
                                                             permanent land acquisition from forest, residential
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                             and agriculture land. Scales of impacts are quite
                                                             limited and can be minimized due to the flexibility
                                                             in site selection.

                                                             Rehabilitation of existing substations does not
                                                             require land acquisition and will be implemented
                                                             within the premises of these substations. However,
                                                             some expansion subprojects will require a small
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



                                                                       amount of land, normally adjacent to the existing
                                                                       sites.

                                                                       For many expansion and new subprojects in PLN’s
                                                                       proposed list, the site/land has already been
                                                                       obtained by PLN.

                                                                       Abbreviated LARAPs will be prepared for all new
                                                                       substations and expansion of existing substations
                                                                       that requires land acquisition in the first group and
                                                                       any subproject identified and defined prior to
                                                                       appraisal in the second group.

                                                                       For the second group subprojects, a Land
                                                                       Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                       will be prepared by PLN. A LARAP for each
                                                                       subproject requiring land acquisition will be
                                                                       developed during project implementation, when
                                                                       the subprojects are proposed for financing.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The following impacts are identified during construction for rehabilitation and expansion of substations: (i) increased
      level of dust and noise from the use and movement of machinery; (ii) non-toxic solid waste during construction; (iii)
      oil spill or leakage from machinery or transformers; (iv) possible discovery of PCB and (v) worker health and safety
      from existing EMF. Impacts during operation include (i) oil leaks from transformers; (ii) fire and emergency
      preparedness; (iii) solid wastes and (iv) worker health and safety. Other issues for equipment upgrade and additions
      that have been identified include managing potential legacy soil contamination and storing and disposing of old
      transformers. For new substations, in addition to the above impacts, other issues include the management of
      vegetation clearance and sediment and erosion control.

      PLN have advised that PCB are not in use in any of the substations that will be upgraded or extended and are not used
      in any new substations. As a precaution, PCB has been included in the list of potential issues to be managed for each
      subproject.
       The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



  Land acquisition processes, including public consultation and satisfactory compensation for the population residing
  in the project area is the main social issue under the project. Since land acquisition is limited, impacts on the individual
  project affected people (PAP) is normally modest and limited in the acquisition of small pieces of land or cutting down
  of a few trees. There will be no worker camps. The social nuisances from construction (noise, dust, traffic, etc.), will
  be managed under the EMP.

  With regards to land acquisition, in Group 1 there is no new substations to be constructed. Draft LARAP of two
  subprojects which are proposed for Group 2 have been reviewed. These are Gedong Tataan Substation in Lampung
  and Tembilahan Substation in Riau. The land required for each substation is about 20,000m2 (2 hectares) and are
  owned by only one land owner in case of Gedong Tataan and four land owners in case of Tembilahan. No significant
  impact to the land owners was observed as the lands are not used for productive purpose and none of the owners
  earn income from the lands.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  No long-term adverse impact is envisaged due to the project activities. The reinforcement of substations will result in
  improvement of power supply adequacy and quality in the project areas, which is an ingredient for economic growth
  and household quality of life.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  For those subprojects in Group 1 which involves land acquisition, alternatives were considered to minimize impacts
  on resettlement and environment.
  For new substations in Group 2, the specific location is flexible within a defined area. The impact on resettlement
  and environment will be assessed for alternative sites as part of the site selection process.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The borrower has prepared the following documents:

  1. An EMP for upgrades and expansions of existing substations. This EMP for Upgrades covers a large number of
  small, discrete substation upgrade and / or extension subprojects, across five PLN Project Offices. This approach
  replaces a large number of repetitive and identical EMPs.
  These projects have very small footprints, mostly within the boundaries of existing substations, and the severity and
  risk environmental and social impacts are low. The potential environmental and social issues of most of these
  subprojects are very similar (with few exceptions which will be separately addressed in the EMP). Furthermore, since
  all subcomponents will be owned by PLN, the EMP aspects of: institutional arrangements, occupational health and
  safety, and emergency preparedness and response systems are established by PLN corporate policy and will be the
  same for all of the subprojects.

  The EMP contains standard mitigation and monitoring plans to cover typical impacts from upgrading equipment and
  installing new equipment at substations, including worker health and safety, earthworks and solid and hazardous
  waste management. The EMP also contains standard EMP monitoring, reporting and review processes to streamline
  processes across the Project Offices and the subprojects.
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



However, each subcomponent is unique in the sense that: (a) it is situated at its? own unique location, (b) public
consultations would involve different affected groups, and (c) the outcome of the public consultation may present
special environmental or social issues. Therefore, there is a screening process for each site to determine whether
there are social and /or environmental risks beyond those covered in the standard mitigation and monitoring plans.
Additional specific mitigation plans, and monitoring plans have been developed for those sites with unique situations.

2. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), to ensure that subprojects in Group 2 to be
financed under IPTD2 meets World Bank safeguard policy requirements. The framework provides guidance for
preparation, appraisal and implementation of Environmental Management Plans and the roles and responsibilities of
each institution.

It is expected that the subprojects will also meet all relevant environment requirements and processes under
Indonesian regulations and laws. Note that for the type and scale of the projects, no AMDAL (EIA) is required under
the Indonesian regulations and laws for any of the proposed activities. For a new substation associated with a new
transmission line, an UPL / UKL (EMP and Environmental Monitoring Plan) is required. There is no environment
requirement for a new substation, which is connected to existing transmission lines and for substation upgrades and
extensions.

Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP- standard environmental specifications for contractors) have been developed
for the five types of physical works listed below as part of ESMF:
•     Rehabilitation of substations: install/replace transformers and other equipment within their existing property
boundaries;
•     Expansion of substations: require additional land adjacent to existing substations;
•     Construction of new substations: construction of typical on-site components of a substation;
•     Construction of transmission branches to connect new substations to the existing sub-transmission network;
•     Upgrading of existing access roads and a new road.

3. Draft EMPs for two new subprojects in Group 2, i.e., Gedong Tataan and Tembilahan substations have been
reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. However, these subprojects will be fully appraised with other
subprojects in Group 2 during implementation.

Environment impacts will be mitigated according to measures set out in the EMPs. Measures include the following:
(i) the construction site will be sprinkled with water during dusty conditions (ii) construction activities will be
performed only during normal working hours; If construction activities have to be performed before or after the
specified time limits, the local society must be notified in advance; (iii) Contaminated soils and solid waste will be
removed and disposed to sites approved by local authorities; (iv) Bidding documents shall prohibit procurement of
equipment containing PCB. For the construction phase, the EMP for each substation (including the Environmental
Codes of Practice) will be included in the bidding documents and contracts as legal obligations for contractors to
implement. During operation, the EMP will be transferred to the respective operating entities for implementation.

4. Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework as guidance for preparing and implementing the land
acquisition of the subprojects in Group 2. The Framework provides guidance on general principles of land acquisition
and resettlement that conform with the World Bank?s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, the requirement for
preparing the LARAP for subprojects proposed for financing, including the process of LARAP approval and
implementation; socioeconomic survey and inventory of affected people and assets; compensation scheme and
categories of affected persons; institutional responsibilities; monitoring and evaluation and the grievance mechanism.
     The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



5. Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) providing guidelines for the preparation and implementation of
Indigenous Peoples Plan in Group 2, if the subprojects will affect indigenous peoples. The Framework regulates the
need for preparing the Indigenous Peoples Plans for any proposed subprojects that are found to affect indigenous
peoples. The Framework also provides guidelines for the indigenous peoples screening in the project area,
preparation of Social Assessment when necessary, the main principles to be followed when the subprojects affect
indigenous peoples, reporting, monitoring and documentation and the grievance mechanism.
The Framework describes how the project implementing unit can ensure that free, prior and informed consultations
are undertaken, in a language spoken by, and location convenient for, potentially affected IP. The views of IP are to
be taken into account during preparation and implementation of any subproject, while respecting their current
practices, beliefs and cultural preferences. The outcome of the consultations will be documented into the subproject
documents.

6. Draft LARAPs for two new substations in Group 2: i.e Tembilahan Substation in Riau province, and Gedong
Tataan Substation in Lampung province have been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. Full appraisal of the
substations will be fully carried out later during implementation with other subprojects in Group 2

In both subprojects, since the land required for new substation is more than one hectare, the process of land
acquisition will follow the national regulation to use the Land Acquisition Committee (LAC) of the respective local
government and the land price for compensation will be appraised by the land appraisal team/institution.

Due diligence was conducted for Batulicin substation in South Kalimantan province, for which the land acquisition
was completed in 2010. The World Bank will finance the expansion of the substation. The process of land acquisition
was followed national regulation (Perpres 36/2005 jo 65/2006) and its implementation guideline, Regulation of BPN
Head No. 3/2007.
Land acquisition was implemented by Kabupaten Land Acquisition Committee (LAC) of Kabupaten Tanah Bumbu,
South Kalimantan. Value of land was valued by the land appraisal team established by the LAC. This value became a
reference during the negotiation.

Borrower capacity:

PLN will be the implementing agency and six regional project management offices (PMOs) in Java-Bali, Sumatera,
Kalimantan and Sulawesi will be directly in charge of managing construction of the subprojects, including safeguard
responsibilities. The Planning and Affiliation Development Directorate (PLAD) and Construction and Renewable
Energy Directorate (CRED) at PLN headquarters will be responsible for overall coordination and oversight during
project preparation and implementation.

PLN has experience in preparing and implementing two on-going transmission projects financed by the World Bank.
At PLN headquarters a dedicated unit within the PRMD is responsible for coordinating environmental and social issues
during preparation and implementation of the project. The unit?s manager and staff who are also coordinating other
World Bank financed projects have adequate knowledge and experience with the Bank policies. PLN headquarters is
responsible for the preparation of ESMF, LARPF, and IPPF and during implementation, for overall coordination and
reporting. It was agreed that PLN will employ a Project Management Consultant (PMC) including an
environment/social specialist within a month after the effectiveness of the loan. The environment/social consultant
will support the Environment Unit of PLAD to oversee project implementation.

All six PMOs are staffed with dedicated environment and social staff, who are familiar with the Indonesian regulation
on environment, EIA and EMP processes (called Amdal and UKL/UPL respectively) and land acquisition. The PMOs for
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



  Java-Bali and the PMO for Sumatra 2 (South Sumatra) have experience with implementation of WB financed projects.
  The PMOs for Sumatra 1(North Sumartra), Kalimantan, and Sulawesi have no previous experience with the WB
  project, but each has competent environment and social specialists as full-time permanent staff. The PMOs are
  directly responsible for preparation and implementation of EMPs and, if required, LARAPs and IP Plans.

  During preparation, environmental and social staff of all five PMOs received training in EMP, LARAP and IPP from the
  Bank team in October 2011. During supervision, further training will be provided to PLN staff in charge of social and
  environmental management. Progress of EMP, LARAP, and IP preparation and implementation will be carefully
  monitored.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders have been identified as the land owners and occupiers (in the case of new substation sites) and
  the immediate community surrounding the subproject sites.

  All safeguard documents were publicly disclosed for at least two weeks and comments sought from the public.
  Disclosure notices were broadcasted online and through newspapers at the provincial branch offices and main offices
  of the PMOs from December 28, 2011 to January 10, 2012. Documents were available from PLN in Indonesian (hard
  copies in the offices and a soft copy on the PLN website) for the public to read and comment on. The draft final
  documents were disclosed on PLN website on January 2012 and the final documents were disclosed on PLN website
  in March 2013. The draft final documents were also disclosed at the Infoshop in Washington D.C. in January 2012 and
  the final documents were disclosed there in April 2013.

  Each of the provincial branch offices of the PMOs where the subprojects are located advertised an “open office? for
  10 working days from December 28, 2012 to January 10, 2012, during which people could drop in to discuss the
  project with staff knowledgeable about the project. There were no visitors to the open office days, and PLN received
  no comments or feedback from the public or key stakeholders. Consultation details have been recorded in the final
  versions of the documents.

  For the two new substation sites in Group 2 for which LARAP and EMP were prepared (Gedong Tataan and
  Tembilahan) one public meeting and consultations has been carried out at or near the proposed sites for affected
  stakeholders to attend. The consultation was undertaken in parallel with the survey for the LARAP and EMP
  preparation in November 2011. All feedback received has been recorded in the final versions of the documents.

  For all other new substation sites in the second group, the PMOs will hold at least one public consultation meeting at
  or near the proposed sites. For all substation upgrades and extensions, the documents will be disclosed online and
  through newspapers, documents will be available in English and Bahasa for comment, and the PMOs will hold “open
  office? days as close to the sites as possible with staff available to consult with the public.

  The first restructuring, which was to enable the financing of substations at higher transmission voltages, was approved
  and disclosed on April 15, 2018. The second restructuring, which is focused on improving the quality and reliability of
  power supplies with a lower energy generation produced, does not trigger new safeguards policies nor change the
  project category nor raise new safeguards issues. The ISDS, with necessary update, is to be disclosed in the
  ImageBank.
                         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                   DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
        13-Jan-2012                                                     16-Jan-2012
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Indonesia                                                      28-Dec-2011
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
13-Jan-2012                                                               16-Jan-2012
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
          Indonesia                                                        28-Dec-2011
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
13-Jan-2012                                                                16-Jan-2012
“In country? Disclosure
           The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Indonesia                                                       28-Dec-2011
 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                      Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
 review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                      Yes
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                      Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                      Yes
 review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                                        No

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
                                                                                      No
 to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



 PDI_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Indonesia Second Power Transmission Development Project (P123994)



    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


                                             Tendai Gregan
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                             Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
