The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2018| Report No: ISDSR24993




                      Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                             Country Director:    J. Humberto Lopez
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Jan Weetjens
                           Task Team Leader:      Kennan W. Rapp
            The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
    P155976                                                     FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR)
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Kennan W. Rapp                                              Latin America
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    17-May-2016                                                 Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU04

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    727,609.00                                                  727,609.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    Trust Funds                                                                                            727,609.00
    Total                                                                                                  727,609.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen: (a) targeted forest-dependent indigenous peoples' knowledge
    of REDD+ Readiness at the national level, and (b) related knowledge exchange at the regional level in eligible FCPF
    countries in Central and South America.



.
            The World Bank                                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

    The development objective of the FCPF Capacity Building Program on REDD+ for Indigenous Peoples in Latin America
    project (P155976, TF0A2446) is to strengthen: (i) the knowledge of targeted forest-dependent indigenous peoples of
    REDD+ Readiness at the national level, and (ii) related knowledge exchange at the regional level in Central and South
    America. It is financed under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Capacity Building Program (CBP) in its 2 nd
    phase, which was set up to ensure the active engagement and participation of REDD+ relevant stakeholders, including
    indigenous peoples (IPs), civil society organizations and local communities from FCPF participating countries in the Latin
    America and the Caribbean (LAC), sub-Saharan Africa and Asia-Pacific regions. The two-year (2016-2018) project is
    financed by a Small Recipient Executed Trust Fund (SRETF) grant of US$727,609. The beneficiaries of this project are
    indigenous peoples’ organizations and networks in 16 FCPF countries in LAC (Argentina, Belize, Chile, Colombia, Costa
    Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname and
    Uruguay), which are eligible to participate in REDD+ related regional learning and exchange activities under Component
    2.1 Of the 16 countries, IP organizations from 10 countries (Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
    Guyana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Suriname and Uruguay) have also been eligible to participate in national-level REDD+
    capacity building activities through a competitive sub-project mechanism under Component 1. The project is being
    implemented by Asociación Sotz’il, which is located in Guatemala City, Guatemala.

    This SRETF project is on track to meet its PDO. As a result, a scale-up of activities will be sought by extending the Closing
    Date to end-June 2020, adding a handful of newly eligible countries, and modifying the Results Framework slightly.
    Additional Financing in the amount of US$1,041,860 is also being sought. Up to now, safeguards performance in the
    project has been fully satisfactory. Like the current project, the restructured project triggers OP 4.10 as it is directed
    specifically at indigenous beneficiaries, but it is not expected to have any on-the-ground impacts resulting from physical
    investments.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Capacity building activities under the project are being carried out in specific FCPF member countries
    throughout Latin America where forest-dependent indigenous peoples and their representative
    organizations and networks are present. They are also being carried out at the regional level.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Kimberly Vilar, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                                Triggered                  Explanation



1REDD+ stands for countries’ efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, while promoting conservation, sustainable
management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



                                                            Given that no physical footprint is associated with
                                                            the project, no environmental impacts are
                                                            expected, hence the explanation that is usually
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No                  provided about the application of screening and
                                                            follow-up procedures for the management of
                                                            potential environmental impacts is not required in
                                                            this case.
                                                            Since there are no activities that will directly impact
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No                natural habitats, screening and follow up
                                                            procedures are not required.
                                                            Activities financed under the project are expected
                                                            to have eventual positive impacts on forest
                                                            management by strengthening the capacity of
                                                            forest-dependent          indigenous           peoples'
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                            organizations to contribute to national REDD+
                                                            Readiness processes. Since there are no direct
                                                            and/or physical impacts on forests, no screening
                                                            and follow up procedures are required.
                                                            None of the activities that would be supported by
                                                            the project are expected to involve the
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No                procurement or a substantial increase in the use of
                                                            pesticides. This would be specified in an exclusion
                                                            list.
                                                            This policy is not triggered because the project is
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No               not expected to support any activities having an
                                                            adverse impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                            OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the project directly
                                                            targets indigenous peoples. Therefore this will be
                                                            treated as an indigenous peoples' project and no
                                                            separate Indigenous Peoples Development Plan is
                                                            required, as per the policy. The capacity building
                                                            activities to be supported were defined through an
                                                            iterative and participatory process of dialogue that
                                                            Sotz'il led with indigenous networks in the two
                                                            years leading up to the approval of the current
                                                            project in May 2016. For the restructured project
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes               Sotz'il re-mapped the project stakeholders and
                                                            determined priority activities via a series of
                                                            consultations, starting with the solicitation of
                                                            feedback during the region-wide meeting of the
                                                            Foro Indígena de Abya Yala (FIAY) in Lima, Peru in
                                                            November 2017. These mechanisms and actions
                                                            will be reconfirmed in an updated version of the
                                                            project's Operational Manual, which already
                                                            provides details on (i) actions that have been used
                                                            to ensure broad community support; (ii) the
                                                            expected continuous participation of key
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



                                                                        stakeholders during project implementation; and
                                                                        (iii) access to culturally appropriate feedback and
                                                                        grievance redress mechanisms.
                                                                        None of the activities that would be supported by
                                                                        the project are expected to involve physical
                                                                        displacement and resettlement. They are also not
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)         No                     expected to involve the involuntary restriction of
                                                                        community access to natural resources in legally
                                                                        designated parks or protected areas. This would be
                                                                        specified in an exclusion list.
                                                                        None of the activities that would be supported by
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No                     the project are expected to involve the
                                                                        construction or operation of new or existing dams.
                                                                        This policy is not triggered because the project is
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                               not expected to support any activities having
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)                                                              adverse impacts on the efficient utilization and
                                                                        protection of international waterways.
                                                                        This policy is not triggered because the project will
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                        not support activities in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      This project provides for the delivery of the simplest and most benign form of TA imaginable (training workshops,
      dialogues/ meetings, learning-oriented studies, educational materials), and does not have any physical footprint.
      Given that its target audience is specifically and exclusively the region's indigenous peoples, OP/BP 4.10 is triggered
      in the current project, and will remain triggered in the restructured project. The project's Restructuring/AF Paper will
      spell out (i) evidence of continued broad community support for the project and its objectives; (ii) mechanisms to
      ensure the active participation of key stakeholders; and (iii) access to grievance redress mechanisms, in order for the
      entire grant to abide by the principles of OP 4.10.

      This classification and the approach to be followed is consistent with the "Interim Guidelines on the Application of
      Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by
      the Bank". The project classifies as Type 1 TA: Strengthening Client Capacity, for which no safeguard instruments
      need to be prepared prior to Appraisal as the activities financed do not have potential adverse environmental or social
      implications or risks. However, during project implementation, any social and environmental impacts will be managed
      by: (i) ensuring that capacity building and awareness raising programs under Component 1 are consistent with the
      World Bank's safeguards policies and incorporate appropriate environmental and social objectives; (ii) ensuring that
      activities are widely consulted with the key stakeholders and have the broad support of their main beneficiaries; and
      (iii) promoting transparency and public information disclosure. In addition, the TA to be provided under the project
      provides an opportunity to build counterpart capacity for integrating environmental and social concerns into their
      work.
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



  In the broader context of the FCPF, activities affecting indigenous peoples are governed by the Common Approach
  (Revised August 9, 2012), which was designed to provide the World Bank and other FCPF Delivery Partners with a
  common platform for risk management and quality assurance in the REDD+ Readiness Preparation process, using the
  safeguards policies of the World Bank as a minimum acceptable standard. The Common Approach is available at
  http://forestcarbonpartnership.org/social-inclusion.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  None.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  None.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As the project involves on-granting at a very modest level to in-country IP organizations, Sotz'il as the Recipient
  Organization applies an exclusion or "negative" list to all sub-project proposals received, to ensure that they do not
  run afoul of any of the WB safeguard policies dealing with negative impacts. Members of the project secretariat in
  Sotz'il have received basic training in WB safeguard policies and procedures.

  Beyond this, Sotz'il has an increasingly distinguished track record of working in a visible and credible way on the nexus
  between natural resources management and the rights of indigenous peoples in Guatemala and throughout Latin
  America, particularly as it relates to free, prior and informed consent; full and effective participation; strengthening
  forms of indigenous self-organization; and recognition of traditional knowledge. For several years now the
  organization has been promoting the responsible use, management, and conservation of forests on indigenous
  territories and the implementation of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; the
  International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention 169 on Indigenous Peoples; and the Convention on Biological
  Diversity, Article 8J.

  Specifically on conflict resolution, Sotz'il has experience developing grievance redress mechanisms at local, national
  and international levels based on the principles of prior, free and informed dialogue, consultation, and consent. A
  detailed feedback mechanism (including a grievance redress mechanism) has been outlined in the Operational
  Manual for the project, and has been maintained by Sotz'il in web-based form.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  As stated above, the beneficiaries of this project are indigenous peoples' organizations in 16 FCPF member countries
  in Latin America that are eligible to participate in REDD+-related regional learning and exchange activities under the
  project's Component 2. Of these 16 countries, IPs from 10 countries have also been eligible to participate in national-
  level REDD+ capacity building activities through a competitive sub-project mechanism under the project's Component
  1. As part of the restructured project, organizations from four additional countries--Argentina, Belize, Panama and
  Paraguay--will also be eligible for support under Component 1.
                            The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)



                      While preparing its proposal for the restructured project, Sotz'il engaged in various consultations with key
                      stakeholders throughout the region, kicking off the process during the region-wide meeting of the Foro Indígena de
                      Abya Yala (FIAY) in Lima, Peru in late November 2017. Since then, Sotzíl has received feedback on the proposal from
                      technical specialists in the individual IPOs making up FIAY (which covers both Central and South America), the FIAY
                      Women's Network, the FIAY Steering Council, IP Observers before the FCPF PC, the members of the TAC, and technical
                      specialists in the sub-recipient organizations for Component 1.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      Date of submission for disclosure
06-May-2016                                                                      06-May-2016
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                              Date of Disclosure
            United States                                                        06-May-2016
            Comments
            The IPDP in this case is equivalent to the original Project Paper.



       COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

           IP_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
           Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                                     No
           been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



           PDI_TABLE
           The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
            Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                                     Yes
            disclosure?

            Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
            and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                           Yes
            and local NGOs?
            The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR) (P155976)




    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Kennan W. Rapp


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
