The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April -2019| Report No: ISDSR25389




                        Regional Vice President:    Axel van Trotsenburg
                               Country Director:    Alberto Rodriguez
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Rita Kullberg Almeida
                             Task Team Leader:      Diego Angel-Urdinola
            The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                    Project Name
                                                                  Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and
    P157425
                                                                  Technological Institutes Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
    Diego Angel-Urdinola                                          Ecuador
    Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
    23-Nov-2016                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GED04


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objectives of the Project are: to increase enrollment and persistence in public technical and technological programs
    designed and implemented in collaboration with Employers, and to strengthen the institutional management of Tertiary
    Technical and Technological Education.



.


    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

Component 1. Optimizing and upgrading the supply in targeted provinces (Total: US$66.0.7 million, Bank: US$58.40
million).

1.       The objective of this component is to improve the actual and perceived quality of education services, accessed by
students, which is expected that would positively impact enrollment and graduation. It would also enable a more efficient
allocation of the existing resources, both physical (e.g., infrastructure facilities, science and technical labs) and in human
resources, through the reorganization of IST supply by consolidation of institutes into new IST “hubs? and upgrading the
infrastructure and facilities. The component will support 6 IST and will specifically finance five types of activities: (i)
construction of 3 new ISTs, (ii) rehabilitation/expansion/completion of 3 ISTs, (iii) supervision of civil works, and (iv)
         The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



equipment, labs and ICT equipment and furniture for 6 IST, and (v) and technical studies. The plan to consolidate ISTs, the
magnitude of infrastructure and equipment packages, and the academic supply of each of the 6 ISTs where the Project
will be implemented will be based on and individual IST “Transformation Plan? (also known as “microplanning?). This plan
consists of a comprehensive document, including: (i) related merging/closing of ISTs plan at the provincial level; (ii)
technical analysis of student demand and ISTs supply ( based on demographic and schooling projections) and definition
of quota of expected number of students to be absorbed in each proposed program, based on estimated labor market’s
needs ( made by local and national surveys on labor demand of employers); (iii) infrastructure dimensioning. These 6 ISTs
would serve up to 40% of the total enrollment in public ISTs in the selected provinces by the end of the Project.

Targeted Provinces.i The Project is aligned with the GoE’s PRETyT national program, which is being implemented in most
of the country’s territory and would be financed through three main financial sources: fiscal, European Investment Bank
(BEI) and World Bank. In terms of ISTs construction and equipment, out of Ecuador’s 24 provinces, 20 are supported
currently: GoE is supporting 5 provinces (5 ISTs) with its own resources, European Investment Bank (BEI) is supporting 8
provinces (8 ISTs) and the World Bank would support 5 provinces (6 ISTs). The provinces selection was based on
TyT enrollment rates (“more beneficiaries?), poverty rate and indigenous people (“poverty and shared prosperity?) and is
complementing interventions from GoE and BEI (no overlap) -- the result of this selection will also give the opportunity to
evaluate the interventions in very different context. The provinces selected areSucumbios, Manabi, Pichincha, El Oro and
Bolivar, with a technical and technological (TyT) gross enrollment rate and poverty rates much higher than the national
average of 25% (based on Life Conditions Survey, Encuesta de Condiciones de Vida – ECV, 2014); 2 are among the poorest
(Bolivar and Sucumbios 43%) and have a large indigenous population; and two are among the largest provinces (Pichincha
and El Oro).

Component 2. Improving program relevance, quality of teaching and IST management capacity (estimated cost $9.79
million: Bank: $8.61 million).

The specific objective of this component is to improve the technical and operational capacity of SENESCYT to design new
and relevant academic programs according to market demand (public and private); to develop new training programs for
professors, tutors and rectors; and to introduce a new administrative and academic management system at IST level. With
an increase on budget allocation from $5.00 million to $8.61, additional investments will be made to support teacher
training at the national level and the development of information systems.
(a)     Sub-Component 2.1. Development of relevant programs. This sub-component would finance technical assistance
to support the development of technical and technological education programs. The design of the new programs would
follow a defined methodology comprising: (i) a “relevance? analysis including macro and micro labor market studies by
technical specialty through surveys and available data; (ii) the institutionalized involvement of employers through the
Consultative Councils (“Consejos Consultivos?); and (iii) a technical assistance that documents rigorously which of the
currently approved programs have been designed in collaboration with the employers.

(b)      Sub-Component 2.2. Training of Teachers and management staff of ISTs. This sub-component would finance a
technical assistance for: (i) the design and implementation of training programs, including training programs for
management staff (rectors, vice-rectors, academic coordinators), teachers and tutors of dual programs of ISTs (to
institutionalize a process of continuous training) and (ii) support the design of the selection process and teacher career
pathway (assessment/review/guidance/evaluation).

(c)     Sub-Component 2.3. Administrative and Academic Management System. This sub-component would finance
technical assistance for the development of the administrative and academic management system of ISTs. The new tool
would be an integrated IT system that would facilitate and optimize the management of IST, specifically: (i) register,
         The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



monitoring and evaluation of academic processes, including modules for programs, library, diplomas; (ii) financial
management, budgeting, accounting and auditing processes; and (iii) a specific module for the continuous gathering of
information of ISTs graduates’ employment. The system would be a common platform shared for national and ISTs levels.
At the national level, the main users would be authorities and technical units of SENESCYT, while at the ISTs’ level users
would be management staff, teachers, students, graduates and tutors.

Component 3. Strengthening Mechanisms for Institutional Coordination, Boosting Demand and Management,
Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project (Total: US$6.30 million; Bank: US$5.49 million).

The specific objectives of this component are to support improved governance of technical and technological education
including (i) institutional mechanisms for effective public-private coordination in the development of programs; and (ii)
institutional mechanisms to monitor and inform public and private sector decision-makers on: the employability of
graduates of the tertiary technical and technological training system on the one hand, and employment opportunities on
the other.

(a)     Sub-Component 3.1. Institutional Partnerships with Employers. This sub-component would finance technical
assistance and training for the strengthening of permanent institutional arrangements for SENESCYT and employer’s
association (the “Consejos Consultivos?), including their involvement in collaboration for re-designing of programs,
estimation of the labor demand, implementation, follow up and evaluation of dual and traditional programs.

(b)     Sub-Component 3.2. Estimation of Labor Market Demand. This sub-component would finance technical
assistance, training and surveys for the upgrading of the methodology to estimate the demand from employers and,
therefore, determination of “quotas? for each program at provincial and ISTs level. The approach is two -fold: (i)
methodology for estimating the demand by SENESCYT through surveys carried out in collaboration with employers; (ii)
agreement with the National Institute of Statistics (INEC) to include a module for technical higher education in their
surveys of employment, carried out semi-annual, including all productive and services sectors at national level.

(c)    Sub-Component 3.3. Boosting the Demand for ISTs. This sub-component would finance communication
campaigns, training and technical assistance to foster the demand of technical higher education. It would also include an
agreement with MINEDUC to build awareness among upper secondary students on the benefits of technical higher
education.

(d)     Sub-Component 3.4. Management, Monitoring and Specific Impact Evaluations. This sub-component would
finance: (i) the technical and administrative management of the Project, including the hiring of specialists in financial
management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, social management and other technical temporary staff needed
during Project implementation; (ii) the carrying out of Project external audits; (iii) the financing of Operating Costs (if
necessary, currently these costs are financed with Fiscal resources) related to Project’s activities; and (iv) the carrying out
of three research/impact evaluation studies.

The Component would focus on strengthening INEC’s capacity and coordinate information gathering from employers.
Thus, the new budget allocation for this component would be reduced to US$5.49 million (from US$9.10 million). This
budget reduction for INEC will go hand in hand with similar increase in funds for SENESCYT to develop surveys and
information systems. This resource allocation reflects both (i) the urgent need to strengthen SENESCYT’s capacity to
develop its own information systems and (ii) INEC’s limited capacity to implement sector-specific surveys. INEC is currently
managing several statistical operations with already limited resources and personnel.
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The Project activities would imply land acquisition for 03 New building construction (IST Machala – El Oro, IST
    Chimbo – Bolívar, IST Saberes Ancestrales – La Moya-Quito), but the land property is public, without any
    illegal/informal occupants identified or/and affected. In the case of the 03 Rehabilitation and Improvement
    (IST Lago Agrio – Sucumbios, IST Quito – Yavirac, IST Manta – Manabí), there is no need of land acquisition.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Mariana T. Felicio, Social Specialist
    Ximena Rosio Herbas Ramirez, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation
                                                                      The Project is classified as Category B under OP/BP
                                                                      4.01. This classification is based upon the
                                                                      temporary and non-significant nature of most of its
                                                                      anticipated impacts. The potential negative
                                                                      impacts can be grouped into two categories: those
                                                                      associated with typical small to medium civil works
                                                                      during construction and upgrade of infrastructure
                                                                      (ITS), and those associated with the installation and
                                                                      operation of equipment in ancillary facilities such as
                                                                      workshops and laboratories which might generate
                                                                      health, safety and environmental risks.

     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                      The Project will finance investments in three
                                                                      defined locations. In Machala and Chimbo the
                                                                      project will finance new buildings and equipment
                                                                      and in Yavirac the rehabilitation/completion of the
                                                                      IST building and equipment. For the three known
                                                                      locations     the    Borrower      has    prepared
                                                                      Environmental Forms (EF) with their respective
                                                                      Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

                                                                      For investments in Pichincha, Manta and Lago
                                                                      Agrio provinces, whose specific location is not yet
                                                                      fully defined and not technical studies are available,
                                                                      the Borrower has prepared in accordance with
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



                                                                  World Bank policies an Environmental and Social
                                                                  Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF
                                                                  includes a review of applicable national policies and
                                                                  regulations as well as WB Safeguard Policies and
                                                                  their requirements for the Project; feedback from
                                                                  stakeholders, including but not limited to affected
                                                                  communities, user groups and beneficiaries, and
                                                                  government and officials at municipal level; and an
                                                                  assessment of institutional capabilities and
                                                                  implementation arrangements for the project
Performance Standards for Private Sector                          The operation doesn't apply to private sector
                                            No
Activities OP/BP 4.03                                             activities.
                                                                  No impacts on natural habitats are expected an no
                                                                  significant conversion or degradation of critical or
                                                                  natural habitats will occur. Nonetheless, as the
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             Yes                   exact location of some of the activities isn't defined
                                                                  yet, the policy has been triggered. The specific EFs
                                                                  and EMPs will have screening tools and mitigation
                                                                  measures to avoid affecting natural habitats.
                                                                  The projects will not have impacts on the health
                                                                  and quality of forests, nonetheless, as the exact
                                                                  location of some of the activities isn't defined yet
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      Yes
                                                                  the policy was triggered. The specific EFs and EMPs
                                                                  will have screening tools and mitigation measures
                                                                  to avoid affecting forests.
                                                                  This policy is not triggered. Project activities will not
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No                    lead to any environmental and health risks
                                                                  associated with pesticide use.
                                                                  The project does not expect to find physical cultural
                                                                  resources, but given the nature of civil works,
                                                                  including excavation, this policy is triggered on a
                                                                  precautionary basis. The ESMF includes clear
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                                  procedures for assessing locations for physical
                                                                  cultural resources aspects and how to manage
                                                                  chance finds in accordance with WB policy and
                                                                  national legislation.
                                                                  A social assessment (SA) conducted in provinces
                                                                  with high indigenous peoples (IPs) and Afro-
                                                                  descendants presence, indicated some concerns on
                                                                  the ISTS’s technical and technological education
                                                                  programs and locations. Those concerns pointed
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           Yes                   the need to ensure culturally appropriated
                                                                  opportunities in the education programs offered by
                                                                  ISTs that would benefit IPs.
                                                                  An IPF has been prepared and disclosed in the
                                                                  website of SENESCYT on August 30, 2016 and made
                                                                  available in the site, for local teachers and potential
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



                                                                  students. The IPF defines the measures for
                                                                  education managers of ISTs, so as to ensure IPs and
                                                                  afro-descendants are not adversely affected or
                                                                  excluded from the Project activities. Indigenous
                                                                  and Afro-descendant peoples plans (IPPs) were
                                                                  prepared according to the IPF to identify activities,
                                                                  procedures and arrangements to be apply to IPs
                                                                  and Afro-descendants in the provinces with high
                                                                  presence of these populations. Free, prior and
                                                                  informed consultations with affected IPs
                                                                  communities was carried out and their support to
                                                                  the project confirmed during the elaboration of the
                                                                  SA, IPF and IPPs to fully meet the objectives of the
                                                                  OP 4.10 and facilitate consultation and active
                                                                  participation.

                                                                  However, the published information must be
                                                                  updated.

                                                                  This policy was triggered since the works planned
                                                                  could involve potential temporary and permanent
                                                                  impacts on land, assets, and livelihoods; and a RPF
                                                                  was prepared for the interventions unidentified at
                                                                  the time of project appraisal to guide the
                                                                  preparation of RPs, for investments that would
                                                                  involve land acquisition.
                                                                  A Due Diligence (DD) was carried out to document
                                                                  a detail status of the landholding identified at the
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes
                                                                  Project’s preparation stage to be used for
                                                                  Component 1 investments. The DD confirmed that
                                                                  in all cases the landholding for ISTs investments do
                                                                  not have any illegal/ informal occupants/ settlers
                                                                  identified and only entails state land which will be
                                                                  donated (at no cost) for the Project’s investments
                                                                  to SENESCYT and the EOD SENESCYT following the
                                                                  pertinent norms.

                                                                  This policy is not triggered given that the project
                                                                  will not support the construction or rehabilitation
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                                  of dams nor will it support other investments which
                                                                  rely on the services of existing dams.
                                                                  This policy is not triggered as the project will not
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                            No                    finance activities involving the use or potential
(BP 7.50)
                                                                  pollution of international waterways.
                                                                  This policy is triggered as the project will not
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No                    finance activities in disputed areas as defined in the
                                                                  policy.
           The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      SOCIAL
      i. Due to the request of the Ministry of Economy and Finance – MEF (September 26 and on October 2, 2018) to the
      World Bank, for reducing 18 million dollars from the Loan, the budget assigned to Component 01 (construction and
      rehabilitation of Institutes) has been reduced, and this implies the elimination of 05 ISTs, the omission of 01 province,
      prioritized before (Tungurahua), and the incorporation of 01 Institute of Ancestral Knowledge. So, it is extremely
      necessary to implement a communication process with the stakeholders which supported the project initially.
      ii. The OP 4.12 was triggered, because of land acquisition, but in all cases, it is about public ownership, without any
      illegal/informal occupants identified or/and affected; so, the risk on physical and economic displacement is low, and
      there is not any large scale or significant impacts.
      ENVIRONMENT
      The project triggers OP 4.01, OP 4.04, Op 4.36 and OP 4.11. The project activities, therefore the civil works, have been
      reduced and no new environmental impacts are foreseen




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

      There are no long term impacts anticipated due to the activities in the project area


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
      SOCIAL
      It is strongly recommended to implement an information and consultation process with stakeholders, because of the
      new works for the Institute of Ancestral Knowledge, and an information process for the 05 ISTs separated from the
      project and transferred to SECAP (Quito – Secap Iñaquito, Quito – Secap Norte, Ambato, Duran, and Colon).
      ENVIRONMENT
      Due to the time lapsed between the preparation of the 3 EMPs and the scope of work being reduced, the
      environmental safeguards specialist of the PIU should review and validate the adequacy of the EMPs,



 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      SOCIAL: NONE

      ENVIRONMENTAL:
      A PIU safeguards specialist has been hired to support the implementation of the project and to make sure that every
      IST implements the EMPs and complies with the WB policies.
            The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Stakeholders:
       (i) Direct beneficiaries: Students currently attending ISTs (and conservatories)
       (ii) Potential beneficiaries: Local Communities, Indigenous peoples, interested on join the IST.
       (iii) Indigenous Organizations (CONAIE, etc.).
       (iv) ISTs Management staff (rectors, vice-rectors, academic coordinators),
       (v) ISTs Teachers (perhaps is the most strong and relevant stakeholder)
       (vi) Productive sector (employers)
       (vii) Consultive Councils (“Consejos Consultivos?)
       (viii) SENESCYT’s staff
       Mechanisms form consultation and disclosure:
       Although social instruments were prepared in the past (with their consequent consultation process implemented),
       due to the elimination of 05 ISTs, and the introduction of 01 new IST (Institute of Ancestral Knowledge) a new process
       of consultation and disclosure is needed.
       So, an information process with the 05 IST’s Stakeholders, has to be done, explaining the reasons and the sense of
       the changes; and a consultation process, with the Institute of Ancestral Knowledge, should be done in a participative
       manner. The final versions should have inform and incorporate comments and suggestions, obtained from
       consultation with their stakeholders.
       Finally, the documents related to the social management has to be disclosure on SENESCYT’s and, some of them,
       updated.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
14-Sep-2016                                                      14-Sep-2016
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
 Ecuador                                                            14-Sep-2016
 Comments
                            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       Date of submission for disclosure
30-Aug-2016                                                                       07-Sep-2016
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                                  Date of Disclosure
          Ecuador                                                                  30-Aug-2016
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        Date of submission for disclosure
05-Dec-2018                                                                        05-Dec-2018
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                Date of Disclosure
            Ecuador                                                                05-Dec-2018
            Comments




        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                     C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                                     No



           NH_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


           PCR_TABLE
           OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)



Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                               Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                                  Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                  Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                  Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                  No
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                  Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                  Yes
review the plan?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                  Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
and local NGOs?
                The World Bank                                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                Transformation of the Tertiary Technical and Technological Institutes Project (P157425)




    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                                  Diego Angel-Urdinola
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                                  Nelson Gutierrez

    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager                      Yves Jantzem                                    26-Apr-2019

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content


i The list of
          the targeted provinces is included in the OM. Any change in targeted provinces during implementation would need to be agreed between
the GoE and the Bank.
