The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)




                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


      Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-June-2018| Report No: ISDSR22094




                      Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                             Country Director:    Mara K. Warwick
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Susan S. Shen
                           Task Team Leader:      Haddy Jatou Sey
            The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                               Project Name
                                                             FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent
    P153585
                                                             Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                      Country
    Haddy Jatou Sey                                          World
    Approval Date                                            Environmental Category
    30-Sep-2016                                              Not Required (C)
    Managing Unit                                            Is this a Repeater project?
    GSU02

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                       Total Financing
    490,750.00                                               490,750.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
    Trust Funds                                                                                    490,750.00
    Total                                                                                          490,750.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to strengthen: (i) the knowledge of targeted forest-€Ždependent indigenous
    peoples of REDD+ Readiness at the national level; and (ii) knowledge €Žexchange at the €Žregional level.€Ž



.
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)



    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

      The project is financed under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) Capacity Building Program Phase 2, which
      was set up to ensure the active engagement and participation of REDD+ relevant stakeholders, including indigenous
      peoples (IPs) from FCPF participating countries in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), sub-Sahara Africa and
      Asia-Pacific regions. The two-year (2016-2018) parent project is financed by a small Recipient Executed Trust Fund of
      US$490,570, currently being implmented by the implementing organization-Tebtebba. The beneficiaries of this
      project are forest-dependent IPs and their representative organizations and networks in the ten FCPF countries in Asia
      and the Pacific, which are eligible to participate in REDD+ - related regional learning and exchange activities under
      Component 2. Of the ten countries, IP organizations/networks from five countries (Bhutan, Fiji, Papua New Guina,
      Vanuatu and Vietnam) are also eligible to participate in national-level REDD+ capacity building activities through a
      competitive sub-project mechanism under Component 1.

      The project underwent mid-term review (MTR) in February 2018 where it was determined that it was on track to
      achieve its objective by the closing date of October 31, 2018. Under Component 1 (National Capacity Building and
      Awareness Raising), six sub-grant agreements have been signed: two in Bhutan, two in Vietnam, one in Fiji and one in
      Vanuatu        (further      information      is     available       on       the      project’s    webpage        at
      http://www.tebtebba.org/index.php/content/2017-01-07-04-16-14). Sub-projects were not signed in Papua New
      Guinea as no acceptable proposals were submitted from the country; the implementaiton of two sub-projects in
      Bhutan and Vietnam allow the achievement of the project’s target on national activities and an efficient use of the
      Trust Fund resources. Tebtebba has been following up on sub-projects’ progress through semi-annual progress and
      financial reports from implementing organizations, through email and phone communication and through visits to
      sub-project sites. Under Component 2 (Regional Exchange and Sharing of Lessons Learned), the project has financed
      the preparation of a study on IPs' customary tenure systems vis a vis state tenure systems. Country case studies have
      been drafted for Fiji, Nepal and Vietnam and the final reports are currently being reviewed by Tebtebba and the Task
      Team. A regional workshop for diseemination of sub-project lessons learned is planned for the first week of October
      2018.

      Restructuring is proposed to add resources (US$651,163) to the project for additional capacity building activities in
      Bhutan, Fiji, Vanuatu and Vietnam, scale up the project’s results and extend the project’s closing date from October
      31, 2018 to December 31, 2019.
.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The additional financing will finance capacity building activities in forest-dependent IP communities in
    Bhutan, Fiji, Vanuatu and Vietnam.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)



Roberto B. Tordecilla, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                           Triggered       Explanation
                                                              Given the scope and scale of the AF, it is not
                                                              expected that significant and irreversible
                                                              environmental impacts and risks will be generated.
                                                              The AF is designed to improve environmental and
                                                              social outcomes by building the capacity of
                                                              targeted forest-dependent IPs in EAP and SAR
                                                              regions to enhance their knowledge and
                                                              understanding of REDD+. The AF will not finance
                                                              physical investment activities on the ground, and it
                                                              will therefore not have any direct environmental or
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No
                                                              social impacts. The impacts of informing IPs to
                                                              enhance their participation in REDD+ processes at
                                                              the national level are expected to be largely
                                                              positive.

                                                              The Operations Manual includes detailed eligibility
                                                              criteria and procedures for the selection of the
                                                              capacity building activities (including consistency
                                                              with World Bank safeguards policies) to be financed
                                                              by the AF.
                                                              Activities financed under the AF are expected to
                                                              have positive impacts on Natural Habitats by
                                                              strengthening the capacity of forest-dependent IP
                                                              organizations to contribute to their national REDD+
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)              No              Readiness processes. The Operations Manual
                                                              includes detailed eligibility criteria and procedures
                                                              for the selection of the capacity building activities
                                                              (including consistency with World Bank safeguards
                                                              policies) to be financed by the AF.
                                                              Activities financed under the AF are expected to
                                                              have positive impacts on forest management by
                                                              strengthening the capacity of forest-dependent IP
                                                              organizations to contribute to their national REDD+
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                       No              Readiness processes. The Operations Manual
                                                              includes detailed eligibility criteria and procedures
                                                              for the selection of the capacity building activities
                                                              (including consistency with World Bank safeguards
                                                              policies) to be financed by the AF.
                                                              The AF is not expected to support activities that
                                                              involve the procurement or substantially increased
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                    No
                                                              use of pesticides. This would be specified in the
                                                              exclusion list.
           The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)



                                                                          The AF is not expected to support any activities
                                                                          having an adverse impact on physical cultural
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                          resources. This would be specified in an exclusion
                                                                          list.
                                                                          OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the majority of direct
                                                                          beneficiaries is IPs as per the criteria of the Policy.
                                                                          Furthermore, it is expected that the
                                                                          implementation of the AF will result in significant
                                                                          positive benefits to IPs, as activities to be financed
                                                                          include capacity building training and enhancing
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)                Yes                     their knowledge base for their active participation
                                                                          in REDD+ processes within their respective
                                                                          countries. The Operations Manual includes detailed
                                                                          eligibility criteria and procedures for the selection
                                                                          of the capacity building activities to ensure
                                                                          consistency with the World Bank's Safeguards
                                                                          Policies.
                                                                          None of the activities that would be supported by
                                                                          the AF is expected to involve physical displacement
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)          No                      and resettlement. They are also not expected to
                                                                          involve the involuntary restriction of access to
                                                                          legally designated parks or protected areas.
                                                                          None of the activities that would be supported by
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                    No                      the AF is expected to involve the construction or
                                                                          operation of new existing dams.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                                 The AF is not expected to support activities in
                                                  No
 (BP 7.50)                                                                international waterways.
                                                                          The project is not expected to support activities in
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)        No
                                                                          disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      Like the parent project, the Additional Financing (AF) triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (IPs) since its
      beneficiaries continue to be IPs as per the criteria of the policy. Similar to the parent project, the AF will be classified
      as Environmental Assessment Category C (EA Not Required) since it will only support training, workshops, research
      and south-south exchanges without any negative impacts on the environment.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
                            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                            FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)



                       The expected impact of the activities financed by the additional financing is increased awareness and understanding
                       of IPs in selected countries of REDD+, and its impact on their communities. Increased participation of IPs in local and
                       national decision making is the expected long term goal of the parent project and the additional financing.


                     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

                       None.


                     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
                       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                       Specific compliance measures with OP/BP 4.10 were incorporated into the Operations Manual, implemented and will
                       continue to be implemented, including: (i) mechanisms to ensure broad community support of capacity building sub-
                       project proposals submitted to Tebtebba (the implementing NGO); (ii) the active participation of key stakeholders;
                       and (iii) access to grievance redress mechanisms. Tebtebba maintains a hard copy and an electronic case book for
                       recording complaints and their resolution, its webpage includes information on contacts and addresses to which
                       grievances can be addressed, and budget has been set aside for grievance redress. To date, no grievances have been
                       issued.

                       Tebtebba's capacity to plan and implement the above measures has been proven as strong. It understands well the
                       requirements of the safeguard policies and uses its knowledge to inform and educate its sub-project beneficiaries.
                       World Bank Implementation Support Missions consist of a safeguard session where safeguard requirements are
                       repeated and compliance is verified and reported on.


                     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                       The key stakeholders are forest-dependent IP communities in Bhutan, Fiji, Vanuatu and Vietnam whose awareness
                       and understanding of REDD+ will further improve, and IP organizations in these countries which will receive funding
                       to carry out capacity building activities for IP communities, benefit from increased capacity within their organizations
                       on REDD+ -related topics, and enjoy from increased visibility among relevant decision makers in their respective
                       countries. Capacity building sub-projects have been and will continue to be implemented following careful analysis
                       of IP communities' needs through consultation with community representatives.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                          Date of submission for disclosure
09-Oct-2017                                                                          09-Oct-2017
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                                  Date of Disclosure
         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)



 Philippines                                                    09-Oct-2017
 Comments
 An Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework is not required. This is the date of the Operational Manual where
 OP 4.10 measures are addressed.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
 C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                               NA
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                               NA
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                NA
 and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                               Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                               Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                               Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                               Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


Task Team Leader(s)                       Haddy Jatou Sey
           The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples in EAP and SAR Project (P153585)




    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
