The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2018| Report No: ISDSR24304




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Michel Kerf
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Iain G. Shuker
                            Task Team Leader:      Cary Anne Cadman
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                                Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic
    P151760
                                                                of the Marshall Islands
    Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
    Cary Anne Cadman                                            Marshall Islands
    Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
    22-Dec-2014                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
    GEN2A

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
    6,750,000.00                                                6,750,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                         6,750,000.00
    Total                                                                                               6,750,000.00
    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the Project is to strengthen the shared management of selected Pacific Island oceanic and coastal
    fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend.




.
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



     3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 The restructured Republic of the Marshall Islands Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (RMI PROP)
 Project is organized in three components, as follows:
 Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries. The objective of this component is to strengthen
 the capacity of the Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority (MIMRA) to sustainably manage its shared tuna
 fisheries. Towards this objective, activities supported include:

i.      Professional development and training of MIMRA staff in the areas of economic analysis, investment
        appraisal, negotiation strategies and fisheries technical areas as well as increased participation in regional
        and national tuna fisheries negotiations;

ii.     Expansion of the National Observer Program, including expanding the number of observers trained and
        certified to Pacific Islands Regional Fisheries Observer (PIRFO) standards; expanding the number of de-
        briefers trained and certified to PIRFO standards to recommended 1:5 ratio; and, operating costs of joint
        observer management offices with other countries;

iii.    Establishment of seafood safety legislation, standards and operating procedures to enable MIMRA to
        function as the Competent Authority for compliance of RMI fish export products with market state
        requirements;

iv.     MIMRA strategic and functional review;

v.      Acquisition of hardware and software to support real time e-reporting/data provision from observers
        (satellite phones, electronic tablets); and,

vi.     Whole of IT system improvements including the expansion of the MIMRA fisheries information
        management system (IMS) and improvement of IT facilities (hardware, software, bandwidth) that support it;
        integration of new data sources (e.g. radar satellite data) into vessel monitoring system (VMS); and,
        equipment for enhanced maritime communication.

 Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries. This component supports RMI to sustainably
 manage defined coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits.
 Specifically, this component finances the following activities:
 2.1 National management measures for targeted coastal fisheries

 i.     Formulation of additional fishery management plans and regulations.

 ii.    Operating costs to implement national regulations on sea cucumbers, marine ornamentals and additional
        targeted fisheries. This activity will also finance expansion of MIMRA’s Aquaculture Program and include
        construction of an intake pipe from the ocean side to bring fresh water into the aquaculture facility given that
        the current intake pipe draws from the lagoon which has significant water quality issues; a sponge aquaculture
        pilot with a local cooperative, building on the successful giant clam cultivation program; and increasing the
        facility’s research and quarantine capabilities.
           The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)




iii. Industry and community awareness including efforts to enhance accessibility to fisheries information
     through the MIMRA website to support and inform resource management decisions; strengthen information
     sharing mechanisms between national and local governments on fishing activities; and enhance awareness
     of national policies and plans available to local governments. A series of training activities will include
     ensuring national and local coastal MCS efforts are coordinated through regular operations training;
     institutional and resource capacity building through training from the University of the South Pacific and the
     College of the Marshall Islands curricula on marine resources management; and, strengthening the capacity
     of local governments in data collection programs through training and development of a MIMRA data
     sharing policy.

iv. Development of a Coastal Fisheries Pollution Management Program. PROP will recruit a consultant to
    develop a two-year pollution management program directed at providing Government with a comprehensive
    assessment of the pollution load, adverse impacts on fish health and humans as well as the main pollution
    sources affecting coastal fisheries. The Program will outline viable solutions for halting coastal fisheries
    pollution and begin implementation of recommended measures that fall under MIMRA’s mandate and within
    the budget envelope earmarked for this program.

2.2 Stakeholder management of targeted coastal fisheries

i.     Support to resource assessment, community consultations, training workshops, and
       development/implementation of local coastal fishery management arrangements in outer islands and
       Majuro. This includes expansion of the successful Fish Collection and Marketing Program, and technical
       assistance to local governments to maximize benefits from conservation programs via alternative livelihood
       activities. Specifically, through PROP, MIMRA currently provides equipment and fishing gear to small-
       scale fishers in select outer islands; in turn, purchasing their catch for sale in Majuro. PROP will finance
       expansion of this successful program to additional outer islands in response to Cabinet’s request to
       incorporate more outer islands in the PROP. In addition, the restructured project will provide dedicated
       support to local governments and communities to increase their participation in coastal fisheries through
       introduction of ocean-side fish aggregating devices (FADs).

ii.    Medium-sized vessel (12 – 13 m) to support resource assessments and management.

Component 3: National Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The objective of this component
is to provide national program management, monitoring and evaluation and includes active day-to-day
management of the RMI PROP Project, including all financial management, procurement, safeguards and
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tasks associated with efficient and effective project implementation.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    PROP has a national focus. Coastal fisheries activities under Component 2 could be implemented across any
    of the 29 atolls and 5 isolated islands. Two thirds of the population live on Majuro atoll, the capital, and
    Ebeye, a densely populated islet of Kwajalein atoll. Marine pollution studies will focus on these urbanised
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



environments and aquaculture projects will be implemented in Majuro. Outer islands are sparsely populated
due to lack of natural resources to sustain large populations, limited income opportunities and economic
development and the lure of migration to the urban areas or to the United States. Coastal fisheries projects
under Component 2 are intended to improve economic opportunities and subsistence living in the outer
islands as well as assist with sustainable fishery resource management. The country has a very large Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) (about 3.1 million sq. km) relative to its small land mass (181 sq.km) and tuna fisheries
provide a key source of revenue. Component 1 will support the sustainable management of the tuna fishery
and ensure the economic benefits for RMI are captured from fish caught in the EEZ and transshipped in
Majuro lagoon.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Penelope Ruth Ferguson, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Ross James Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered            Explanation
                                                                The aim of the project is to help improve
                                                                environmental and fishery resource quality in RMI
                                                                in order to increase the economic benefits
                                                                generated by the good and services from healthy
                                                                ocean ecosystems. As such, the overall impact of
                                                                the project is expected to be highly positive and
                                                                none of the eligible investments include activities
                                                                that would generate significant risk or irreversible
                                                                adverse impacts in the coastal or oceans fisheries
                                                                targeted by the project.          However some
                                                                investments under Components 1 and 2 may
                                                                generate minor to moderate site specific and time
                                                                bound adverse environmental impacts that can be
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                readily mitigated through standard mitigation
                                                                measures, when screened properly. This includes
                                                                upgrading the aquaculture facility and installing
                                                                Fish Aggregating Devices.

                                                                The project also envisages technical advisory for
                                                                marine pollution studies. The aim of the study is to
                                                                identify methods to improve coastal ecosystems
                                                                and complies with this policy. In all cases of
                                                                technical advisory, the Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                Application of Safeguard Policies to TA Activities in
                                                                Bank-Financed Projects and TFs Administered by
                                                                the Bank will apply. Terms of References for the TA
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



                                                                activities will be reviewed by the Bank to ensure the
                                                                consultancy methodologies and outputs comply
                                                                with the Bank safeguard policies.

                                                                The Reimaanlok process of community-based
                                                                resource management has so far worked very well
                                                                and the citizen engagement and consultation
                                                                approaches, and the resource management plans,
                                                                are compliant with this policy.

                                                                The PROP Environmental and Social Management
                                                                Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide
                                                                investments and technical advisory that may
                                                                generate any adverse environmental and social
                                                                impacts. Screening forms will be used to screen for
                                                                environmental and social impacts and determine
                                                                the appropriate instrument and mitigation
                                                                measures. The ESMF has been updated for the
                                                                restructuring, to address the changes in project
                                                                scope and implementation arrangements.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                                Program activities will not involve significant loss or
                                                                degradation of natural habitats. All program
                                                                activities are designed to enhance positive and
                                                                sustainable returns from coastal and oceanic
                                                                fisheries by maintaining and improving the
                                                                environment and fish stocks.

                                                                The Reimaanlok process of community-based
                                                                resource management has so far worked very well
                                                                and the citizen engagement and consultation
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes
                                                                approaches, and the resource management plans,
                                                                are compliant with this policy.

                                                                The Program level ESMF contains measures to
                                                                properly manage the risk of any unforeseen
                                                                adverse environmental impact on natural habitats,
                                                                including critical natural habitats, as well as
                                                                measures to enhance the program's positive
                                                                environmental outcomes.

                                                                The PROP program Phase 1 includes technical
                                                                assistance to support the development of Marine
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes                  Protected Areas and Ocean Finance mechanisms
                                                                (through the FFA PROP Project), both of which
                                                                could influence conservation incentives for coastal
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



                                                                communities to conserve the mangrove habitats.
                                                                Hence the policy is triggered. So far this has not
                                                                been implemented under PROP in RMI, but any
                                                                specific sites or activities that are identified will be
                                                                screened using the ESMF, to ensure that the
                                                                negative impacts on mangrove forests or
                                                                community access are addressed, and any positive
                                                                impacts are enhanced.
                                                                The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                                dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                                                                Given the small scale of physical works involved,
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                   the policy is not triggered. A chance finds
                                                                procedure is included in the ESMF.
                                                                This policy has been triggered in the original
                                                                project, as the PROP Phase 1 Program has a
                                                                regional scope, and because specific sites and
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No                   activities were not identified at the project
                                                                preparation stage. In RMI this policy is not
                                                                triggered, as there are no communities which meet
                                                                the definition in the policy.
                                                                Project activities may require small-scale coastal
                                                                land access (water pipeline, small shed facilities). It
                                                                is expected that market-based leases or voluntary
                                                                donation will be used. Any voluntary land
                                                                donations will meet the World Bank requirements
                                                                through the application of the Voluntary Land
                                                                Donation Protocol appendd to the ESMF in Annex
                                                                D.

                                                                There will be no requirement for involuntary land
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes                  acquisition or resettlement, due to the very limited
                                                                size of new physical investments.

                                                                In case of downstream establishment of the MPAs
                                                                or Ocean Finance mechanisms (under the FFA PROP
                                                                project, but which could be piloted in RMI), which
                                                                could potentially restrict access to resources, the IA
                                                                will select appropriate safeguard instrument(s)
                                                                according to the responsibilities defined in the
                                                                ESMF (and in particular the Annex on Process
                                                                Framework).
                                                                Neither this project nor the possible downstream
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No                   investments from project’s TA will involve building
                                                                dams nor depend on an existing dam.
                                                                Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA, it
Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           No                   was agreed that there will be no impacts from this
(BP 7.50)
                                                                project or its possible downstream investments on
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



                                                                       international waterways as described under OP
                                                                       7.50.
                                                                       Any project activities in areas which may be
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No                     disputed will be declared ineligible and not
                                                                       included in the project.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The overall impact of the project is considered to be highly positive and the physical investments, technical advisory
      and MIMRA functions funded by PROP will not generate significant, large scale nor irreversible impacts. The
      restructured project includes some defined physical investments, such as upgrading of the aquaculture facility in
      Majuro and providing a new water supply intake valve. The impacts are minor and relate to good wastewater
      management and safe disposal of construction waste. The marine pollution study and downstream activities under
      Component 2 are expected to assist RMI to avoid and mitigate pollution impacts to generate improved human health
      and ecosystem benefits.

      To date, the project has had no environmental nor social issues and has supported positive and inclusive community-
      based resource management through the Reimaanlok program.




 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      The long term impacts are expected to benefit coastal and oceanic fisheries sustainability and biodiversity
      conservation and sustainable management and the communities that rely on them for reliable subsistence and
      livelihoods.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
      capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      Borrower capacity to address safeguard policy issues has been limited to date, due to the lack of a trained and
      experienced safeguard consultant available to the team.

      The Department of International Development Assistance in the Ministry of Finance has recently recruited a full time
      safeguards consultant to service all World Bank projects in Marshall Islands. This person is responsible to ensure the
      PROP safeguards instrument (Environmental and Social Management Framework) is applied to the Technical Advisory
      services, physical investments and MIMRA’s community engagement activities delivered under this project.
                         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)




                  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
                    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                    Island and urban communities that receive MIMRA support to improve fisheries and coastal resource management
                    and the farmers who benefit from the clam and sponge aquaculture support services provided by MIMRA are the key
                    project stakeholders. The Reimaanlok process is primarily used to engage communities. Farmers and fishers are
                    already involved in MIMRA’s training and market chain opportunities and these methods will be used in the continued
                    delivery of the project. The RMI Environmental Protection Authority is a key stakeholder for the marine pollution
                    study and will need to be closely involved in the preparation of the TOR, supervision of the consultant and
                    downstream activities to influence the outputs and outcomes to achieve with their institutional mandates.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.                 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                          Date of submission for disclosure
        23-Sep-2014                                                          23-Oct-2014
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
            Marshall Islands                                                    23-Oct-2014
            Comments
            This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Date of submission for disclosure
23-Sep-2014                                                                    23-Oct-2014
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                               Date of Disclosure
          Marshall Islands                                                      23-Oct-2014
         The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



 Comments
 This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                              Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?             Yes



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                    No
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
 critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                           NA
 acceptable to the Bank?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                                    Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                                    Yes
 review the plan?

 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?

 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
 to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



 FO_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
 been carried out?

 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
 constraints?
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Republic of the Marshall Islands (P151760)



    Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
    provisions for certification system?



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                       Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                     Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                       Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                       Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                       Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                       Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Cary Anne Cadman


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
