The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2018| Report No: ISDSR25253




                       Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                              Country Director:    Carolyn Turk
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Jennifer J. Sara
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo
                            Task Team Leader:      Habab Taifour
              The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
              Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P133591                                                      Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Habab Taifour                                                Ethiopia
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    20-Mar-2014                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GWA08


    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

    SUMMARY               -NewFin1




    Total Project Cost                                                                                           233.80
    Total Financing                                                                                              233.80
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


    DETAILS -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 205.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                               205.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Counterpart Funding                                                                                          28.80
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                        28.80


    2. PROJECT INFORMATION
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The proposed development objective of the project is to “increase access to improved water supply and sanitation services
    for residents in participating woredas/towns and communities in Ethiopia.?



.


    1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
     A. Introduction
       1. A credit of US$205 million equivalent was approved for the WaSHP on March 20, 2014 with the Project
       Development Objective (PDO) to “increase access to improved water supply and sanitation services for
       residents in participating woredas/towns and communities in Ethiopia.? The project aimed to provide
       benefits in the form of improved water supply services and sanitation and hygiene education to an estimated
       2.62 million people (1.62 million rural and 1 million urban). It was estimated that project resources would
       benefit unserved people in about 150 woredas and 70 small and medium towns. To achieve the PDO, the
       project is composed of three components: (i) Rural and Pastoralist WaSH; (ii) Urban WaSH; and (iii) Program
       Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.

       2. The project was restructured in March 2015 to pool IDA resources with funds from other development
       partners (DPs) financing the WASH sector through a sector wide programmatic approach . A pooled
       financing mechanism, the Consolidated WASH Account (CWA) was created to harmonize planning,
       budgeting and implementation of the government of Ethiopia’s ambitious One WASH Nati onal Program
       (OWNP). This program is known as OWNP – CWA. The restructuring allowed IDA resources under WaSHP to
       be pooled with resources from African Development Bank (AfDB - US$90.6 million), United Kingdom
       Department for International Development (DFID - US $131 million) and UNICEF (US$10 million) into the
       CWA located at the National Bank of Ethiopia. The combined resources of OWNP-CWA targeted 382 woredas
       and 144 towns (124 small and 20 medium). The results framework was amended to reflect increased scale
       of activities and it was agreed that any revisions and amendments to the results would be dimensioned
       accordingly in the joint Program Operations Manual. The restructuring also designated that the World Bank
       would provide fiduciary and safeguard oversight for all OWNP-CWA financed activities on behalf of all
       contributing DPs.

       3. Total CWA resources fluctuated due to additional financing from DPs and diversion of funds to respond
       to humanitarian crisis. Following the creation of the OWNP-CWA, AfDB provided Additional Financing of
       US$6 million. In 2016, following a declaration of a state of emergency by the Government of Ethiopia (GoE),
       DFID diverted US$20 million equivalent and UNICEF diverted US$6 million of OWNP-CWA committed funds
       to support humanitarian efforts. In May 2017, the Government of Finland joined as a new partner to the
       OWNP-CWA with a contribution of US$2.5 million.

       4. With the proposed extension achievement of the Project Development Objective is achievable. Targets
       for rural and institutional WaSH will be met or exceeded. Targets for urban WaSH are lagging, but still remain
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



 achievable. Program management capacity and coordination has steadily increased over the course of the
 implementation period with notable progress for multi-sectoral planning, budgeting and implementation.

 5. A Level 2 restructuring of the project will be executed with the proposed changes to : (i) extend the
 closing date of the original financing from June 30, 2019 to June 30, 2020 to allow sufficient time for full
 achievement of revised urban WaSH targets; (ii) modify the results framework to reflect reduced
 beneficiaries for urban WASH to account for reduction in targeted towns from 144 to 94 due to reduction in
 OWNP – CWA resources and increased service level standards set forth by the GoE’s Growth and
 Transformation Plan II (GTP II); (iii) trigger Operational Policy 4.37 Safety of Dams; and (iv) removal of the
 unutilized contingency component.

B. Rationale for Restructuring
  6. The purpose of the extension is to allow for achievement of urban WaSH project development
  objectives (PDO) targets. In order to fully achieve project targets, an extension is needed to complete water
  supply systems that are under construction and managed at the regional level. The major factors that
  contributed to implementation delays are: (i) high cost escalation of proposed urban WaSH activities due to
  increase in service level standards introduced in the GTP II; (ii) reduction of available budget due to diversion
  of US$26 million equivalent of OWNP-CWA resources (from DFID and UNICEF) in 2016 to address emergency
  humanitarian efforts; (iii) the complexity of urban water schemes that require large quantities of imported
  goods such as electro-mechanical equipment, steel casings, pipes and fittings and timely availability of hard
  currency to procure imported goods; and (iv) volatile security situation that hindered access to some project
  sites and discouraged contractors from mobilizing machinery to finalize activities. 29 out of 60 town water
  supply schemes that are under construction are in Oromia Region alone – these towns also represent the
  highest concentration of targeted urban WaSH beneficiaries. The pace of implementation in Oromia was
  significantly impacted due to the sporadic unrest. The proposed extension would allow Oromia Region in
  particular to make up for the delays and meet proposed urban WaSH targets. Urban sanitation targets that
  are also lagging, require additional time for completion. Additional time is also required to complete a series
  of strategic studies managed at federal level.

 7. PDO targets for urban water supply beneficiaries require revision and reduction . In light of the high
 cost escalation and reduction in OWNP- CWA program resources, financing for all targeted towns is not
 available. Twenty-one small towns and nine medium towns will not be financed under this phase of OWNP-
 CWA. The original targeted beneficiaries cannot be met and need to be revised accordingly. The targets for
 urban beneficiaries provided with access to improved water supply will be reduced from 2.1 million to 1.5
 million to account for the 30 towns that will not be financed under the project as originally envisaged.

 8. The Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.37, Safety of Dams is triggered. A consultancy for the study and
 design for Cibilu Dam (Water Project III), ancillary structures, water treatment plant, transmission and
 distribution are in place and requires adequate oversight as per the Bank’s OP 4.37. The consultancy contract
 was signed in November 2017, subsequently halted due to insecurity that hindered mobility outside of Addis
 and surrounding areas. The consultant was remobilized to resume activities in March 2019. The team was
 aware that OP 4.37 is applicable and required triggered and considered the use of this comprehensive
 restructuring to do so. Continued discussions regarding risk categorization and action plan to ensure
            The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



      adequate oversight by Bank team are ongoing. These discussions may necessitate potential further internal
      Bank approvals and measures and revisions in the future to ensure that the feasibility study and associated
      Environment and Social Impact Assessments are prepared in accordance to Bank policies and standards and
      with the level of risks.

      9. Removal of unutilized contingency component. For internal processing purposes, removal of this
      component is dimensioned as part of the restructuring. This component was not part of the Financing
      Agreement and does not constitute a separate disbursement category. The restructuring proposes to
      remove this component from the Bank’s internal reporting format in the Operations Portal.
.

    1. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    Ethiopia has adequate surface and ground water resources to meet the demands for potable water and
    sanitation facilities. However, the spatial distribution of water sources, particularly in the drier parts of the
    country requires different types of water lifting technologies for water extraction. For instance, in the
    pastoral areas, deep boreholes drilling machines might be used, while in the central highlands, with shallow
    water wells, might require the use of water pumps and or simple digging because of the closeness of the
    ground water sources. The project will support government's national program which covers rural and urban
    beneficiaries all over Ethiopia. The project specific sites will be identified during implementation and for this
    reason the project is using a framework approach to environmental and social issues. The environmental and
    resettlement consequences of the project's civil work activities are likely to be very minor, however, due to
    the uncertainties on the nature and scope of the civil works and the nation wide spread of the project,
    including the participation of undeserved communities in the remote areas, it was determined that ESMF,
    RPF and SA will be prepared, cleared and disclosed before project appraisal and the required mitigation plans
    will be prepared before commencement of any civil work. The World Bank is also considering providing
    technical assistance in the form of capacity building activities to the project team so that they can adequately
    manage the safeguards aspects of the project during implementation.



    2. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Yalemzewud Simachew Tiruneh, Social Specialist
    Tesfa Teferi Gebreegziabher, Social Specialist
    Tesfaw Ashagrie Zegale, Environmental Specialist
    Tamru Demsis Temam, Environmental Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    3. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                         Triggered            Explanation
                                                                    OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project due to
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                    its planned rehabilitation and construction
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



                                                               activities under components 1 & 2. Since specific
                                                               investment locations cannot be identified at this
                                                               stage, the Borrower has revised the Environmental
                                                               and Social Management Framework used by the
                                                               recently closed WSSP, particularly with regards to
                                                               current developments. The prepared safeguards
                                                               instruments have been consulted upon and
                                                               disclosed prior to appraisal.
Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                           No
Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                               Both urban and rural water development
                                                               infrastructure will be implemented in areas settled
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No                  by humans that are not close to any natural
                                                               habitats. The project, therefore, will not have any
                                                               impact on natural habitats.
                                                               No water development sub-project will be
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No                  implemented in forested areas, nor doe the project
                                                               involve forestry.
                                                               The project does not involve pest management
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                               measures.
                                                               The project will not affect any physical cultural
                                                               resources. However, as precaution measure, the
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                 policy has been triggered and the necessary
                                                               procedures are included in the ESMF and screening
                                                               forms.
                                                               Based on the screening conducted by the World
                                                               Bank, the majority of people in the project area
                                                               meet the criteria defined under OP4.10, and
                                                               therefore, the project has triggered OP/BP 4.10 and
                                                               an enhanced social assessment (SA) was conducted
                                                               to complement the RPF and to identify social issues
                                                               . Key stakeholders were consulted in the Woredas,
                                                               Kebeles and communities, including identified
                                                               vulnerable and undeserved groups to seek their
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          Yes
                                                               broad support for the project and emphasize the
                                                               importance of WaSH services to themselves and
                                                               their families. The findings of the enhanced social
                                                               assessment and extensive consultations, including
                                                               measures to ensure that the project involves and
                                                               benefits appropriately the various groups has been
                                                               fully reflected in the PAD. The social assessment has
                                                               been consulted upon and disclosed before
                                                               appraisal.
                                                               OP 4.12 is triggered by the proposed project due to
                                                               its planned rehabilitation and construction
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                               activities under components 1 & 2. Since specific
                                                               investment locations cannot be identified at this
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



                                                                       stage, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                                                                       been prepared, consulted upon and will be
                                                                       disclosed to ensure that appropriate measures are
                                                                       in place to address any issues which might arise
                                                                       from potential land acquisition and or restriction of
                                                                       access to communal natural resources under the
                                                                       Project. When the investment sites are identified
                                                                       the borrower will prepare a Resettlement Action
                                                                       Plan (RAP).
                                                                       This policy is triggered as the project is supporting
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  Yes                    the development of feasibility studies for water
                                                                       storage that should follow OP 4.37 standards.
                                                                       OP 7.50 is triggered because the proposed project
                                                                       will finance water supplies to several smaller towns
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                              and rural settlements that will cause abstraction of
                                                Yes
 (BP 7.50)                                                             surface and ground water. Therefore, Ethiopia's
                                                                       riparians have been notified and were advised to
                                                                       provide comments no later than January 20, 2014.
                                                                       The policy is not triggered; as no water
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No                     development sub-project will be implemented in
                                                                       disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
I. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project is classified as category B. Six safeguards polices have been triggered. The Environmental Assessment,
      Physical Cultural Resources, Involuntary Resettlement, Safety of Dams, Projects on International Waterways, and
      Under-served People (Vulnerabilities). The overall environmental impacts of the project are positive, especially as
      planned activities will supply safe drinking water and sanitation facilities. Some of the negative impacts are site
      specific and these will be localized and can be reduced or avoided with proper mitigation measures. There are ongoing
      discussions related to categorization of risks. The outcomes of these discussions may necessitate a change in risk
      categorization or additional measures to ensure oversight of activities related to OP4.37.

      The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be used to address any environmental and social
      impacts of the project. The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop in accordance with Bank
      requirements on November 30, 2013

      The project’s anticipated social impacts have triggered OP4.12 and OP4.10 and in keeping with good practice
      established under WSSP, this project have to put in place mitigation mechanisms acceptable to the World Bank to
      mitigate these impacts. For impact on land use and structure, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used under WSSP
      is updated and customized to the specificity of the WaSH-II, to address any potential impacts, which is expected to
      be site specific and minor. The Bank’s OP4.10 is triggered, based on the screening conducted by the World Bank,
      which indicates that the majority of the people in the project area meet the criteria defined under OP4.10. Therefore,
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



       a social assessment (SA) was conducted to complement the RPF. The PAD includes measures to ensure that the
       project has free, prior and informed consultation leading to broad community support; mitigates any adverse impacts
       on communities; includes culturally appropriate benefit-sharing; includes a grievance redress mechanism; and, has a
       monitoring and evaluation system. The social assessment was consulted upon and disclosed prior to Appraisal.

       Oversight for study and design of Cibilu Dam an ancillary structures will necessitate the Client to engage an
       independent Panel of Experts based on Terms of References (ToRs) that are reviewed and approved by the World
       Bank. As part of the scope of the feasibility study, requisite plans such as (Emergency Management Plan, Operation
       and Maintenance, Construction Supervision and Dam Safety Instrumentation) will be prepared and independently
       reviewed by the Panel of Experts. The ToRs for a detailed Environmental and Social Assessment and if needed a
       standalone Resettlement Action Plan that may be prepared as part of this support will be reviewed by the Bank as
       well as independent experts to ensure compliance with OP4.37.



     2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

       The project will not have potential indirect or long term impact.


     3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
       The existing traditional institutional structure for water supply will be enhanced and the planning and management
       of sub-projects will involve the participation of beneficiary communities’ benefit sharing and mitigating adverse
       environmental and social impacts.


     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
       capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
       The borrower has good experience in preparing safeguards instruments and screening sub-projects to identify
       environmental and social impacts; however its institutional capacity for the implementation of mitigation measures
       is limited. The project will support measures that will strengthen the Borrower's capacity to identify and assess
       potential adverse environmental and social impacts and to implement and monitor appropriate mitigation measures.
       Specifically, the borrower will designate a qualified and experienced sociologist and an environmental officer to be
       responsible for social and environmental safeguards matters and they will receive training on World Bank safeguards
       policies. The project has developed a grievance redress system, and a culturally appropriate benefit-sharing
       mechanism.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Key stakeholders were consulted in the Woredas, Kebeles and communities, including identified vulnerable and
       under-served groups (meeting the OP 4.10 criteria) to seek their broad support for the project and emphasize the
       importance of WaSH services to themselves and their families.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
                      The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Date of submission for disclosure
        07-Nov-2013                                                     29-Nov-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Ethiopia                                                       28-Nov-2013
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
14-Oct-2013                                                              29-Nov-2013
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
          United States                                                   03-Dec-2013
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
04-Nov-2013                                                                29-Nov-2013
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            United States                                                  03-Dec-2013
         The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



 Comments




COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   No



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 No

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                     No
 impacts on cultural property?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                     No
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                     Yes
 (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                     Yes
 review the plan?



 SD_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                No

 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
                                                                                     Yes
 been reviewed and approved by the Bank?

 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                     No
 been made for public awareness and training?



 PIW_TABLE
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)



    OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                            Yes

    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement,
    has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP                          NA
    prepared and sent?

    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                           NA



    PDI_TABLE
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      Yes
    disclosure?

    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
    and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                    Yes
    and local NGOs?



    ALL_TABLE
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      Yes
    prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      Yes
    cost?

    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




II. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                      Habab Taifour


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Nathalie S. Munzberg                      27-Jun-2019

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Pier Francesco Mantovani                  27-Jun-2019

.
The World Bank                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)
