Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC465 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 3, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P086949 
Project Name: Modernizing Agricultural 
Knowledge and I 
Task Team Leader: Doina Rachita 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 2004 
Estimated Board Date: September, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Agricultural Research, Extension and 
Education (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 30 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Borrower and Beneficiaries 
Others (EU, The Netherlands, USAID) 
($m) 
5.0 
10.0 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The overall objective of the project is to assist the Romanian Government to improve the 
competitiveness of farmers and agro-processors in the EU accession environment. This will be  
achieved through: (i) increased access of farmers and agro-processors to knowledge on 
technologies related to production, quality control, food safety, processing and marketing in 
order to meet EU standards; and (ii) improved linkages between agricultural research, extension, 
education and clients and of the Romanian AKIS to the global knowledge pool. 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
 
The project will consist of three components: 
 
1)  Strengthening the National Policy and Regulatory Framework, including support for the 
newly-decreed Romanian Agency for Food Safety (preliminary cost estimate: US$10 
million)
.    
The government of Romania has recently decreed to establish a Romanian Agency for Food 
Safety (RAFS) which will function as a single authority under the direct control of the Prime 
Minister.  The mission of the Agency is to work towards risk reduction in food and consumer 
products with regard to public health, veterinary health and animal welfare.  The primary 
responsibility of the Agency will be to maintain a high level of consumer trust and 
confidence in terms of food and product safety and oversee compliance with EU rules.   It 
Page  2
 
 
will provide independent scientific advice on all matters with a direct or indirect impact on 
food safety, covering all stages of food production and supply, from primary production to 
the safety of animal feed, right through to the supply of food to consumers.  The Agency will 
achieve this goal through: (i) appropriate supervision of processes and training
 of those 
involved in food production and processing to ensure compliance with legislation; (ii) risk 
assessment and mitigation measures
 for potential threats to the safety of food products; and 
(iii) risk communication
, to the general public and producers concerning risk and risk 
reduction based on accurate and reliable data.   
 
The component will support the RAFS with the following: (i) development of its overall 
structure, staffing, training, laboratories, equipment and operating costs; (ii) its activities 
related to development of food safety standards, inspection, testing, enforcement, training 
and communications; and (iii) building its capacity to advise the MAFWE and Ministry of 
Public Health in updating and implementing the policy and regulatory framework in line with 
the EU agro-environmental requirements.   
 
The Government of Netherlands and EU delegation in Romania have agreed to provide 
technical assistance in preparation of this component as well as co-financing the cost of its 
implementation.   
 
(2) Establishing an Efficient and Effective Extension and Information System
 to provide and 
facilitate access to relevant agriculture information and technologies. This component will 
finance activities aimed at:  
 
a)  Establishing a Central Training Unit  (preliminary cost estimate: US$4 million)
 as a 
center of excellence at a selected agricultural university to serve as a knowledge resource 
base, accreditation and training center for extension agents and other interested 
stakeholders. The Unit will build and maintain capacity for, and access to, information on 
technologies related to production, quality control, food safety, processing and marketing. 
It will be continuously updated on changing EU agro-environmental requirements and 
directives, as well as on the best technologies and opportunities available worldwide. The 
Unit will also: (i) train Regional Advisory Centers (RAC) staff and certify extension 
agents who will provide extension and advisory services to farmers and other 
stakeholders and to food safety and quality experts; and (ii) develop relevant courses for 
selective universities in high priority fields of applied agricultural research and extension. 
 
Establishing Regional Advisory Centers (RAC) (preliminary cost estimate: US$12 
million).
 The project will establish an RAC in each of the eight euro-regions. Each RAC 
will be a hub with state-of-the-art facilities for accessing regional, national and global 
information and for disseminating the necessary information in the region. The 
information will range from production to processing, marketing, food safety, quality 
control and necessary certification of farms complying with EU requirements. The RACs 
will be under the MAFWE. Each RAC will be managed by 2-3 permanent administrative 
staff and will use project funds on a competitive basis to hire accredited extension service 
providers from universities, research institutions, private sector, local ANCA staff, 
NGOs, on a need basis. Initially, the RACs will provide free advice to small- and 
Page  3
 
 
medium-sized family farms and producer associations.  However, over time, with 
improving incomes, payment for such services will be sought to ensure sustainability of 
the RACs. For extension services provided to large commercial companies, the advisors 
could seek remuneration for their services. The current public expenditure on extension 
activities and the role of the Judet-level extension staff will be examined during project 
preparation with the view to ensuring sustainability of the proposed decentralized system. 
 
3)  Supporting four Priority Research Institutes to meet Information and Technology Needs 
(preliminary cost estimate: US$16 million).
 The Government has selected four priority 
national research institutes to be restructured and modernized to become centers of 
excellence for selective research programs and to meet the priority knowledge and 
technology requirements to benefit from EU accession. Support under the component would 
include rehabilitation of physical infrastructure, laboratory equipment, field research 
facilities and machinery as well as training to upgrade the quality and caliber of staff. The 
four priority research institutes are: (i) the Institute of Plant Sciences, focusing on technical 
and niche crops, forages and wheat; (ii) the Institute of Animal Biology, focusing on health, 
nutrition and husbandry; (iii) the National Institute of Soil, Water and Ecology; and (iv) the 
National Institute of Biotechnology, including fruits and vegetables. These institutes will also 
cover policy needs and the economics of technologies related to their area of research.  These 
four institutes are key candidates for continued public support, while other research institutes, 
such as those dealing with crops such as maize, etc. could be more appropriately handled 
through the private sector. The MAFWE has agreed to provide core funding for the selected 
research institutes. All institutes will be eligible to compete for operational funds in priority 
areas available through Competitive Grant Programs. 
 
4)  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (preliminary cost estimate: US$3 
million).
 This component will provide funding for project management and particularly for 
undertaking regular monitoring and evaluation of project activities to assess the project’s 
impact. Implementation arrangements have been discussed with the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forests, Waters and Environment and with the Ministry of Public Finance. It was agreed that 
the existing (possibly strengthened) ASSP PMU would be responsible for implementation of 
the proposed project.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be implemented at national level. 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The institutional capacity of the Borrower varies considerably among the fields of food safety, extension and 
research.  Project preparation and design will reflect these differences in order to ensure efficient project 
implementation, including the effective exploitation of synergies between the three sub-sectors of the national 
agricultural knowledge and information system.  The government has agreed that this project will be implemented 
through existing PMU of the  ongoing Agricultural Support Services Project which is well – established and 
competent.  The proposed project will build on the existing capacity of the PMU which will be further strengthened 
as required.  
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Page  4
 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
It was determined that there are no environmental issues involved and the project is Category "C. 
It was also determined that there are no social safeguards triggered. 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be 
prepared:  March 2004 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Doina Rachita 
Dec. 5, 2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
