Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1411 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P093096 
Project Name: SOCIAL INCLUSION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Ana Maria Sandi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (75%);General education sector (25%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P);Social safety nets (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00 
 
EC: COUNCIL OF EUROPE'S SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT FUND 
25.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
25.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed development objective of the Social Inclusion Project (SIP) is to improve the 
living conditions and the social inclusion of the most disadvantaged/vulnerable people in the 
Romanian society. To achieve this objective, the Project will support capacity development for 
continuous progress towards the social inclusion of disadvantaged people, priority interventions 
for highly disadvantaged groups (including Roma), as well as the implementation of new quality 
standards in the public LTC institutions and alternative services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The SIP will support the implementation of priority objectives of the Joint Inclusion 
Memorandum (2006-2010) concluded between the Government of Romania and the European 
Commission. Several programs to be assisted were identified. All programs have components on: 
(i) accessing EU structural funds; (ii) monitoring and evaluation; and (iii) information, education, 
communication (IEC) and public awareness.  
Page  2
Component 1: Program of Priority Interventions (Roma and Disadvantaged). This program 
aims to bring the most disadvantaged Roma settlements up to minimum standards in terms of 
infrastructure and basic services. It  will provide grants to fund demand driven, integrated 
community development projects in settlements identified as the most disadvantaged. Eligible 
activities will include both small infrastructure (rehabilitation or construction of small 
infrastructure in order to increase access to services, markets, water and sanitation, safe 
environment, and basic housing) and community-based social services (increase access to 
educational and health centers, waste collection and disposal, advocacy services). The 
procedures will be similar to current Romanian Social Development Fund (RSDF) practice 
(facilitation, community-management and implementation, partnerships with local authorities).  
 
Component 2: Inclusive Early Childhood Development (ECD) Program (Roma and 
Disadvantaged. While the Priority Interventions Program has a targeted approach, mainstreaming 
of Roma and other disadvantaged groups into the programs of line ministries is equally 
important, for building inclusion into regular policies and programs. Under the SIP, the MER 
ECD Program will be supported. This program wasselected given its inter- sectorial links 
(education, health, nutrition) and the importance of early interventions for future development. A 
sub-component of the ECD program will deal with special needs education. The SIP will support 
development of the legal framework, staff training (teaching and care services), curriculum 
development, provision of educational materials, increasing equity through alternative, 
community based options for ECD. Specific assistance will be provided for children with special 
needs.  
 
Component 3: Social Protection Programs for Disabilities, Elderly and Orphans.  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: Disabilities Program. The Disabilities Program supports the 
implementation of the GOR action plan for institutionalization prevention, de-
institutionalization, development of alternative systems of assistance, institutional restructuring, 
and social inclusion. The cross-sectorial approach covers: (i) provision of short and long term 
care for PWD; (ii) institutional capacity building; (iii) disability pensions; and (iv) employment 
support for those with less severe disabilities.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: Elderly Program. The SIP will support: (i) rehabilitation of existing 
infrastructure and possibly establishment of new centers (including socio-medical centers); (ii) 
development and provision of cost effective alternative services for elderly; and (iii) professional 
staff training in order to properly implement the new standards for the quality of care. The 
alternative services are to be financed through a competitive grant scheme that is already in 
place. Both local authorities and NGOs are eligible to submit proposals. This approach will 
stimulate the design of creative and innovative services at local level, improving the potential for 
further absorption of EU structural funds allocated for this purpose.  
 
Sub-Component 3.3: Social Housing Program (Roma and Disadvantaged).  The Social Housing 
Program has two components: (i) improving the social housing legislation and (ii) establishing 
Multifunctional Centers for youth over 18 leaving the state child protection system. 
 
Component 4. Capacity Building for Social Inclusion. The SIP will support capacity building 
for social inclusion. Assistance will be given to the Ministry of Labor, Social Solidarity and 
Family (MLSSF and the Ministry of Education and Research (MER), the National Agency for 
Page  3
Roma (NAR) and RSDF for improving inclusive planning, implementation of programs and 
accountability mechanisms. In addition, the SIP will finance assistance activities to be provided 
by NAR, MLSSF and MER to potential disadvantaged groups that want to access EU structural 
funds to solve their problems.  
 
The proposed Program for poverty alleviation and social inclusion has the following 
characteristics: (i) it proposes to use a Program Based Approach to be implemented through a 
Specific Investment Loan; (ii) it aims at strengthening Romania's budget system and 
implementation processes to optimize the use of all resources available in effective ways for 
disadvantaged groups; (iii) its strategy is to shift the public system from accounting inputs to 
planning for and monitoring outcomes and outputs; (iv) monitoring and evaluation would be 
inbuilt in the Program; (v) it would encourage the coordination of all interventions financed by 
the Government and all donors in the areas of focus; (vi) allocation of resources  will be made as 
much as possible through competitive schemes based on incentives that reward performance; 
(vii) participation and partnership will be promoted, making use of lessons learnt from working 
with the Roma in the past; (viii) empowerment of disadvantaged Roma and building social 
accountability will be promoted; (ix) although the multi- sectorial approach agreed in the Decade 
of Roma Inclusion remains as the organizing framework to address the issues of the Roma, the 
Bank's assistance will target selected areas first and then gradually expand to the others. Small 
scale interventions will be financed (construction materials to upgrade houses, water supply, 
sanitation, day care centers).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sites for project interventions will be determined based on demand, compliance with eligibility, 
and selection criteria.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
RSDF and line ministries have the capacity to comply with Bank safeguard policies 
demonstrated through the involvement in previous Bank assisted projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
Mr Mark C. Woodward (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
FI with primarily B and some category C subprojects: An environmental chapter will be 
included in the Operational Manual that will state environmental screening criteria and 
approaches to identify and mitigate risks.  
 
Note that the involuntary resettlement will not be triggered despite the inclusion of 
infrastructure works under the project because the legal agreements will exclude any financing of 
subprojects involving land acquisition.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/07/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Before appraisal, currently scheduled to start on January 16, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ana Maria Sandi 
11/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
11/23/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
