Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1676 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P093775 
Project Name: Romania Environmental Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Karin Shepardson 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 10, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (50%);Solid waste management 
(20%);Other industry (20%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Other 
public sector governance (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To build institutional capacity to implement the EU environment acquis by supporting improved 
cost-effectiveness of investments and building project development capacity for absorbing EU 
funds.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support environmental investments particularly in areas where the gap between 
costs and needs are highest; deadlines for compliance are short and can result in loss of economic 
activity; areas where public health risks are high; and areas of global importance where 
international grant funds can help leverage other investment resources and partners.  It would 
also focus on areas where good demonstration impacts can be made in terms of lowering costs, 
involvement of private sector, and innovative application of economic instruments.  Preliminary 
priority investments have been identified in discussion with the Ministry of Environment that 
span the area of waste management, water, nature protection, and capacity building   
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
National in focus   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has overall good capacity for implementing Bank safeguard policies- however a 
detailed assessment of these capacities is under preparation for several loans seeking to rely on 
the national systems.  This project can help to support any critical gaps in capacity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita Klees (ECSSD) 
Mr Lucian Bucur Pop (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Project is assumed to be category A at this point, however will be re-assessed further as 
components are developed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
There is potential that civil works within Nature Parks could trigger this safeguard policy.  
The loan plans to support capacity building for environment officials to introduce environment 
permits for work in Natura 2000 sites (EU system of key natural habitats)as part of environment 
acquis implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Not likely to be triggered and any screening of investments will avoid these sites, however 
the rating will be assessed again once more specific investments are identified.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
process framework would be develeoped and followed to address any restricted access 
issues related to protected areas.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
All the territority of Romania is located within the Black Sea/Danube Basin - however a 
waiver of the IW policy is likely to be granted as investment activities do not envision any new 
extraction or discharge to water resources.  This will be further assessed as specific investments 
are more clearly defined.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2006 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Project rating and required studies will be re-assessed with safeguard team by end November 
2005 based on further loan preparation details.  
 
Launch of studies is proposed for December 2005.. As currently envisioned, a framework 
EA/EMP and sub-project specific EA/EMPs is assumed to be required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
07/26/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/26/2005 
Comments:  This PCN-stage ISDS is cleared for safeguards. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Tuck 
07/26/2005 
Comments:  This ISDS is cleared. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
