Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1995 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Russian Federation 
Project ID: P092429 
Project Name: Second State Statistical System 
Task Team Leader: Misha V. Belkindas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (P);Debt management and fiscal 
substainability (S);Analysis of economic growth (S);Other economic management 
(S);Macroeconomic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
81.50
81.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The aim is to support the achievement of key social and economic goals set by the GOR in its 
strategy and policy priorities through supporting the development of a modern and efficient 
federal state statistical system that will meet the needs of Russia and that can be sustained when 
the Project is completed.  
 
This will be achieved by adopting of new law on statistics, introducing the international 
standards into statistical practice, improving management information systems and accelerating 
IT investment, improving coordination and collaboration among stakeholders, improving 
technical coordination among data producers and users, and continues retraining of human 
resources in statistics.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This Project will be a Specific Investment Loan, under the umbrella of the STATCAP Adaptable 
Program Loan to improve statistical capacity through a sector-wide approach, using the SMP and 
Page  2
FTP as the basis for investments. The STATCAP supports a medium to long-term approach. To 
enter the STATCAP lending program borrowers need to fulfill the eligibility criteria: (i) 
preparation of a national statistical development strategy and statistical master plan; (ii) strong 
national commitment and leadership; (iii) willingness to comply with good statistical practice; 
(iv) participation in global development and monitoring activities; and (v) use of sustainable 
financial and institutional arrangement. Russian Federation has met all STATCAP requirements 
and the Project components are designed to support the implementation of the SMP.  
 
The major components of the Project are (a) Modernization of statistics methodology (based on 
further development of the System of National Accounts harmonized with the international 
standards); (b) Development of modern design and technology for statistical data collection, 
processing, and dissemination system (linked with integrated techniques for analytical and 
forecasting works); (c) Enhancement of social statistics (including the living standards statistics, 
labor, education, health, and demographic statistics); (d) Human resource development (based on 
the continues  professional education for statisticians), (e) Project Management.  
 
The estimated total cost of the Project is around US$ 102 million. The Government of the 
Russian Federation contribution is estimated at US$ 81.5 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The main location of the project is Moscow with many activities in regional statistical offices.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As the implementing agency, Rosstat has demonstrated that it has the capacity to carry out 
statistical capacity building projects and to take the lead in technical and methodological forums 
for statistical policy, and together with on-going upgrading/professional growth of human 
resources it mitigates the risk for reaching Project goals.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/06/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No land acquisition and no civil or re-habitation works.  The project deals with 
Modernization of statistical systems.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Misha V. Belkindas 
11/10/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Rita Klees 
12/01/2005 
Comments:  This is cleared and delegated to the project sector manager for future clearances. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Asad Alam 
12/15/2005 
Comments:  Approved. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
