                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                     IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                      Report No.: ISDSC20344

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country:             Rwanda                         Project ID:      P162274
   Project Name:        Additional Financing Rwanda SEDRP
   Team Leader(s):      Natacha Caroline Lemasle,Pia Peeters
   Estimated Date       13-Jan-2017
   of Approval:
   Managing Unit:       GSU07                          Lending          IPF
                                                       Instrument:
   Financing (in USD Million)
   Total Project Cost: 0.80                          Total Bank Financing: 0.00
   Financing Gap:      0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     Free-standing TFs AFR Sustainable Development                                                0.80
     Total                                                                                        0.80
   Environment        B - Partial Assessment
   Category:

  B. Project Development Objective(s)
  The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the efforts of the GoR to: (i) Demobilize
  members of Armed Groups of Rwandan origin and the Rwandan Defense Forces (RDF); and (ii)
  Provide socioeconomic reintegration support to such members following demobilization, with a
  particular focus on female, child, and disabled ex-combatants. The project includes the following five
  components: (i) Demobilization, (ii) Reinsertion, (iii) Reintegration, (iv) Mainstreaming of program
  activities, and (v) Program Management. The PDO of the original project remains valid under the
  AF.
  C. Project Description
  Project activities under the proposed AF would remain similar as under the current project:

  Component 1: Demobilization. Principal activities include general sensitization and counseling
  regarding civilian life, HIV/AIDS voluntary counseling and testing (VCT), socio-economic profiling,
  and support of basic needs while encamped, including catering services and basic health care.

  Component 2: Reinsertion includes an initial three-month period of assistance to help ex-combatants
  meet their basic needs from the day of discharge. The project provides assistance in accordance with
past practices to ensure consistency and equal treatment of all demobilized, and includes a Basic
Needs Kit (BNK), and Recognition-of-Service Allowance (RSA) for regular military personnel.
Dependents of Armed Groups members are also provided with a Basic Reinsertion Kit, as well as
basic support and rehabilitation services.

Component 3: Reintegration is the process of facilitating the reincorporation of disenfranchised
groups into mainstream society. Assistance includes: micro-project and Vulnerability Support
Window (VSW) grants, psycho-social counseling, HIV/AIDS awareness training, and community
sensitization, support to capacity building of ex-combatants' cooperatives, and targeted reintegration
assistance for children and the severely disabled.

Component 4: Mainstreaming of program activities particularly related to the disabled, chronically
ill, psycho-social assistance to ex-combatants, and services that target children. A key element of the
component involves the preparation, in collaboration with relevant ministries, of a phasing out
strategy to mainstream activities and subcomponents to the various ministries and agencies.

Component 5: Program Management includes support for decentralized structures; regular project
administration of procurement, disbursement, and internal management tasks; extensive monitoring
and evaluation of project activities; and on-going support to reinserted ex-combatants to facilitate
linkages with appropriate services.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will continue to be implemented at the national level. Demobilization will continue to
take place through one demobilization center and one children rehabilitation center, already in
operation for several years. Reintegration will take place throughout the country, where ex-
combatants choose to settle and implement individual small scale sub-projects for income generation.
Given the small amount of money provided for individual sub-projects, potential negative
environmental and social impacts are limited. As ex-combatants supported under the program are
both widely dispersed and a very small portion of the overall population, no cumulative
environmental impact is expected. Under the Additional Financing, the project will continue to
implement the ESMF developed and adhered to under the original project, and revised and re-
disclosed in the InfoShop and in country on December 11, 2013. The ESMF includes detailed
screening mechanisms and mitigation measures for sub-projects.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower has consistently adhered to safeguards requirements during the implementation of the
original project and compliance with safeguards has consistently been rated satisfactory. The ESMF
for the original project was disclosed in country on 02/01/2010, and revised and re-disclosed on
December 11, 2013, and re-disclosed again in country in March 2014. The borrower has also worked
closely with the Rwanda Environmental Management Authority, throughout implementation of the
original project to ensure compliance with environmental safeguards. Sub-projects have been
screened for environmental and social impacts following the screening process described in Section
F I. of the ESMF. Sub-projects were all found to be category C, and did not require the preparation of
ESMPs, but rather implementation of environmental and social measures, as per the ESMF. There
was also no case of involuntary resettlement.
Under the Additional Financing, the project will continue to use standardized screening tools and
mitigation mechanisms described in the ESMF to manage the limited impacts of individual sub-
projects. In order to attenuate or eliminate social and/or environmental impacts, sensitization of ex-
  combatants in the Demobilization Center concerning norms and expectations of civilian life, gender
  relations, and conflict mitigation, as well as HIV/Aids and reconciliation activities in communities of
  resettlement, will continue as under the original project.
  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Grace Muhimpundu (GSU01)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             As with the parent project, OP/BP 4.01
  BP 4.01                                              continues to be triggered, and the
                                                       Environmental and Social Management
                                                       Frameowrk prepared under the parent project
                                                       continues to be valid. Little or no negative
                                                       environmental or social impacts are expected as
                                                       a result of implementation. The project has
                                                       consistently adhered to the application of
                                                       relevant social and environmental safeguards as
                                                       per the Environmental and Social Management
                                                       Framework. Sub-projects have been screened
                                                       for environmental and social impacts following
                                                       the screening process described in Section F I.
                                                       of the ESMF. Sub-projects were all found to be
                                                       category C, and did not require the preparation
                                                       of ESMPs, but rather implementation of
                                                       environmental and social measures, as per the
                                                       ESMF.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
  Pest Management OP 4.09              No
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
  BP 4.11
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes             As with the parent project, OP/BP 4.12
  4.12                                                 continues to be triggered as a precaution
                                                       measure, in relation to construction of houses
                                                       for severely disabled ex-combatants. There has
                                                       been no case of involuntary resettlement. The
                                                       ESMF includes an annex indicating that in cases
                                                       of involuntary resettlement, the project would
                                                       use the RPF prepared for the Land Husbandry,
                                                       Water Harvesting and Hill Side Irrigation
                                                       Project. Since the beginning of the project in
                                                       2009, there have been no case of involuntary
                                                       resettlement.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
  Projects on International        No
  Waterways OP/BP 7.50
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
  7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
  A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
      i. Explanation

      ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
        28-Oct-2016
  B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


IV. APPROVALS
  Team Leader(s):                  Name: Natacha Caroline Lemasle,Pia Peeters
  Approved By:
  Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 08-Nov-2016
  Practice Manager/                Name: Robin Mearns (PMGR)                                          Date: 09-Nov-2016
  Manager:



  1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
  InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
  affected persons.
