ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                  AWorld Free of Povorty
' -lnfoShop
Report No: AC46
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/28/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SAMOA                                    Project ID: P075523
Project: WS-2nd Infrast Asset Mgmt                Task Team Leader: William D. 0. Paterson
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 15, 2003         IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 27, 2003                      IDA Amount ($m): 9.60
Managing Unit: EASTR                              Sector: Roads and highways (80%); Aviation (20%)
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other
Status: Lending                                   public sector governance (P); Environmental policies
and institutions (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
Key infrastructure assets perform satisfactorily with sustainable resilience to natural risks.
Oversight and management of infrastructure, natural resources and national emergency are effective and
efficient, with participation of private sector and stakeholders.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would be designed on a component framework similar to the first phase, to preserve
continuity for the objectives and sub-sector components, although these will be in different proportions
in the second phase, according to priority and need.
A.     Airport Infrastructure: (est. $0.6 million)
This would provide only minor further support to the aviation subsector because it was predominant in
the first phase.
(i)    Instrumented Landing System (ILS): equipment, est. $0.5 million
(ii)   Establishment of airport asset management system: services, est. $0.1 million
B.     Road Infrastructure: (est. $11.6 million)
This would be the main component, continuing the first phase objectives, with addition of improving
network capacity in the Apia environs and access to remote villages.



2
ISDS
(i)    Bridge replacement and rehabilitation: 8 number, est. $4.0 m;
- 2 under construction from IAM-I, 2 designed under IAM-1, 4 identified by
ARNTMS from list of 9 high priority sites (see iv).
(ii)   Road rehabilitation: 30 km West Coast Road, est. $3.0 m;
- feasibility and designs prepared under TAM-I, available by April 2003.
(iii)  Pedestrian and safety facilities: 2 schemes, est. $0.5 m;
- 1 designed under IAM-1, I new to be identified by ARNTMS.
(iv)   Network capacity expansion: est. $2.5 million
- road widening, new construction, or traffic management schemes for congestion
relief: likely to include bypass of business center, connection to port area, access
to Games site. The Apia Road Network and Traffic Management Study
(ARNTMS) during preparation will identify priority, feasibility and cost estimates.
Designs will be done under the Project.
(v)    Remote access: 3 roads, est. $1.6 m
- feasibility studies available March 2003 for Fagaloa Bay (12 km, WST 3.0 m);
Tiavea Road (3.2 km, WST 0.5 m); and Sauniatu Road (6.5 km, WST 1.5 m)
C.     Risk Management: (est. $2.6 million)
(i)    Coastal risk management - preparation of CIM Plans for remaining 28 Districts,
mainstreaming CIM risk reduction programming, incorporate climate change adaptation,
monitoring ($0.33 m).
(ii)   Land and geographic information management - upgrade geodetic survey control
network to cadastral survey standard, revised ordinances and training ($0.25 m);
(iii)  Risk reduction implementation - implement civil works program of sub-projects
identified from CIM Plans, initial list available totaling over $3 m ($1.0 m);
(iv)   Reform of Land registration, information and management - reform of land titling
process, development of land registration and cadastral information system, related
policy and legislation, dissemination and implementation, review of land management
and compensation policy ($0.6 m);
(v)    Natural Resource and Environment management - EIA legislation and regulations
effective, extend environmental monitoring, GIS applications for natural resource
management, sustainable construction materials policy ($0.16 m);
(vi)   National Emergency Management - review and upgrade current disaster management
structure and plans, training and equipment for readiness and response, education
program for readiness, conduct and evaluate emergency simulations, evaluate financing
options for disaster costs ($0.25 m).
D.     Institutional Capacity-building: (est. $1.2 million)



3
ISDS
(i)    Works and Transport Reform - training and advisory support to MWTI, support for
implementation of Land Transport Authority, advisory support for priority land transport
reform actions ($1.2 m);
(ii)   Natural Resources and Environment Reform - included under component C (v).
E.     Project management: (est. $1.0 million)
(i)    Project Management Unit - A central unit under contract to Treasury Department,
comprising Project Manager, Accountant and Administrative Assistant, and Project
Component Managers in MWTI and MNRE.($0.9 m).
(ii)   Auditing - Independent auditor ($0.1 m).
Components:
A. Airport Infrastructure
B. Road Infrastructure
C. Risk Management
D. Institutional Capacity-building
E. Project Management
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            Q Yes O No    * TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               O Yes * No    0 TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       * Yes 0 No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                 0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas



4
ISDS
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sumnmary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. Ia. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Not expected to be major safeguard issues, though will be some possible small-scale environmental impacts
and possible small scale land acquisition and/or resettlement implications. No large-scale or irreversible
impacts.
Il.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment: Initial EA completed and disclosed in-country and to InfoShop.
Involuntary Resettlement: Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework developed and disclosed
in-country and to InfoShop
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders have been involved in project design and preparation at all stages. As a pat of the
preparation of the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework workshops were held with
representatives of local (village level) women's committees (Komitis Tumamas), Pulenuu Councils
(councils of mayors of local communities) and with key government agencies involved in preparation and
implementation.
The preliminary Environmental Assessment has been largely based on an analysis of the utility of the
approach utilized under Phase 1. The process for participation of key stakeholders during
implementation has been outlined above.
The Social Assessment will define mechanisms for ongoing community participation in project and
subproject implementation which will pay particular attention to methods of ensuring that marginal and
potentially excluded groups are full participants. Mechanisms designed during Phase I will be evaluated
and, where appropriate, improved to ensure ongoing participation.
E. Safeguards Classification Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ I SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks



5
ISDS
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. -No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan.'         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/24/2003     2/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/27/2003     2/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/27/2003     2/27/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/24/2003     2/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/27/2003     2/26/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/27/2003     2/27/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan.'                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan.                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosur'e
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             William D. 0. Paterson
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Bruce M. Harris/Person/World Bank      3/04/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                          4/16/2003
Sector Manager/Director:      Jitendra N. Bajpai                          4/7/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
LSEARC      C  L [ Ai Di ACrE K  | eI SHOWCASE



6
ISDS



