                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC647
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/01/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: SENEGAL                                              Project ID: P086480
                                                              Global Supplemental ID: P058367
Project: Integrated Marine and Coastal Resources              Task Team Leader: Yves Andre Prevost
Management Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 14, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: November 11, 2004                              IDA Amount ($m): 10.00
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.00
Managing Unit: AFTS4                                          Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            (100%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Other environment and natural resources
                                                              management (P); Biodiversity (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

  The project's development objective is to increase the sustainable management of marine and coastal
  resources in three pilot areas by communities and the Government of Senegal. Sustainable management
  includes responsible exploitation of resources combined with protection of the ecosystems and
  ecological processes critical for their replenishment.

  The objective is to be achieved through three components:

        i. Management of sustainable fisheries
       ii. Conservation of critical habitats and species
       iii. Program management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and communication


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

  The Project will comprise three components, and the estimated cost of the program is US$16.49 million,
  of which IDA will fund US$10 million, GEF will fund US$5 million, and the Government of Senegal
  will fund US$1.49 million.


Project Component 1: Management of Sustainable Fisheries (US$6.53 million)

  The purpose of this component is to increase the sustainability of fisheries through the use of area-based
  comanagement. Component 1 will include three sub-components:

      Sub-Component 1.1: National level activities to improve fisheries management (US$1.38 million),
                             to enable the implementation of comanagement initiatives.
      Sub-Component 1.2: Promotion and coordination of local comanagement initiatives (US$4.67
                             million) in three pilot areas, Senegal River Delta, the Cap-Vert Peninsula, and
                             the Saloum River Delta.
      Sub-Component 1.3: Institutional strengthening and capacity building (US$0.48 million) to
                             oversee, support and monitor the implementation of comanagement initiatives.

                                                        2
                                                                                                            ISDS




Project Component 2: Conservation of Critical Habitats and Species (US$6.02 million)

   The purpose of this component is to improve the long-term management of Senegal's network of coastal
   protected areas by: (i) developing and implementing management plans for these areas, according to an
   ecosystem approach, and (ii) restructuring the biodiversity management framework. Component 2 will
   include two sub-components:

       Sub-Component 2.1: Managing ecosystems (US$4.45 million) in three pilot areas, Senegal River
                               Delta, the Cap-Vert Peninsula, and the Saloum River Delta.
       Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening the Biodiversity Conservation Framework (US$1.57 million)
                               by preparing a Biodiversity and Protected Area Act, strengthening
                               institutions, and preparing the establishment of a Trust Fund.

Project Component 3: Program management, M&E and Communication (US$3.94 million)

   The purpose of this component is to effectively manage the project. Component 3 will include five
   sub-components:

       Sub-Component 3.1: Monitoring and evaluation (US$2.8 million). The Project Coordination Unit
                               (PCU) will manage aid from donors and partners, ensure efficient
                               implementation and procurement, monitor implementation against indicators,
                               and commission periodic independent evaluations.
       Sub-Component 3.2: Coordination (US$0.1 million). The PCU will ensure the operations of the
                               Integrated Marine and Coastal Resources Management Steering Committee
                               and the Advisory Scientific and Technical Committee. It will also support the
                               cross-sectoral structures necessary in the pilot intervention areas to ensure
                               coordination among various implementing agencies, including joint sessions
                               between the CNCPM and the National Biodiversity Committee.
       Sub-component 3.3: Communication (US$0.3 million). The PCU will develop and implement a
                               communication plan to ensure the flow of necessary information to and from
                               stakeholders on project activities.
       Sub-Component 3.4: Sub-regional Coordination (US$0.1 million). The PCU will coordinate with
                               sub-regional and regional structures involved in similar initiatives.
       Sub-Component 3.5: Activities funded under the PPF (US$0.66 million).


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

   The Project will focus on 3 pilot sites, the Saloum River Delta, the Senegal River Delta and the Cap Vert
   Peninsula. The pilot sites include 4 National Parks, 2 Nature Reserves and a biosphere reserve.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project objective is to improve the sustainability of coastal and marine resources. However,
the Project Team wishes to properly address any potential side effects.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)

                                                         3
                                                                                                             ISDS


                                      Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                            Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                    Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                     Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                       Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                   Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                    Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                               Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                    Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                         Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

   The Environmental and Social Assessment identified two main safeguard issues: (i) access restrictions
   resulting from fisheries comanagement initiatives under Component 1, most particularly for migrant
   fishermen, and (ii) the impact of the reestablishment of natural floods on local populations in parts of
   the Senegal River delta, under Component 2.

   In the first instance, the main risk is that the conversion of the current open access system to a system of
   recognized user rights might reduce the access of certain fishermen to fish resources. The
   implementation of fisheries management plans that set limitations on who can catch, where and how, is
   necessary to reverse the current degradation of fish stocks. Such limitations on access will most
   particularly impinge on the capacity of commercial fish interests to maintain or extend their control over
   fishing activities. The Project addresses this issue in several ways:

       1. The Project will fund sub-projects to implement local fisheries comanagement initiatives
            proposed by Local Fisher Committees. The Project will also support the Local Councils for
            Artisanal Fisheries in the Project areas that will deliberate these initiatives. Stated objectives
            for such initiatives include: (i) resolving local conflicts over fish resources, including access to a
            reasonable proportion of the catch by migrant fishermen, (ii) sustainably managing fish
            resources, by limiting fishing effort or allowable catch, (iii) equitably allocating allowable catch
            among registered members, (iv) protecting critical breeding or nursery grounds, and (v)
            optimizing member income from the sale, processing, and marketing of fish products.
                  Comanagement initiatives might restrict access to local fish resources by local fishermen
            or by migrant commercial fishermen. In response, the Project will ensure that the sub-projects
            comply with the Process Framework (for local fishermen) and with the Resettlement Policy
            Framework (for migrant fishermen). If necessary, sub-projects will be accompanied by a
            Resettlement Action Plan that indicates how excluded fishermen would be compensated.
       2. The Project has reached an agreement with Senegal's Social Investment Fund (Agence de
            financement pour le développement social: AFDS) to establish a Fisheries Reconversion Fund
            earmarked for fishermen who are affected by access restrictions and face declining income. The
            Fund will allow these fishermen to acquire new skills and find alternative employment.
       3. The Project will support the Comité National Consultatif des Pêches Maritimes (CNCPM) to

                                                          4
                                                                                                           ISDS


            serve as the primary consensus building forum among national stakeholders, most particularly
            in regards of the management plans for two key fisheries that will be funded by the Project.
            The ToRs of the consultant that will prepare these plans will include provisions for: (i) a
            process to identify and provide compensation to fishermen that have to reduce their fishing
            effort, and (ii) the identification of potential impacts on women.

   In the second instance, the environmental assessment identified risks associated with the rehabilitation of
   ecological functions in the Senegal River Delta, which could include the reestablishment of seasonal
   floods in certain parts of the Delta that might have potential impacts on local populations. The Project
   does not include funds for this purpose, but it is a stated intent of the Project to promote this measure.
   The decision to go forward will depend on the results of studies (topographical, hydrological and
   development scenarios funded by the Long Term Water Supply Project) that will not be completed until
   May 2005. As a consequence, the risks and impacts of such a decision could not be assessed during
   Project appraisal. It was agreed that support by the Project towards such a decision would be
   conditional on the prior preparation under the Project of an EA and EMP satisfactory to the Bank. The
   Government has agreed to comply with the Project's Resettlement Framework in the event that the
   decision is taken to go ahead with this rehabilitation.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

   N/A


II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

   The main long-term impact would be the reestablishment of natural floods in part of the Senegal River Delta.


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
   N/A


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

   The following safeguard policies were taken into account during project preparation and compliance
   mechanisms identified:

      l Environmental Assessment. An Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out prior to
            Project appraisal. An additional EA will be carried out if the Government of Senegal decides to
            rehabilitate the ecological function of the Senegal River delta.
      l Natural Habitat. One of the main objectives of the project is to conserve and protect natural
            habitats in three pilot areas. The GEF component is designed specifically to address
            conservation of these habitats and the maintenance of their ecological functions. The Project
            does not involve the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.
      l Cultural Property. The Project should not have an impact on cultural property, but nonetheless
            procedures are included in the Environmental Management Plan to address cultural property
            issues if OPN11.03 happened to be triggered during Project implementation. Cultural property
            issues will be included as a topic of discussion during the formulation of comanagement
            initiatives.
      l Involuntary Resettlement. A Process Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework was
            prepared prior to Project appraisal, indicating the procedures to compensate for the reduction or

                                                        5
                                                                                                           ISDS


            loss in access or property, that might arise following the implementation of Project activities.
            The Process Framework may lead to participatory local management plans and the Policy
            Framework might lead to resettlement plans. Furthermore, a Resettlement Action Plan will be
            prepared if the project goes ahead with the rehabilitation of the ecological functions of the
            Senegal River Delta. The Plan would be preceded by a desk review of relevant literature, as
            well as a ground-level opinion survey, to ensure informed and up-to-date decisions on how to
            proceed.

   The PCU will supervise compliance with safeguard requirements during implementation.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

   The full EA, the Resettlement Policy Framework and the Process Framework were publicly disclosed
   for 120 days at the Ministry of Environment and at the offices of the five Regional Development
   Agencies along the coast. They were also posted on the Project's website (www.girmac.sn). The extent
   of public disclosure was praised by Ministry of Environment and by regional authorities, who
   considered it as an example of best practice. The safeguard instruments were also disclosed through the
   InfoShop.

   The fishers and other populations that live along the coast and depend on marine and coastal resources
   for their livelihood are the Project's key stakeholders.

   Several stakeholder workshops were organized to capture stakeholder concerns and expectations, and to
   help build ownership and partnerships. Stakeholder involvement during project preparation served to
   increase the chances of successfully implementing the project. The project's final design incorporates
   the views expressed during these workshops.

   The Project's design provides for the participation of and regular consultations with stakeholders,
   including groups affected by Project activities. Furthermore, the PCU includes a Community
   Participation specialist that will oversee collaboration with the Senegal Social Investment Fund
   (AFDS).

   Stakeholder participation at the national level during implementation will be ensured through the
   GIRMaC Steering Committee and its Scientific and Technical Committee. The Project will also
   support the Conseil National Consultatif des Pêches Maritimes (CNCPM) to function as the primary
   negotiation and consensus building forum among stakeholders for fisheries issues, and the National
   Biodiversity Committee for biodiversity issues.

   At the local level, the Project will support Local Fisheries Councils and Local Fisher Committees. It
   will also support Ecosystem Management Committees for the three pilot areas targeted by the Project.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues

                                                      6
                                                                                                    ISDS


[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/31/2003      01/20/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          02/18/2004      02/18/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           02/18/2004      02/18/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/31/2003      10/02/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          02/18/2004      02/18/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           02/18/2004      02/18/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Yves Andre Prevost                                 10/26/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Robert A. Robelus                                  10/26/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Kristine Ivarsdotter                               10/26/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        10/26/2004
Sector Manager                        Mary Barton-Dock                                   10/26/2004

