Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/24/2005 
Report No.:  AC1449
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Senegal 
Project ID:  P083609 
Project Name:  Agricultural Markets and Agribusiness Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  El Hadj Adama Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural marketing and trade (50%);Irrigation and drainage (35%);Agro-
industry (15%) 
Theme:  Rural markets (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Rural non-farm income 
generation (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.15 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
10.20 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
6.00
22.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Program long term patterns. The long-term objectives of the overall Agribusiness and 
Agricultural Markets Development (AgMARKETS) Program are to  increase non-
traditional agricultural exports from the current level of 13,000 tons to 50,000 tons, and 
double participant producer revenues by the end of the program in 2015.  Specifically, the 
program would: (i) rationalize and improve domestic markets of crops and animal 
products; (ii) promote and expand exports of higher value-added, non-traditional 
agricultural exports (i.e., horticultural products, essential oils, spices, and processed 
foods) in the Niayes areas where the costs of land, labor and water are increasing rapidly; 
(iii) develop private irrigation to support the expansion of commercial agriculture in the 
Senegal River Valley; (iv) revitalize the confectionery groundnut sector and support 
activity modernization in the broader Groundnut Basin, and (v) improve the collection 
and commercialization of fruits and cashew nuts in the Casamance region. The Program 
will rely on beneficiary participation and buy-in to design, implement, and monitor its 
activities through a supply chain approach. The program cost is estimated $150.0 million 
over the ten years.  
Page  2
AgMARKETS Program Phasing  
 
The first five-year phase of the program aims to increase agricultural exports from 
13,000 tons to 30,000 tons, with a 60 percent increase in producer revenues by the end of 
the first phase in 2010. It will deal with major constraints that hinder sectoral 
development in the shorter term and initiate building blocks for longer term development 
prospects. The first phase of the program would: (a) build on achievements of the pilot 
operation and emphasize institutional capacity building; (b) develop human resources for 
quality management, (c) establish public-private partnership institutions for effective 
management of the sector, and (d) define and test infrastructure and business models for 
sustainable competitiveness both in the domestic markets and for export. The primary 
intervention areas would be in the traditional export region of the Niayes, the promising 
Senegal River Delta and part of the Groundnut Basin.  In addition, some pilot activities 
would be carried out in other regions, in particular in Casamance, the eastern regions and 
the Senegal River Valley. The first phase cost is estimated at US$57.3 million for which 
the Government is requesting $35.0 million from IDA.  
 
The second five-year phase of the program would expand on the results achieved in the 
first phase, and consolidate the institutional framework activities for agricultural export 
promotion (Fondation Origine S?n?gal in particular).  Building on the successes of the 
first phase, the second phase would expand the approach to other supply chains and to 
other regions of the country.  Emphasis would be put on: (i) restructuring the irrigation 
system in the Niayes areas with water supply and management system independent from 
the potable water distribution system, (ii) expansion of successful small scale irrigation 
models notably in the broader Groundnut Basin, (iii) development of public infrastructure 
in support of private investment in the Senegal River Valley, and (iv) support to market 
facilities development in the Casamance.  The cost of the second phase is estimated at 
US$92.7 million.  
 
The triggers from moving from the first to the second phase are as follows:  
 
.
The Fondation Origine Senegal- Fruits & Legumes has been created and endowed with 
the horticultural export-related soft and physical assets developed under the  pilot project 
(PPEA);  
 
.
Infrastructures and facilities created or upgraded with project support are under private 
management;  
 
.
O&M costs for irrigation infrastructures are recovered by at least 90%.   
 
3. Project Description 
The components of the project are as follows:  
 
Component A: Improving domestic marketing conditions (US$10.8M) would support 
the modernization of the distribution channels of crop and livestock products, and 
improve food safety in local markets. The target beneficiaries are producers and producer 
associations, trade associations, local authorities, agro-industries and small and medium 
sized enterprises (SME) engaged in crop and livestock agribusiness. This component 
comprises three sub-components:  
 
Subcomponent A1 - Domestic supply chains consolidation would focus on assessing 
market demand (due diligence review) of selected supply chains (onion, banana, meats 
and poultry, oil nuts, processed foods including high quality rice); assisting enterprises to 
Page  3
design well-defined Business Development Projects (sub-projects) that link producers 
through contract farming to market operators in agro-processing and domestic 
distribution channels; and assisting eligible enterprises to implement their sub-projects--
through a matching grant that emphasizes technical assistance and support to strengthen 
capacity of outgrowers and their organizations.  
 
Subcomponent A2 - Rural market infrastructure would upgrade infrastructure of key 
mid-level rural consolidation markets (including Dahra and Diaobe); develop 
concepts/blue prints and innovative management systems for collective facilities for 
handling commercial crops and livestock products; and promote better quality of services 
in such facilities. For demonstration purposes, the project would build a limited number 
of such facilities.  
 
Subcomponent A3 - Knowledge management would develop and implement a 
marketing and communication strategy to generate and disseminate domestic market 
knowledge and information; support training of actors to improve agribusiness practices 
in domestic markets; and help establish improved quality management, grading and 
certification tools in domestic markets.  
 
Component B: Development of Agricultural Exports (US$17.6M) would expand non-
traditional agricultural exports (i.e., horticultural products, confectionary nuts, essential 
oils and spices, and processed foodstuffs) with an emphasis on beneficiaries? 
participation.  The beneficiaries are producers, exporters, their associations and the to be 
created Fondation Origine Senegal (FOS). This component comprises three sub-
components.  
 
Subcomponent B1 -  Innovation and quality management will cover the following 
activities (i) disseminate mechanisms developed under PPEA to consolidate produce and 
market diversification and promote investment through technological, financial, and 
commercial partnership with special focus on small exporter/family farmers engaged in 
contract farming ; (ii) create innovation centers in key locations by upgrading existing 
agricultural services centers; (iii) establish a national management and quality 
certification system (to enhance the traceability of export products and compliance with 
international norms, such as EurepGAP); and (iv) promote quality norms adapted to 
small out-growers? circumstances (referentiel paysan Senegal or SeneGAP) to allow 
them to profitably participate in global supply chains.  
 
Subcomponent B2 - Agricultural export infrastructure would develop: (i) collective 
post-harvest infrastructure and services (e.g., simplified warehousing/packaging/cold 
storage facilities at farmegate level) in key locations, (ii) a dry port and a management 
system for the Saint-Louis Agropole (a multipurpose storage, refrigeration, and 
processing facility in Pal, outside Saint-Louis), and (iii) rehabilitate a container 
handling/freight facility area at the port of Dakar on about 10,000 sq m.  
 
Subcomponent B2  - Building agricultural export institutions would consist of  support 
to capacity building activities for producers/exporters? associations and assistance for 
establishing the Foundation Origine Senegal; monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge 
dissemination (through market intelligence and an integrated and dynamic database); and 
agricultural export benchmarking of practices and costs in key supply chains.  
 
Component C: Development of Private Irrigation (US$17.8M) would promote demand-
driven, pro-poor, investments in irrigation to support the expansion of agribusiness.  It 
would include three subcomponents.  
Page  4
Subcomponent C1  - Support to diversification and private irrigation  in the Senegal 
River Delta would build critical public infrastructures needed to support the development 
of innovative irrigation schemes for crop diversification by private small farm-families 
and large entrepreneurs, thus providing incentives for private investment and support to 
family sized irrigation models. The project will also support local governments in 
administration and land management to secure better private investment. This would be 
provided through donor funding from France.  
 
Subcomponent C2 -Promoting small-scale irrigation in the Groundnut Basin. This 
activity would promote the use of excess water from existing village boreholes and small 
water-catchments dams (basins de retention) for small farm-families to diversify 
production away from traditional groundnut production. Test on adaptable technologies 
will be carried out in the first two years of the project before expanding the most 
successful models.  
 
Subcomponent C3 - Strategic Studies and knowledge management. The project will 
assist the country in assessing potential opportunities and constraints and define a 
strategy for rapid irrigation development as part of the preparation of the second phase of 
the project. Strategic and implementation studies will be carried out for Niayes areas and 
a
master plan will be elaborated for the Lac de Guiers area, and other regions (Senegal 
upper-middle valley and Casamance).  The project will introduce new irrigation 
technologies and production models (including tree crop-based models) which will be 
closely monitored and evaluated prior to scaling up in the second phase. These regional 
strategic studies for irrigation development will also include strategic environmental 
assessment.  
 
Activities under Components A and B would be funded through matching grants.  The 
implementation manual of the pilot Agricultural Export Promotion Project will be 
updated accordingly to reflect the new design.  Under Component C an incentive fund 
(aide imitative) for small farmers would be made available. The Project would also 
collaborate with IFC and local banks to facilitate access to capital for foreign investors 
and local producer associations as well as small and medium agribusinesses.  
 
Component D: Project Coordination and M&E (US$4.05M) would be contracted out, 
whenever possible, to appropriate public or private entities to implement project 
activities. However, a small central Project Coordination Unit (PCU), with two regional 
offices in the Groundnut Basin and Senegal River Valley, would be responsible for 
overall project coordination and implementation. More specifically, the PCU would 
coordinate and consolidate the annual work plans and budgets and oversee the financial 
management, procurement, as well as monitor and evaluate activities of all the other 
implementing agencies. An international firm (Market Integrator) experienced in the 
distribution and export of agricultural products would assist the unit, under the 
supervision of the unites coordinator.  
 
Under this component, the project would finance:  (i) staff and operating costs of the 
PCU and supplemental costs incurred due to project activities carried out by the regional 
executing agencies; (ii) technical assistance provided by the Market Integrator Firm, and 
local consultants on specific issues (technical, legal etc), and audits; and (iii) equipment, 
software and consultant services, cost of M&E including the information and 
communication systems, monitoring safeguards and social impacts, and the mapping of 
outgrowers and service providers in the project areas.   
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
AgMARKETS Program will be implemented throughout Senegal, with a focus on the 
Niayes areas, Senegal river Delta and the Groundnut Basin in the project phase.  
 
The Groundnut Basin (GB) . The GB covers 64.093 km2 which coincide barely with 
administrative region of Thies, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack and the south-eastern part of 
Louga region. It is characterized by a Sahelian-type climate with rainfall varying from 
200 mm to 900 mm, and proceeding into 3 to 4 months even 5 months in south-eastern 
zone. Surface water resources are limited both in volume and quality. But the GB shelters 
two important groundwater reserves: the Eocene-Paleocene intermediate aquifer and the 
deep Maestrichtien with roofs at 80 and 350 m depth respectively.  There are many 
potential sites for small catchments (basin de retention) which present real potentialities 
for development of irrigation. Extensive groundnut cropping and herding, combined with 
chronic rainfall deficit accelerated wind erosion which resulted in environmental 
degradation (soil, flora, fauna etc). Development of pastoral boreholes over the last two 
decades contributed to worsen the situation.  A strategic environmental assessment 
including a groundwater monitoring program will be done by the end of the program first 
phase  and before scaling up promising irrigation/farm models in the second phase.  
 
Niayes. It corresponds to a band of coastal land band from Dakar through the south of 
the Senegal River Delta. It lengthens on more than 180 km on a 10-30 km depth, across 
the regions of Dakar, Thies, Louga and Saint-Louis. Its Canarian-type  climate, the 
availability of an leveling aquifer, access to various services with the proximity of Dakar, 
make the Niayes the  most important horticultural and production and exporting area of 
the country. However, pressure on water resource from agricultural and activities and 
industries, and for potable water, land scarcity resulting from a fast urbanization threatens 
the future of horticultural production in the Niayes, and this its particular wetland 
ecosystem. Niayes are currently characterized by: imbalance between water usage and 
low capacities of renewal of the water table; the deterioration of the quality of water 
because of salinization and nitratation , the pollution induced by the excessive use of 
manure and pesticides, and contamination by the domestic effluents. Technical solutions 
are under investigation with support of the Long Term Water Supply Project which is 
projecting the disconnection of the irrigation supply system from drinking water network 
which would be fed from the Lac de Guiers once ongoing works will be completed.  
 
The Delta of the Senegal River (SRV). It constitutes one wide strip from 10 to 25 km 
along the river Senegal from Saint-Louis to Bakel. It cut across the administrative regions 
of  of Saint-Louis, Matam and Tambacounda. The hydrographic network is consisted of 
the Senegal river itself, and its various branches. The Delta system is composed of the 
Lac de  Guiers, Djeuss, Gorom and Lampsar. With the construction of Diama (Senegal) 
and of Manantali (Mali), the surface water potential is important in SRV. This water is 
however threatened by pollution and the harmful effects of industrial wastes. Major 
development constraints in this area are: salinization that limits  utilization of the table 
water, with low depth and which tends to go up quickly under the effect of the irrigation; 
erosive effects of the winds which involve a important soil degradation; poor access to 
capital for farmers to invest in systems and mining methods which preserves natural 
resources; the presence of many users, inducing a strong competition on water resource; 
Page  6
the presence of many spontaneous irritants for rice cropping, without connection to the 
drainage networks which cause important water discharges on water table.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Irrigation Infrastructures. The direct impacts associated with irrigation canals would be 
waterborne diseases (bilharzia, malaria) and infestation with aquatic weeds (Salvinia, 
Typha, Eichhornia). Infestation by Typha creates habitat for grain-eating birds (Quelea 
quelea) that could devastate rice production. Irrigated agriculture could also lead to soil 
salinization and water pollution by fertilizers and pesticides. Poor water quality has been 
blamed for cattle deaths. Current water management in natural depressions (cuvettes) is 
less than optimal for recession agriculture, for irrigating pastures and for inundating fish 
reproduction zones. Associated to this, excess water that has been diverted away from the 
cuvettes causes flooding risk in irrigation fields, villages and towns. The recent breach of 
the Langue de Barbarie has negative effects on agricultural production in the Delta and 
the Lac de Guiers.  
 
Safety of Dams. The project will not finance any new or rehabilitate dams. However 
irrigated areas in the Senegal river delta will use water provided from the Manantali and 
the Diama dams. The AgMARKETS project will collaborate with the Senegal River 
Basin Multipurpose Water Development Project to ensure that appropriate dam safety 
measures are being applied by the OMVS (Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du fleuve 
Senegal). (Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).  
 
Other infrastructures that the project would develop include post harvest 
warehouses/storage, rural markets facilities, slaughter-houses. It is likely that 
environmental impact of the project would be limited given that:  (i) the targeted areas in 
the first phase are limited  to the Niayes region, the upland lower Delta, and and part of 
the Groundnut Basin, and (ii) technologies that will be used for irrigation and markets 
Page  7
facilities are environmentally friendly.  However, as these infrastructures are defined, the 
Government will address potential impacts following the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF, that has been prepared by the government for 
disclosure in Senegal and will submit it to the Bank for disclosure prior to Bank appraisal 
of this project. Specific EA will be done for each infrastructure investment once known.  
 
Pest Management and pesticides. The project will not finance directly or otherwise, the 
purchase of limited quantity of fertilizers, pesticides or other inputs for demonstration 
activities. But the development of intensive agriculture through the project activities may 
lead to an increase on use of such inputs. A PMP is required for disclosure along the 
ESMF.  
 
Social inclusion: development of agribusiness in Senegal with increasing foreign direct 
investments may lead to a concentration within the sector to the expenses of 
smallholders. In addition, although agribusiness- notably horticultural export? has 
demonstrated net positive effects on women, their working condition in exporting farms 
and packing houses are far from the business international standards.  
 
Involuntary resettlement: Project will avoid, when possible, adverse impacts on people, 
land and other economic resources and on livelihoods. It is not known whether people 
will be affected or not. The Government is preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF), and if needed, a resettlement action plan will be elaborated during project 
implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The key issues raised by the project are the potential impacts in the Senegal River Delta 
of project-supported infrastructure on waterways, floodplains and wetlands With 
development of irrigation infrastructure in the Senegal River Delta, the cultivated areas 
could also expand beyong the project scope and encroach on protected areas (e.g. 
Reserve Speciale de Faune du Ndiael and Reserve Sylvo-Pastorale du Ferlo) and breach 
local laws and international agreements, e.g., the Ramsar Convention. The project should 
comply with relevant safeguards policies and specific environmental assessment done for 
each infrastructure once known.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of Senegal is familiar with the Bank Safeguard Policies, based on 
experience with other bank funded projects, in which the Government successfully met 
the requirements of these policies. Examples of recent projects in different sectors are; 
The Agricultural Services and Producer Organizations Project, The National Rural 
Infrastructure Project, The Energy Sector Investment Project and the Agricultural Export 
Promotion Project,  to list a few.  
 
Page  8
Specifically, with regards this project, the Government has prepared a Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP), a Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PMP), a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Guideline for Environmental norms to be 
consider for irrigation infrastructures. In addition, the Referentiel Quality prepared under 
the pilot Ag. Export Promotion project provides a comprehensive approach for dealing 
with international standards such as EurepGAP for horticultural exports.  
 
Furthermore, the National Environment Commission under the Ministry of 
Environment, in line with its mandate has cleared all safeguards document on June 17, 
2005, and documents have been largely disclosed within country and sent to Infoshop for 
disclosure on June 22, 2005.  
 
The ESMF made recommendations on institutional arrangements and additional 
resources needed for monitoring and implementing safeguards. An Environmental and 
Social Evaluation Specialist will be recruited as a core staff of the Project Coordination 
Unit, and safeguards focal points will be designated in each implementing agency.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the direct beneficiaries (producers and exporters and their 
associations), the "Communautes Rurales" (rural communes) in project areas, 
agribusiness enterprises and service providers, NGO and the project implementing 
agencies (SAED, ANCAR) and technical partners, (Ministry  of Livestock, Ministry of 
Commerce, Direction du Genie Rural, APIX), and NGOs. The ESMF, the RPF, and Pest 
Management Plan have been sent to the project partner-institutions and stakeholders, 
strategic information center including universities, NGO confederation (CONGAD). 
They also have been disclosed in daily news and the project website www. 
iflexsenegal.org, and sent to InfoShop for disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/06/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/06/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/22/2005 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/22/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Safety of Dams: The issue will be taken up by OMVS with the Senegal River Basin 
Multipurpose Water Development Project under preparation with the Bank support.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr El Hadj Adama Toure 
06/24/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
06/24/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
06/24/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/24/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
06/24/2005 
Comments:   
