Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC557 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 12, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P083609 
Project Name: Agricultural Markets and Agribusiness 
De 
Task Team Leader: El Hadj Adama Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade 
(50%);Irrigation and drainage (35%);Agro-industry 
(15%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Rural non-farm income generation 
(S);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Serigne Omar Fye (Safaguards); Demba Balde (Social 
Development) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 25 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
Government of Senegal 
5 
EC: EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (EDF) 
15 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
8 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program aims at creating the conditions for rapid agricultural growth, driven by greater 
competitiveness in domestic and export markets. Achievement of the above objective would be reflected 
in: (a) an increase in the volume and value of agricultural exports; (b) higher market shares in domestic 
markets for agricultural products; ; and (c) greater product  diversification and higher producer incomes in 
the project areas.   
The above objectives would be achieved through the following three set of activities : (i) the promotion of 
highest value added crops in The Niayes area around the Dakar markets where the costs of land, labour 
and water are increasing rapidly; (ii) the development of private irrigation to support the extension of 
commercial agriculture in the SRV area; (iii) the revitalization of the groundnut sector and the 
modernization/diversification of production in the broader GNB. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
With the exception of the Agricultural  exports promotion project (PPEA), The two main Bank operations 
currently supporting the rural sector in Senegal use the CDD approach. These are the Ag. Services Project 
(PSAOP) which focuses on improving the capacities of producer organizations and their access to key 
agricultural services; and the National Rural Infrastructure Program (PNIR) which aims at improving the 
access of rural populations to basic services.  
The proposed project would represent a natural complement to the above capacity building and 
institutional reform efforts. Its emphasis would be primarily on agribusiness development and the scaling 
up of the successfully tested agricultural export promotion strategies through PPEA. It would target 
upstream production conditions, in particular quality aspects, and downstream market opportunities for 
major commercial crops. It would focus its interventions on key bottlenecks along the production and 
marketing chains of the selected agricultural products. 
Page  2
 
 
 
A
. Component 1:  Enhanced agricultural Exports promotion (US$ 15 millions).
 
this 
component would help Senegal realize a significant share of its potential for agricultural exports. For the 
fruit and vegetable alone, this potential is estimated at 50,000MT annually compared to 10,000MT 
currently. This objective would be achieved through the following activities: (i) provision of institutional 
support to private sector operators through the 
‘Fondation Origine Sénégal’
 ; (ii) facilitation of product 
diversification,  access to new technologies, and the opening of new markets through the provision of 
matching grant funds; (iii) implementation of a national Quality Management and Certification System 
for export products; (iv) promotion of private investment in agricultural export; and (v) development of 
collective infrastructure and provision of support services  to promote post-harvest and export activities. 
 
B. Component 2:  Development of distribution networks and support to agribusiness SMEs 
(US$ 15 millions
).  
Under this component, the project would seek to modernize the distribution systems 
for commercial crops and livestock products,  and significantly improve food safety standards in domestic 
markets.  The activities would include: (i) preparation and implementation of a national master plan for 
the development of rural and urban distribution systems (ii) the upgrading and expansion of agriculture 
marketing facilities and services and feeder roads in major rural towns; (iii) the promotion of the use of 
new communication technologies for market information and transactions; (iv) the assistance to 
agribusiness trade associations (Interprofessions) involved in the marketing and export of agricultural 
products; and (v) support to small and medium agro-industries in the areas of R&D and processing 
technologies, active market assessment and penetration, quality management, packaging, and business 
development. 
 
C. Component 3:  Promotion of private irrigation and agricultural diversification (US$ 20 
millions).
 
 
This component seeks to strengthen and broaden the supply base for agriculture products. For 
that purpose it would develop  an effective incentive and support framework to encourage investment in 
irrigation infrastructure by small farmers and agribusiness enterprises. The following set of activities 
would be carried out: (i) evaluation of the potential for small scale irrigation in the targeted areas; (ii) 
support public and collective investment in basic irrigation infrastructure in order to motivate private 
sector investment in irrigated agriculture; (iii) assistance for introduction and adoption of new irrigation 
technologies; (iv) provide technical support services to rise the efficiency of production and encourage 
diversification in the project areas.
 
 
D. Component 4:  Project Coordination and M&E (US$ 3 millions).
 
The implementation of 
project activities would be contracted out to  appropriate public or private entities, whenever possible.  
However, a small central coordination unit (PCU), with two regional operational offices in the Groundnut 
Basin and Senegal River Valley, would be in charge of coordinating project implementation.   More 
specifically, the unit would coordinate and consolidate the annual work plans and budgets and oversee the 
financial management, procurement, as well as monitoring and evaluation activities of all the executing 
agencies. The unit would be assisted by an international firm in the distribution and export of agricultural 
products, whose experts would work under the supervision of the coordinator of the unit.  The final 
institutional arrangements would be finalized by the appraisal phase. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Project will be implemented throughout Senegal
. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Page  3
 
 
The Government of Senegal is familiar with the Banks Safeguard Policies, based on experience with other 
bank funded projects, in which the Government successfully met the requirements of these policies. 
Examples of recent projects in different sectors are; The Agricultural Services and Producer 
Organizations Project, The National Rural Infrastructure Project, The Energy Sector Investment Project 
and the Agricultural Export Promotion Project,  to list a few. 
 
Specifically, with regards this project, the Government is negotiating a grant from Canadian CIDA and a 
PPF with the Bank, to ensure timely preparation of all safeguard instruments. The Government therefore, 
intends to apply part of these funds towards eligible payments to meet the cost of preparing the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
and the Dam Safety Measures Report required of it, by the triggered policies. ( see later sections below). 
 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Environment, will in line with its mandate, review and clear all safeguard 
documents for the Government and will be play a monitoring role during project implementation. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project will finance the construction of agricultural related infrastructure, in 
pursuance of its project development objectives. These facilities are likely to be post 
harvest warehouses/storage, feeder roads, rural markets and small scale irrigation. To 
successful identify and manage potential adverse impacts on the environment from project 
funded activities such as these, the Government will prepare an ESMF, for disclosure in 
Senegal and will submit it to the Bank for disclosure at the Infoshop, prior to Bank 
appraisal of this project.
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
To be determined.
 
[x] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
The project will not finance directly or otherwise, the purchase of fertilizers or other 
inputs .But the development of intensive agriculture through the project activities may 
lead to an increase on use of such inputs. Senegal has set up a national strategy on pest 
management and is currently implementing a countrywide IPM program with the 
assistance of FAO. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the Bank-supported  Ag. Export 
promotion Project contributed substantially to increasing Good agricultural practices 
(BPA) amongst export crop growers. The new project will hand over and broaden the 
Quality management activities  initiated through PPEA.
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Project beneficiaries will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other 
economic resources and on livelihoods. In situations where this cannot be avoided, the 
Government will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), to address the needs of 
people who will be affected by loss of economic activities, land acquisition and/or 
relocation. The RPF will be disclosed in Senegal, and submitted to the Bank for disclosure 
at the Infoshop, prior to Bank appraisal of this project.
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
This policy does not apply.
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
This policy does not apply.
 
[x] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
As the project will finance small scale irrigation infrastructure such as small/micro dams 
Page  4
 
 
and other water retaining infrastructure, the Government will prepare a Dam Safety 
Measures report, to ensure that such facilities are designed,  built/rehabilitated, operated 
and maintained safely and to ensure that a suitable emergency/disaster response regime 
that secures life and property, is in place. The Dam Safety Measures report, will also be 
disclosed in Senegal, and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the Infoshop, prior to Bank 
appraisal of this project.
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
This policy does not apply.
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
This policy does not apply.
 
[x] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
The Government will notify its fellow Riparian in compliance with its membership 
responsibilities of River Basin Commissions/Authorities and consistent with this policy, 
prior to Bank appraisal of this project.
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[X ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
The PCN QER is scheduled for mid-June2004.  
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The ESMF, RPF and Dam Safety measures report will be prepared, approved and disclosed in Senegal by 
the Government and sent to the Bank for disclosure at the info shop by end September 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
El Hadj Adama Toure 
March 11, 2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mary Barton-Dock 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
