Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1404 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/23/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P087304 
Project Name: Dakar Diamniadio Toll Road Project 
Task Team Leader: Moctar Thiam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 11, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: April 11, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);General finance sector (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other urban 
development (S);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
100.00 
 MIGA 
GUARANTEE 
30.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
40.00 
 
FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
70.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
240.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The construction of a main communication axle between Dakar and Diamniadio is intended to 
foster the economic development of Senegal main economic center  by (i) diminishing transport 
congestion and its associated costs in the peninsula; (ii) favoring sustainable spatial distribution 
of economic activities and housing within and outside the Cape Vert peninsula ; and (iii) 
improvement of the housing conditions of the targeted population between Pikine bridge and the 
Fass-Mbao neighbourhood.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists in establishing a high traffic link highway between Dakar (Malick Sy) and 
Diamniadio along the coast.  
 
The strategic choice of the Senegalese authorities is:  
Page  2
(i) 
to complete the construction of the highway between Malick Sy and Patte d'Oie;  
 
(ii) 
to privilege the construction of a toll-highway between Patte d'Oie and Diamniadio in 
order to facilitate traffic in the city, and to help opening up the inner city towards Rufisque and 
Diamniadio. The choices of access and the localization of the toll booths will be made on the 
basis of the traffic and the footprint studies outcomes and  
 
(iii) 
to rehabilitate public equipments and upgrade urban planning of the Thiaroye zone as 
accompanying measures to the ROW acquisition and involuntary resettlement occurring on 
Pikine-Mbayo road segment.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Dakar-Diamniadio, Senegal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
APIX (Agence pour la Promotion de l'Investissement des Grands Travaux - The National 
Promotion Agency in Major Projects Investment), the Government Agency, that will implement 
the project on behalf of the Borrower will contract out the preparation of environmental and 
social safeguards plans  to qualified Consultants.  The implementation of these plans will  be 
executed by qualified agencies with expertise in (i) participatory approaches and social 
facilitation processes at the local level (consultation, conflict management, communication, etc.)  
 
During project preparation, APIX will  hire  an international Technical Assistance to enforce its 
capacity in preparing TORs for safeguards studies and reviewing draft plans.  The TA will also  
provide the  project preparation team with general advice to ensure full compliance with  Bank 
Safeguard policies and procedures.   APIX will further benefit from the assistance of an 
interministerial Steering Committee to ensure project compliance with national legislation on 
environmental protection and land acquisition procedures.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has been classified as a Category A project, since this is a large road project in a 
congested urban setting. The project sponsor will prepare an EA for the selected route. Pre-
project preparation has carried out a route selection study to identify a route with the least social 
and environmental impacts and for the lowest costs (Analysis of alternative routes, which will be 
part of the EA for the selected route). The route selected is the one described in this ISDS. The 
consultant will carry out a Public Consultation on the Terms of Reference (TOR) to include the 
concerns of primary and secondary stakeholders in the final TOR and a Public Consultation will 
be carried out on the Draft EA Report. The minutes of the Public Consultation meetings and how 
these concerns have been addressed will be annexed to the Final EA Report.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The EA consultants will identify if this Safeguard Policy is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
A
rapid archaeological survey on the route of the newly highway will be carried out to 
identify if cultural property will be damaged. During construction a chance find procedure will 
be put in place to salvage cultural property discovered during construction.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
resettlement policy framework will be prepared for the entire project and specific 
resettlement plans for each road segment. The resettlement plans for Patte d?Oie ?Pikine, 
Mbayo-Diamniadio, and the resettlement site of Keur Massar will be prepared and disclosed 
before project appraisal.  
 
The implementation of resettlement plans will be aligned to the civil works planning to 
avoid the risk of displacing people before payment of fair and equitable compensation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/06/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Target date for launching of safeguards studies: May 20, 2005.  
 
Target date for completion: September 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Moctar Thiam 
06/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/23/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
06/21/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
