Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1414 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/04/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P088656 
Project Name: SN-Participatory Local Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Moctar Thiam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to promote the full use of community-driven development 
strategy by all sector ministries, local governments, local communities and the private sector in 
the provision of quality basic social and economic services to the poorest populations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project components. The project would comprise four components: (i) Support to central 
government to develop a national CDD framework, (ii) Capacity-building program for all actors 
to implement CDD, (iii) Local investment Fund, and (iv) Support to  local economic 
development.  
 
Component 1: Support to central government to develop a national CDD framework. The 
project will assist the government of Senegal set up national institutions and launch 
complementary actions and reforms necessary for operationalizing decentralization laws and 
participatory local development policies. Activities financed by the component will include: (i)  
update of the decentralization regulatory and policy framework, and sectoral policies as 
necessary, to include CDD; (ii)  set up and support new institutional arrangements for 
Page  2
implementing the CDD strategy in the country; (iii)  define a minimum package of essential 
services and infrastructures for local governments and communities; and (iv)  support the reform 
of the Fonds d?Equipement des Collectivit?s Locales-FECL (in liaison with PAC-2 and PRSC) 
to ensure an adequate financial transfer mechanism to LGs and communities.  
 
Component 2:  Capacity-building program for all actors to implement CDD (participatory local 
development). The project will support capacity building activities for line ministries, local 
government, communities and the private sector in order to ensure efficient and quality service 
delivery to the poor through the CDD approach. These activities will include: (i) assisting line 
ministries to realign sectoral policies with decentralization; (ii) strengthening local governments 
to efficiently manage resources for service delivery, including poverty targeting, delegation of 
responsibilities to local communities, and community sub-project cycle management; (iii) 
empowering targeted local communities for participatory poverty and needs assessments, human 
and natural resource base assessment, participatory sustainable NRM and human asset 
development, and investment project identification, preparation, submission, implementation and 
monitoring; and (iv) developing the private sector capacities to deliver services to LGs and 
communities.  
 
Component 3:  Local Investment Fund (LIF). The project will finance a local investment fund 
designed to promote a CDD oriented funding mechanism for local governments which may 
overtime be incorporated in a reformed FECL. The LIF will have two windows to provide 
resources: (i) directly to local governments for the implementation of multi-village/high-
sophistication/large-amount projects, pertaining to the LG?s Local Development Plan, (ii) 
directly to local communities (at the request of their local governments) for the implementation 
of projects of single village interest and low-sophistication and ?cost, identified, developed and 
submitted by them to their local governments and approved according to criteria set up in their 
Local Development Plan. The delineation between the two types of projects will be the 
responsibility of the concerned sector, and based on the subsidiarity principle. Community 
projects will include local asset ?valorization?/development projects.  
 
The financing mechanism would be designed to: (i) prepare future Development Policy 
Lending supported by donors including IDA, and therefore, be a workable transition between the 
current project approach and future budget support through PRSC and (ii) ensure that funds for 
community-projects will reach communities and be managed by them. Effective transition 
toward budget support would be effective if the Government agrees to finance from its budget a 
component?s substantial portion, through its regular mechanism (FECL) in parallel to IDA funds 
(Special Account). The M&E system would therefore monitor the comparative efficiency of both 
channels and help progressive improvement of the Government?s regular channel (Benin model). 
Resources made available by the HIPC initiative may be used for this objective.  
 
Component 4  Support to local economic development. This component aims to improve the 
economic status of the targeted communities by providing: (i) matching funds to microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) to build their capacity to better serve the targeted poor clientele, mainly 
through service decentralization and development of financial products and services that better 
suit the needs of the poor, and (ii)  funds to local communities and producers to improve their 
access to technical support to create and/or improve their income generating activities. This 
Page  3
component will build and expand lessons from experience in Senegal PNIR, PSAOP and AFDS) 
and other countries. It will be based on microfinance best practices.  
 
This component?s implementation will be based on the following key principles that: (i) local 
governments have neither capacity nor legitimacy to provide microfinance services; (ii)  
Senegalese microfinance industry has reached a good level of maturity over the last 5-6 years; 
and (iii) provision of grants to communities to start/improve income-generating activities will not 
be used because such grants could jeopardize the development on the microfinance industry 
which is the only sustainable mechanism.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will support all local governments and local communities across the country in the 
context of the Bank's support of decentralization reforms in Senegal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Senegal has gained experience with the implementation of safeguard policies under previous 
operations. The proposed project will strengthen the environmental management capacity based 
on needs identified during the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Mr Demba Balde (AFTS4) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy will be triggered due to the potential negative environmental and social impacts 
related to the implementation of (i) multi-village/sophisticated sub-projects based on the local 
governments' Local Development Plans; and (ii) projects of single-village interest/less 
sophisticated sub-projects identified, developed and submitted by the communities to their local 
governments based on Local Development Plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
In preparing the ESMF, the consultants will determine whether any of the sub-projects are 
likely to negatively affect natural and/or critical habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
In preparing the ESMF, the consultants will determine whether any of the project activities 
are likely to have negative impacts on the country's forests.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The ESMF will provide information on the current status of pest management in the country 
as well as the level of implementation of Senegal's Pest Management Plan.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
In light of the fact that the project covers the entire country, the consultants will determine 
whether any negative impacts on cultural property are to be anticipated.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
In the course of preparing the ESMF, the consultants will det
ermine whether indigenous 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
peoples might be affected negatively by the project's activities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is anticipated that some of the project activities will involve land acquisition, and, 
therefore, the project will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
It is anticipated that some of the sub-projects are likely to depend on water management 
structures such as small dams; these might require rehabilitation to ensure their safety.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The consultants will determine whether any of the water sources to be used by the sub-
projects will include international water bodies.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft ESMF and the draft RPF as well as any other studies that might be required will be 
completed and disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Serge Theunynck 
08/04/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
08/05/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr William Experton 
08/04/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
