Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1550 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/14/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Senegal 
Project ID: P093622 
Project Name: Agricultural Services & Producer Organizations Project 2 
Task Team Leader: Renato Nardello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 5, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%);Agricultural marketing and trade (15%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Decentralization (S);Participation and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.50 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
0.00 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
0.70 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.50
17.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the APL program, in the framework of the overarching objective of 
poverty reduction, is the "sustainable increase of smallholder productivity, production and 
income through technological change". Its long-term vision is characterized by: (i) strong and 
effective producer organizations capable of co-managing the nature and quality of the services 
they receive and pay for, as well as influencing the policy dialogue in the sector; (ii) efficient and 
deconcentrated ministries focusing on their essential functions of policy formulation, monitoring 
and evaluation as well as in the definition of the regulatory framework; and (iii) financially 
sustainable agricultural services accountable to producers and relevant to their needs.  
 
The objective of the first phase was "the establishment of the institutional reforms to achieve 
autonomy and accountability of agricultural services (research, extension) as well as the 
empowerment of producer organizations".  
Page  2
The objective of the second phase (this project) is to consolidate the achievements of the first 
phase, in order to create an environment conducive to increased productivity of selected pro-poor 
agricultural productions (cereals, oil seed, tree crops, and livestock).  
 
Provisional triggers for moving to the third phase (to be discussed during appraisal and 
negotiations) could include:  
 
-
The National Rural Development Fund  effectively covers the operational costs of rural 
advisory services and support to POs;  
 
-
Deconcentration of the sectoral ministries is completed as planned;  
 
-
The Government has defined and implemented coherent Medium-Term Expenditure 
Framework for the agriculture and livestock sub-sectors;  
 
-
The Government has defined and begun to implement a comprehensive rural social protection 
strategy that address major risks and shocks faced by the sector.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project design substantially reflects that of phase one, while taking into account lessons 
learnt and the evolution of the context since the initial conception of PSAOP in 1999. The 
project would be built around four main components clustering some of the original seven 
components as sub-components, to highlight the main thrusts of the project and improve 
flexibility in the allocation of resources. It will maintain and improve the successful 
implementation mechanism adopted in phase one, with procurement activities managed 
independently by each implementing agency, and fiduciary unit providing quality control of 
procurement and coordinating the disbursement process. A simplified coordination mechanism, 
responsible for overall M&E will be added to the design, in order to improve the overall 
coherence and an efficient flow of information between the components and with the Bank.  
 
1.
Support to the Agricultural Research System. This component will include 3 sub-
components.  
 
a. 
National Agricultural Research Fund (NARF). The component will consolidate NARF as 
a
sustainable independent mechanism for the selection and funding of agricultural research 
projects relevant to the strategic plans of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS), as 
well as on themes of regional relevance (e.g.: livestock, soil fertility, pest management, 
irrigation, , etc.). To this end, the component will: (i) review and update the fund implementation 
manual; (ii) strengthen the M&E of the impact of research projects ; and (iii) strengthen the 
capacity of NARS actors, in particular concerning the elaboration of research proposals and the 
use and dissemination of research results.  
 
b.
ISRA (Senegalese Institute for Agricultural Research). The component will strengthen 
ISRA capacities through (i) the rehabilitation and upgrading of regional research centers as 
agreed in the restructuring plan (Kaolack, Sangalkam etc); and (ii) the training of scientific and 
managerial staff, with particular emphasis on young researchers on specific domains where the 
country lacks capacity.  
 
c. 
ITA (Food Technology Institute). The component will strengthen ITA capacities through 
(i) improvement of materials and equipment; (ii) training of scientific and managerial staff, and 
(iii) management of research results (protection of intellectual properties, certification of 
laboratories, strategic partnership for results dissemination)  
 
2.
Agricultural advisory services. Phase I supported the creation of ANCAR, the National 
Rural and Agricultural Advisory Agency and its deployment in 142 out of 320 Rural Communes  
Page  3
(RCs). The component will support: (a) the evolution of ANCAR towards (i) a national agency 
assuring methodological support, quality control, technical information, monitoring and 
evaluation of rural advisory services (for all types of demand-driven providers); and (ii) a 
decentralized network of private and competitive rural advisory services in all 320 RCs; (b) the 
implementation of capacity-building and community investment programs based on the most 
relevant themes (as defined by the demand of Producer Organizations (POs) and the evaluation 
of technical and economic opportunities): cereals, seeds, soil fertility, livestock development, 
tree-crops food and produce quality, marketing, etc.; and (c) the establishment of an information 
and communication system ensuring collection and transmission of agricultural, rural and 
technical information.  
 
3.
Support to producer organizations. The component will support: (a) expansion of the 
network of Rural Consultation Councils (CLCOPs) to all 320 CRs (b) strengthening the 
capacities of OP federations in defining and implementing their strategic plans; (c) strengthening 
the capacities of, and assistance to, POs at local level to gain access to productive investment 
funds and to implement R&D projects; (d) consolidation and expansion of the demand-driven 
agricultural services fund, including funding of productive investments; (e) strengthening the 
capacity of CNCR (National Council of Consultation of Rural People) to participate in policy 
dialogue at national and sub-regional levels on most relevant issues (land reforms, tax and trade 
reforms, etc.), and to collaboration with relevant institutions in elaborating and implementing 
specific technical programs (Rural Young Farmers Initiative, Soil and land Management).  
 
4.
Support to the sectoral coordination. The component will strengthen the strategic focus of 
sectoral ministries (Agriculture and Livestock ) on policy formulation, planning, coordination, 
monitoring and evaluation of public investments in the sector, as defined in the framework of the 
LOASP. To this end, the component will support: (a) the completion of the deconcentration of 
personnel toward regional offices, and the staffing of key central directorates with qualified 
specialists (b) the establishment and monitoring of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework for 
the sector; (c) the implementation of the national agricultural and rural training strategy; (d) the 
construction of new unified headquarters for the Ministry of Agriculture and various 
departmental offices, and decentralized regional offices; (e) M&E of sectoral projects (including 
but not limited to PSAOP); and (f) strengthening the "PSAOP Fiduciary Unit" within the 
Ministry of Finance responsible for oversight and quality control of procurement and financial 
management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will intervene in all of Senegal 320 rural communes (Communautes Rurales).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Senegal is familiar with the Bank's Safeguard Policies, based on experience 
with other bank-funded projects, in which the Government successfully met the safeguard 
requirements. Examples of recent projects in different sectors are; the first phase of PSAOP, the 
National Rural Infrastructure Project, The Energy Sector Investment Project and the Agricultural 
Export Promotion Project, to list a few.  
 
To ensure timely preparation of the PSAOP 2, including all safeguard-related activities, the 
Government has requested a PHRD grant from Japan and will request a Project Preparation 
Page  4
Facility from the Bank. The Government intends to apply part of these funds towards eligible 
payments for the preparation of all safeguard-related studies.  
 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Environment will, in line with its mandate, review and clear all 
safeguard documents for the Government and will play a monitoring role during project 
implementation.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy will be triggered due to: (i) the implementation of sub-projects for productive 
investments; (ii) the rehabilitation and upgrading or construction of research centers and 
administrative buildings; An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared to allow for the identification, assessment and mitigation of potential negative 
environmental and social impacts related to the afore-mentioned activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Project implementation manuals will establish that activities affecting natural habitats are 
ineligible to funding by the project. In the course of the preparation of the ESMF, it will be 
determined whether any sub-projects or construction/rehabilitation activities are likely to affect 
natural and/or critical habitats, and recommendations will be made as appropriate.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
PSAOP already has a PMP in place. The ESMF will include information on the status of pest 
management/integrated pest management in the project area and the implementation status of the 
existing Pest Management Plan (PMP), and will contain appropriate recommendations.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Project implementation manuals will establish that activities in cultural property are 
ineligible to funding by the project. ESMF will determine whether potential impacts on cultural 
property are to be expected or not, and will make appropriate recommendations.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
This policy will be triggered due to the potential need for land acquisition for (i) sub-projects, 
(ii) rehabilitation/upgrading or construction of administrative offices and research centers. The 
project will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which will outline the principles 
and procedures to be followed in the event that any of the proposed project activities involve 
land acquisition.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project will not fund activities associated with large dams. This will be reflected in the 
implementation manual and will be confirmed during the safeguard study.In preparing the 
ESMF, the consultants will determine whether some sub-projects are likely to depend on water 
management structures such as small dams which might require rehabilitation, and make 
recommendations as appropriate   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/22/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related studies will be carried out in the period of June-July, 2005. Disclosure of 
the relevant documents will be completed by August 1, 2005. The team includes a safeguard 
specialist. An official memorandum transferring the project to AFTS4 will be issued by the 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Renato Nardello 
06/06/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
06/09/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
06/08/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
