Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1654 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/30/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Serbia and Montenegro 
Project ID: P093461 
Project Name: Sustainable Tourism Development Project (Montenegro) 
Task Team Leader: Andreas Rohde 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (60%);Water supply (30%);Roads and highways (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Biodiversity (S);Pollution management 
and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.60 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.30
6.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Montenegro in better designing 
and implementing an integrated coastal zone management approach to reduce coastal 
degradation and in the same time foster environmentally sound tourism development through: (i) 
enhancing spatial development, use of natural resources, regulatory policy, institutional capacity 
and governance of the coastal zone, and (ii) initiating priority investments to improve 
environmental conditions and foster development of high-quality tourism.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The scope of the project components is summarized below:  
 
-
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Policy and Institutional Capacity BuildingComponent:  
This component will finance improvements in land-use planning and protection to guard against 
uncontrolled real-estate development which is threatening the coastal environment.  In particular 
it will finance (i) a detailed master plan and ecological management plan for the Bojana-Buna 
Delta with the aim to establish it as a protected area, e.g. Biosphere Reserve, (ii) urban 
Page  2
masterplans, updating of cadastres, integrated municipal management plans and detailed physical 
plans in selected municipalities, (iii) the development of a coastal zone management policy for 
Mosko Dobro,  (iv) TA for the water and wastewater utilities to increase its operation capacity, 
and (v) institutional strengthening for managing the Bojana-Buna Delta.  
 
-
Coastal Environmental Infrastructure Component: This component will finance investments 
for (i) wastewater collection and treatment in Ulcinj, to reduce negative impacts that the 
discharge of wastewater currently has on the Bojana-Buna Delta and to mitigate any potential 
damage from increased coastal development; and in Podgorica, to protect the water quality in 
Lake Skadar; (ii) infrastructure for ecotourism in the Bojana Buna Delta, e.g., bike paths, dolphin 
and bird watching platforms, public sea turtle nursery, information center; (iii) water supply 
improvements to selected high priority areas at the coast, e.g., Ulcinj, in accordance with the 
Coastal Zone Spatial Plan; and (iv) local public tourism infrastructure to implement coastal zone 
development plans.  
 
-
Project Management and Monitoring Component:  This component will finance program 
management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The coastal zone of Montenegro.  The new wastewater treatment plant will be constructed in 
Ulcinj, and rehabilitation of existing wastewater facilities might be carried out in Podgorica and 
other places along the coast.  Water withdrawal for water supply will take place from the 
Bojana/Buna River at or near Lisna Bori.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Environment and Urban Planning is implementing other World Bank-financed 
projects and is expected to have sufficient capacity to implement the Bank's safeguard policies.  
 
In addition a special agency for managing the Bojana-Buna Delta will be created and 
strengthened during project implementation. This agency will add to the monitoring function of 
the Ministry of Environment and Urban Planning.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSIE) 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The borrower has already launched the Environmental Assessment for the water supply 
component.  After a positive review of the draft Environmental Assessment by the project team 
and the safeguards team, the Borrower will disclose the draft and discuss it with the public. The 
TOR for the Environmental Assessment for the wastewater component in Ulcinj will also be 
fully disclosed to the public after a positive review by the project team and the safeguards team.  
The Borrower is currently requesting expression of interests from qualified consultants for 
carrying out the EA.  In addition to the above mentioned two category A Environmental 
Assessments, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental Framework to screen smaller 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
investments identified during implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Although no significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitat is expected, the 
safeguard team advised that this OP is triggered because of the critical natural habitat of the 
Bojana - Buna Delta, which will benefit from the project.  The proposed project will include 
measures to develop the capacity of institutions on the local and the republican level for effective 
environmental planning and management.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The project team will assess during project preparation the likelihood of chance finds during 
construction.  Based on this assessment the project team, together with the safeguard, team will 
review before appraisal, if this OP is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It cannot be excluded that during project preparation it might become necessary to acquire 
land for specific infrastructure investments.  Therefore a Resettlement Plan Framework will be 
agreed upon with the Government which will describe the broad principles governing land 
acquisition.  In addition the Resettlement Policy Framework will include provisions for assisting 
displaced people, should demolishing of existing structures arise.  This is currently not 
anticipated, but may arise during the implementation of the management plan for the Bojana-
Buna Delta, which will be prepared during project implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Because the project will finance the withdrawal of water from the Bojana-Buna River, which 
is the border between Montenegro and Albania, the project team will ask the Borrower to notify 
the neighboring countries about the project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/11/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The draft Environmental Assessment A for the water supply component is expected to be 
disclosed and discussed with the public by end of November 2005, and finalized by early 
January 2006.   The TOR for the wastewater treatment plant in Ulcinj and the Environmental 
Framework is expected to be disclosed to the public by end of November 2005.  Completion 
of the EA for this component and the Environmental Framework is expected to be end of 
January 2006.  
 
Before Appraisal, the Resettlement Policy Framework will be agreed upon with the 
Government.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andreas Rohde 
11/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/15/2005 
Comments:  This is cleared for safeguards at the PCN stage; we look forward to further discussions 
with the Task Team as preparation continues, to affirm safeguards requirements. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
11/30/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
