                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/31/2005                                      Report No.: AC1250

1. Project Statistics
Country: Serbia and Montenegro                   Project ID: P087964
Project Name: IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE REHABILITATION PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Usaid I. El-Hanbali
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 22, 2005         Estimated Board Date: August 30, 2005
Managing Unit: ECSSD                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                 Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%)
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              25.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                   6.97
        LOCAL FARMER ORGANIZATIONS                                           0.73
                                                                             7.70
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]       No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The project's main objectives are to: (a) improve the capacity for increased agricultural
yields through support to high priority rehabilitation of drainage and irrigation
infrastructure; (b) reduce the risk of damage from flooding to land, crops, property,
infrastructure as well as reducing risk of life loss from flooding in project areas; and (c)
improve water resources management and strengthen the associated water resource
management institutions and policies.

 The above objectives are in accordance with the recommendations of current policy
studies, as agreed by MAFWM, notably those of the Policy Advisory Unit under the EU
funded European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR). Key performance indicators would
be: (a) area benefited from reduced water logging and improved drainage; (b) area
protected against flooding; (c) reduced number of population under flooding risk; (d) area
benefited from minor irrigation development; (e) increase in crop production in the areas
benefiting from improved drainage, irrigation and flood control; (f) number of water
users associations and drainage boards established; and (g) finalized legal and regulatory
aspects of water resources management.

 The project would enhance the security of the agricultural sector and improve the
growth base of that sector. It will also contribute to the objective of increasing
employment and income generation by enhancing regional development through creation
of improved and secure conditions for investments and economic activities, particularly
in the areas affected by floods and drainage problems. It will also partially contribute to
the promotion of fiscal discipline by being instrumental in reducing the burden of funding
operations and maintenance by the Government budget. It will also contribute to the
objective of promoting more private sector participation in water management by
introducing the participatory irrigation management principle in the project areas.

3. Project Description
The project size is about US$32.7 million consisting of a US$25.0 million credit, a
US$6.97 million borrower contribution and a US$0.73 million contribution from project
beneficiaries. The project has a five year implementation period. The land benefiting
from improved drainage is about 350,000 ha, with 250,000 inhabitants benefiting from
improved flood protection. The returns to the economy, from increased agricultural
productivity, increased incomes and associated fiscal benefits, and reduced losses from
flooding, would be substantial. The project would include the following four
components:

 Component 1. Rehabilitation and Improvement of Drainage and Flood Control
Infrastructure (US$20.4 million): Rehabilitation and improvement works would include:
(a) rehabilitation of drainage facilities, including pumps and maintenance equipment; and
(b) rehabilitation of flood control defenses to give a 1 in 100 year flood protection for
agricultural and minor settlements, and a 1 in 1000 year protection for large settlements
and industry.

 Component 2. Minor Irrigation Development Program (US$6.0 million): This program
will support the development, rehabilitation and improvement of minor irrigation
schemes mainly in the hilly regions of Central and Southern Serbia. These schemes
would be of less than 300 ha each and total 4000 ha. Selection of areas for the schemes
will be based on a set of criteria, chief among them is farmer's organization into well
established Water Users Associations (WUAs). Beneficiaries of the minor irrigation
schemes are expected to contribute, in-kind or cash, 10 percent of the costs of
construction and 20 percent of the costs of O&M equipment that will be provided ot these
associations under the project.

 Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$4.9 million):
This component will aim to strengthen the institutional capacity of water sector
institutions. It will strengthen DoW capacity in its regulatory and strategic functions,
particularly in the irrigation and drainage sub-sector, and at field testing participatory
irrigation and drainage management principles (including Water Users Associations and
Water Boards). The component will also include provision of various equipment and
studies for other public institutions that have been deemed to be crucial, independently
from the institutional option to be sought by the Government in the medium-long term.

 Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring (US$ 1.4 million): The project will
provide support to the Government to implement the project, including support for: (a)
overall project management and technical assistance in such areas as detailed design,
contract administration and construction supervision, procurement and financial
management, and participatory water management institutions; (b) monitoring and
evaluation of project impacts; (c) development of environmental management plans for
rehabilitation and construction activities carried out under the project; and (d) annual
financial audits of project accounts.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Although the project has a country-wide coverage, all of the drainage and flood control
works (about 80% of the planned investments) will be concentrated in the northern
Vojvodina region, and the remaining activities for the minor irrigation development
program will be concentrated in the central and southern regions.

5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team



6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
An Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared for the project. Specific EAs will be
prepared for the proposed flood and drainage schemes, while a framework EA has been
prepared for the irrigation schemes. Public consultation process was undertaken in
accordance with the World Bank policy and guidelines. Key stakeholders were
identified, interviewed and their concerns discussed and taken into account in preparation
of the EA. The EA was publicly disclosed in early February 2005. The public
consultations to review and discuss EA were held on February 21 and 22, 2005 in
Belgrade and Novi Sad. The final EA and record of public consultation was delivered to
the World Bank in early March 2005 and has been posted in the Infoshop.

 The Bank safeguards policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50) has been
triggered because the project areas involve the Danube River Basin, an international
waterway. The Bank has determined that the policy does not apply to the drainage and
flood control works, because they deal only with existing drainage and flood control
schemes (no new schemes will be constructed). However, project activities related to the
minor irrigation component are considered relevant, because they have the potential to
impact water flows into the Danube River.It is anticipated that the estimated abstraction
for the minor irrigation program would be built up over about 5 years commencing in
2006. The net water quantity abstracted would be about five million cubic meters per
year, which constitutes a negligible percentage (about 0.01%) of the flow of the Danube
River and a very small percentage of the storage volume of the Iron Gate reservoirs on
the Danube River.

 In accordance with the policy, Serbia has requested the Bank to notify other riparian
state countries about the project and its components. The Bank has already sent that
notification through the International Commission for Protection of the Danube River
(ICPDR) to facilitate the riparian notification process required. The deadline for the
riparian state countries to respond was set as of May 15, 2005. At that time it will be
decided either to proceed with the project or inform the Bank management if any issues
have been raised.

 A rapid assessment for the social component of the project was carried out as part of
project preparation. The proposed project is expected to directly and indirectly benefit
farmers within the project study areas. Reliable irrigation water will substantially
increase agricultural output and will help some farmers shift from subsistence farming to
competitive commercial agriculture. The rehabilitation of drainage and flood control
measures will reduce risk for farmers and enhance agricultural output. A major social
objective of the proposed project is to further promote participation and decentralization
in the irrigation and drainage sectors. In particular, the project will support formation of
WUAs and drainage/water boards. In this regard, Component 3, Institutional
Strengthening and Capacity Building will help strengthen institutional capacity of the
water sector. It will help pilot innovative and participatory approaches to water
management by establishing WUAs and Water Boards, especially in the areas developing
minor irrigation schemes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing agency, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management
and its subordinate Departments and Directorates are supported by long established
technical institutes and the universities. These agencies at present suffer from diminished
professional staff due to migration, and equipment and facilities also require
modernization and rehabilitation. Also, there is a need to reorganize the sector and
introduce a more participatory and integrated approach to water management.

 In spite of these shortcomings, there is still a viable professional specialist cadre in
Serbia to sustain the reorganization and reinstatement of agriculture given stability and
funding provision. However, these institutions need to be familiarized and trained on the
Bank's Safeguard Policies.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management,
its Directorate of Water and Public Water Companies, farmers using irrigation and
drainage schemes, and communities living in flood-prone areas. Many of these
stakeholders have been involved in discussions about project design with the consultants
and World Bank staff members preparing the project. In addition, a formal public
consultation process will be carried out at part of the Environmental Assessment that is
currently being prepared for the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03/01/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   02/22/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03/09/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   Yes

  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA      Yes
  report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                        Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification          No
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:                       No
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                       No
  BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                                Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                    Mr Usaid I. El-Hanbali                     03/30/2005
Environmental Specialist:            Mr Nikola Ille                             03/30/2005
Social Development Specialist        Ms Helen Z. Shahriari                      03/30/2005
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Mr Ronald N. Hoffer                        03/30/2005
 Comments:
Sector Manager:
 Comments:

