ISDS
THE WORLD BANK GROUP                                                 AWorld Froo of Povorty
AifoShop
'le Wouhd Rink
Report No AC73
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/14/2003
Section I - Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO                   Project ID: P075343
Project: Energy Efficiency Project               Task Team Leader: Mohinder P. Gulati
Authorized to Appraise Date: July 8, 2003        IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 18, 2003                IDA Amount ($m): 10.00
Managing Unit: ECSIE                             Sector: District heating and energy efficiency
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  services (100%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Climate change (P); Pollution management
and environmental health (P); Access to urban
services for the poor (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives:
The development objectives of the project are to (a) reduce the local and global environmental impact of
the use of dirty fuels for heating buildings in Serbia, and (b) make heating more affordable by improving
end-use energy efficiency.
These objectives will be achieved by financing (a) the replacement of inefficient lignite and oil-fired
boilers, at the end of their economically useful life, with a gas-fired plant at the Clinic Center in
Belgrade; (b) energy efficiency improvements in selected public buildings such as schools and hospitals
throughout Serbia, including selected buildings in the Clinic Center; (c) technical assistance to the
Serbian Energy Efficiency Agency for capacity building, developing a pipeline of projects, institutional
development, public outreach/communications and monitoring and evaluation.
An associated GEF residential energy efficiency project is envisioned. While the IDA project will focus
on improving the functional and health environments of public/social sector buildings, the GEF project
would support the removal of barriers to energy efficiency improvements in residential buildings. The
GEF is expected to help establish an Energy Efficiency Fund (EEF) for providing affordable financing to
the residential consumers to improve energy efficiency of their homes and buildings. The combination of
IDA and GEF support for public and residential buildings, respectively, would help the Government of
Serbia (GOS) develop effective programs and institutions that will facilitate sustainable public and
private initiatives for improving energy efficiency in key building categories (i.e. schools, hospitals and
residences). The two projects will be processed separately due to differing processing schedules. They
will be linked through their common development and global environment objectives, as well as through
integrated implementation arrangements that aim to strengthen the Serbian Energy Efficiency Agency



2
ISDS
(SEEA), which is expected to play a pivotal role in operationalizing energy efficiency policies adopted
by the Government of Serbia (GOS).
An important outcome of this project, as well as that of the associated GEF project, is to support the
Government's program of energy sector reform which includes institutional reforms (enactment of a new
Energy Law, creation of regulatory agencies, restructuring of the electricity sector), gradual introduction
of competition in generation and supply, and stepwise tariff adjustments to levels that cover costs. The
Bank is supporting the power sector reforms in Serbia throgHOrgrlcy Electric Power
Reconstruction Project.However, rising electricity and other energy tariffs are generating concerns
among the population and consequently political resistance to reforms. The project will help partially
mitigate this impact by promoting energy efficiency to contain costs to consumers, without reducing the
derived benefits. The investment in the Clinic Center and energy efficiency improvements in public and
residential buildings will result in substantial environmental benefits by reducing local air pollution as
well as emission of Green House Gases.
Inefficient use of energy is a major concern in Serbia. Consumption of primary energy in Serbia for
every dollar of GDP is thirteen times more than in Germany, ten times more than France, five times more
than Slovenia, and almost twice that of Romania (see Section B.2). Working with the newly created
Serbian Energy Efficiency Agency (SEEA), which has a broad mandate of inter-alia improving energy
efficiency in Serbia, the project will foster partnerships with several other donors assisting Serbia in this
field. The Government of Norway is providing assistance in improving energy efficiency of the
industrial sector, the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) is providing technical assistance for
institutional development and formulation of the Government's policies in this field, the Bank is
supporting technical assistance for the development of an Energy Strategy (including energy efficiency),
the proposed IDA Credit would help inplement energy efficiency program in selected public buildings,
and the multi-donor financed GEF support will help overcome barriers to energy efficiency in the
residential sector.
I.A.3. Project Description:
The project would consist of two components: (i) Rehabilitation of Heat Supply System and Energy
Efficiency Improvements in the Clinic Center (CC) in Belgrade. This component will consist of two
sub-components: (a) conversion of nineteen lignite and mazut fired boiler plants at the Clinic Center to
one natural gas-fired plant for production of heat, sanitary hot water, and steam; (b) energy efficient
retrofitting of CC buildings selected as high priority buildings by the Government. (ii) Energy Efficiency
Improvements in Social Services Facilities This component will consist of two sub-components: (a)
optimization of space heating in selected school and hospital buildings across Serbia; (b) technical
assistance to SEEA for (i) institutional development in monitoring and evaluation, technical quality
control, and external communications; and (ii) to train potential energy consultants in the state of art
methodologies in energy auditing and energy efficiency project development.
Component (i). Rehabilitation of Heat Supply System and Energy Efficiency Improvements in the
Clinic Center. The Clinic Center complex includes 76 buildings with a total covered area of 391
thousand square meters and spread over an area of 38 hectares. These buildings include hospitals,
specialized Clinics, faculties and research institutes, as well as administration, service and storage
buildings. The energy supply services within the CC consist of heat supply from 19 separate boiler plants
(up to 50 years old, usilng lignite and heavy oil) comprisinig of total 72 boiler units with a variety of unit
sizes. The CC's electric load of about 15 MW is supplied by the power distribution company. The heat is
distributed through pipes mainly laid in channel beds either by steam or by hot water. The total installed
capacity of the boiler plants is about 77 MW, and their annual consumption is 11,500 tons of heavy fuel



3
ISDS
oil, 650 tons of light fuel oil and 6,850 tons of coal, for which storage facilities have to be provided. The
CC is connected to the power grid by underground cables.
The Clinic Center boiler plants are characterized by (i) low efficiency, (ii) costly operation and
maintenance, (iii) low reliability of energy supply, and (iv) environmental pollution. By burning dirty
fuels with outdated equipment, the existing boiler plants are major sources of air pollution for the central
part of Belgrade where-they are located and in particular for the patients of the Clinic Center most
directly exposed to its emissions. A feasibility study for evaluation of various alternatives for supply of
heating, hot water, and steam to the Clinic Center and to determine the least-cost solution will be
completed by May 2003.
A few important buildings of the Clinic Center will be retrofitted to demonstrate the benefits of
improving energy efficiency. Remaining buildings will be taken up for retrofitting in a phased manner
by the Clinic Center.
Component (ii). Energy Efficiency Retrofitting of Social Services Facilities.
This would include (a) installation of energy efficiency equipment and retrofitting in public buildings
(schools and hospitals), and (b) technical assistance.
Under the public buildings (schools and hospitals) sub-component, the SEEA and the Ministries of
Health and Education would agree on selection criteria for hospitals and schools, and to invest in energy
efficiency measures designed to have a demonstrable impact on energy savings. The SEEA is expected
to be accountable for the fiduciary and project management aspects of the installations on behalf of the
Ministries (in the case of hospitals), and Municipalities (in the case of schools). The participating
agencies are expected to provide access and facilitate implementation of the project, including ex-post
monitoring of benefits and measurement of impacts.
Investment packages for schools and hospitals will be designed around (i) energy efficiency
improvements and (ii) inter-fuel substitution. For energy efficiency improvements, investment payback
would be 6 to 7 years. Each package will depend on the primary fuel and heating system used. For
schools served by district heating utility, a package of roof insulation, weather-stripping and
indoor/outdoor controller with a 3 way valve yield about a 4 year payback whereas for fuel oil heated
schools the investment package could cover a wider range of measures due to the higher cost of the fuel
oil. Inter-fuel substitution would be considered if significant cost savings can be achieved without
switching to dirtier fuels. This would be the case with light fuel oil boiler conversions to district heating
or natural gas, where available.
Technical assistance would be used by SEEA to develop training, communications, and monitoring and
evaluation capacity that it would use not only for the implementation of this proposed project but also for
follow on activities in residential and other building classes. For example, consultants and contractors
trained in the state of art energy auditing and energy efficiency under the proposed project would be
available for conducting energy audits of buildings and preparing investment proposals for beneficiaries
of follow on projects. This methodology and experience is valid across several types of buildings.
Similarly quality control capacity created in SEEA during project implementation would be available for
follow on energy efficiency projects. The institutional capacity and development of local skills would be
particularly useful to investments in the residential sector that are expected to be supported with the
proposed associated GEF project.
Technical assistance requirements will be more clearly defined during project preparation but the
preliminary assessment indicates the need for assistance for the following:



4
ISDS
a.   Capacity building of SEEA: (i) for design and implementation of a monitoring and
evaluation program; (ii) for technical quality control of energy efficiency investmenit
proposals, and (iii) for design and implementation of a communications campaign to
disseminate lessons learned from the project to key potential beneficiaries.
b.   Training of consultants and contractors in state of art energy auditing and in developing
investment proposals.
c.   Policy studies that strengthen incentives for end-use energy efficiency. These may include
district heating consumption-based tariff methodologies, metering regulations, etc.
The project costs and the Bank financing indicated against each component in the Table below are
indicative, and will be determined once the feasibility studies are finalized by end May 2003.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites
or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Clinical Center (CC) in downtown Belgrade, is the largest hospital area consisting of about 70
buildings, of which 40 are used for the hospital. These buildings are, at present, heated with 19 local
heat sources using mazut or coal as fuel. The existing heating system with old, outdated and inefficient
mazut- and coal-fired boilers results in heavy air pollution in the center of Belgrade. The CC area has
no gas available at the moment. The existing gas pipeline is at the distance of about 3 km.
The energy efficiency investments are targeted all over Serbia, mainly focusing on energy efficiency
improvements in schools, and hospitals buildings in urban areas.
B. Clheck Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments The project will involve mostly rehabilitation works, therefore the category B is proposed. An
Environmental Assessment, including Environmental Management Plan, will be prepared for the Clinic
Center investments. An EMP will be prepared as part of technical design and specifications, and its
implementation included in thle installation and construction contract as well as in operational and
management practices of CC's engineering staff. For the energy efficiency component, the Serbian Energy
Efficiency Agency (SEEA) will ensure that the subprojects meet occupational health and safety regulations,
and environmental requirements of appropriate national and local authorities, and are consistent with the
Bank safeguard policies.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Policy                                Applicability
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                    * Yes O No    0 TBD
Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04)                            O Yes * No    O TBD
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                       O Yes * No    O TBD
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   O Yes * No    O TBD
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               C Yes * No    O TBD
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                O Yes * No    O TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No    0 TBD
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 O Yes * No    O TBD
Projects in International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)         0 Yes 0 No    0 TBD



5
ISDS
| Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                0 Yes * No    0 TBD
*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties' claims
on the disputed areas
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Connecting the Clinic Center to the gas pipeline and construction of gas based water boilers will require
environmental protection measures during the construction works, and provision for emissions control in
the design and operation of the boiler.
The energy efficiency retrofitting projects will involve improvements to heating systems, insulation,
thermostatic valves and other installations in buildings, as well as heat substations and networks. Other
than handling of asbestos and minor construction related disturbances, major safeguards issues are not
expected. Capacity will be established within the SEEA to carry out the subproject EA work. Any large
scale new construction with significant environmental impacts is unlikely to be financed under this
component. However, if such subprojects are proposed, then a detailed environmental impact assessment
will be prepared in consultation with the Bank.
Il.D. I b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
N/A
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project is expected to produce positive environmental benefits by substitution of brown coal and heavy
oil used as fuel in 77 MW of heat production with natural gas based boilers (about 60 MW capacity) and by
providing incentives and investments that increase energy efficiency and facilitate the sustainable use of
clean fuels for heating.
IL.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if rcquircd)
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Bank preparation missions will include, when appropriate, an environmental specialist who will review
activities undertaken to comply with the Bank's environmental policies.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations will be held with the local community while deciding the route of the gas pipeline. Local
communities are also expected to be consulted for retrofit projects in schools.
The project design is intended for continuous learning throughout implementation so as to better
understand the functioning of a demand-side program that is based on public-private initiative in Serbia.
Given its demand-driven nature, the energy efficiency component is designed to be community-focused,
developing institutions (e.g. tenant/apartment owners associations) which will help final beneficiaries
make collective decisions about energy efficiency investments. SEEA will have to overcome lack of



6
ISDS
consumer confidence in government initiatives. Appropriate participatory approaches, such as advisory
groups, public consultation, information dissemination and feedback, will help strengthen consumer
confidence in the value proposition offered by the project. The project will help develop one or more
successful models for replication and scaling up.
E. Safeguards Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or on basis of
cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks
in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
S3. -No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address
safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirenments
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               5/20/2003     Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           5/20/2003      Not Available
Date of submission to InfoShop                             5/21/2003     Not Available
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the ED  Not Applicable Not Applicable
(For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                        Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework.             Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                      Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by      Name                                       Date
Task Team Leader:            Mohinder P. Gulati                         04/21/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Nirmala Saraswat/Person/World Bank   04/21/03



7
ISDS
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Miroslav Ruzica/Person/World Bank         04/21/03
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                   Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                04/29/03
Sector Manager/Director:       Henk Busz                                     04/21/03
For a list of World Bank news releases on projects and reports, click here
LSEAR~CH4  S  I IFEEbSACK III SHOWCASE -AP



