Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/09/2005 
Report No.:  AC1484
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Sierra Leone 
Project ID:  P078389 
Project Name:  SL Infrastructure Development Project (Transport) 
Task Team Leader:  David Stephen Rudge 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 9, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (52%);Ports, waterways and shipping (24%);Aviation 
(24%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.56
7.56 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The provision of sustainable access for Food Security and Poverty Reduction.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A: Road Network. The project will finance the rehabilitation of two segments 
of the primary core road network, Bo-Kenema (63 km) and Makeni-Matatoka (35 km), as 
well as approximately 400 km in four "access-poor" districts Kailahun, Kono, 
Koinadougou and one other), to be selected on a priority basis to provide all-weather 
access from the core primary network to the rural areas and achieve maximum impact on 
food security and poverty reduction. A key element of Government's strategy is to restore 
the essential links as a fundamental basis for poverty reduction, food security and 
national integration strategies. In the context of a PHRD-financed Road Sector 
Management Action Plan, the project will also continue to support reform and 
restructuring of the road sector, aimed at encouraging private sector participation and re-
definition of Government's role away from force account works. This will include 
technical assistance and other support for the above-mentioned Action Plan, built around 
establishment of an independent Road Maintenance Fund with an autonomous Board and 
reorganization of SLRA; and review of management structure of user charge collection 
and business scope of SLRTA in their new roles.  
Page  2
Component B: Freetown Port.  In the context of an Action Plan for Privatization of the 
Port's Core Activities, financed under the previous Bank-financed Transport Sector 
Project (TSP), the project will finance the expansion of the paved container stacking area, 
as part of an incentive package for the concessioning of the port container handling 
operations; plus specialized equipment to meet internationally recognized environmental 
and safety standards (particularly related to navigational aids, oil spills, waste 
management and safety and security management). Through PPF financing, the project 
will support the implementation of the above mentioned Action Plan, involving: (i) 
concessioning the container terminal and licensing the bulk handling operations; (ii) 
restructuring SLPA, including revision of legal status, staff reduction and social 
mitigation plan, development/management of the port's land holdings, establishing 
financial modeling of charges and tariffs and completion of the sale of slipway assets and 
concessioning of ferry services; and (iii) redefinition of the port's technical and regulatory 
functions in the context of its overall reform.  The PPF supported activities are expected 
to extend into the first year of the project; the project also provides for additional 
institutional support to be identified during the course of the project on an as-needed 
basis.  
 
Component C: Freetown International Airport. The project will finance rehabilitation 
and improvements to the runway, taxiway and lighting to safely accommodate modern 
aircraft; and installation/upgrading of the water and electricity supplies for security, 
sanitation fire fighting and back-up supplies. The project will also finance support to 
SLAA's efforts to increase efficiency and competitiveness, through training and technical 
assistance.  
 
Component D: Project Coordination and Studies. The project will finance project 
management and coordination for the three sector-based components, through a 
Coordination and Monitoring Unit (CMU) of the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications (MOTC). This will include financial management, monitoring and 
performance indicators, environmental and social safeguard expertise and quality 
assurance and procurement capacity. The project will also finance a Master Plan Study 
for the International Airport, as well as other studies to be identified.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Core network roads: Bo-Kenema and Makeni-Matatoka (about 100 km); approximately 
400 km of gravel and/or feeder roads will be identified on a demand-driven basis as 
priority links to support connectivity and access within the context of PRSP goals; 
Freetown Port and Lungi International Airport. All road improvements will be made on 
existing alignments and developments for the port and airport are envisaged within the 
existing boundaries of the port and airport.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project components will include activities which have a positive impact on the 
environment and will also include mitigation measures for potential adverse impacts.  
 
Road component  
 
Primary Road Network.  No major environmental issues exist on the project-financed 
primary road investments, Makeni-Matatoka and Bo - Kenema.  These investments 
involve rehabilitation of existing paved alignments, which were constructed clear of the 
long established land settlements with no stall holders or markets along the road 
alignments.  An environmental analysis was carried out and an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan has been prepared.  
 
Feeder/Rural Roads. Since the location of the rural roads to be improved is not yet 
known, an Environmental and Social Policy Framework has been prepared, which lays 
out a procedural framework for implementing the environmental and social management 
process in the selection, planning and implementation of these subprojects.  Although it is 
not anticipated that these investments will involve any resettlement, the Government has 
prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, which will be applied in the event such 
issues arise.  
 
Port Component  
 
No significant environmental issues are anticipated on the project-financed port 
investments, as all the physical works are planned within the port's existing secure 
industrial area.  An Environmental Assessment and Port Environmental Management 
Plan have been prepared.  This includes sampling of the seabed to determine that no toxic 
materials will be dredged.  In addition, an environmental audit will be prepared to 
establish baseline environmental conditions, which will be incorporated into the 
concession agreements.  
 
Page  4
Freetown International Airport Component  
 
No adverse environmental issues are anticipated on the project-financed airport 
investments.  An Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management 
Plan have been prepared.  This included an extensive socio-economic survey of 
surrounding communities, although it was determined the project's scope would not 
affect them.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts include induced development along the improved roads and at 
intersections, as well as an increased risk of traffic accidents due to higher speeds and 
heavier traffic.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Analysis of Alternatives for individual road projects will be carried out with a view 
toward avoidance and/or mitigation of potential negative impacts, identified during 
project screening.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Road component  
 
Primary Road Network.  The design study for each project includes an Environmental 
and Social Management Plan, which assesses environmental issues and specifies 
mitigation measures needed during the construction and post-construction phases. The 
mitigation plan specifies contract clauses for environmental mitigation and measures to 
mitigate the risk of HIV/AIDS and responsibility for regular monitoring and reporting.  
 
Feeder/Rural Roads. Since the location of the rural roads to be improved is not yet 
known, a procedural framework for implementing the environmental and social 
management process in the selection, planning and implementation of these subprojects 
has been prepared. The Environmental and Social Management Framework defines 
standard procedures and methods for incorporating environmental and social concerns in 
the selection, planning and implementation of all individual rural and feeder road sub-
projects carried out under the project. The mitigation plans will specify contract clauses 
for environmental mitigation and measures to mitigate the risk of HIV/AIDS and 
responsibility for regular monitoring and reporting. Although it is not anticipated that 
these investments will involve any resettlement, the Government has prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework, which will be applied in the event that any such issues 
arise.  
 
Port Component  
 
The Feasibility and Design Study for this component includes a Port Environmental 
Management Plan, which assesses environmental issues and specifies mitigation during 
the construction and operational phases. The mitigation plan specifies contract clauses for 
environmental mitigation and measures to mitigate the risk of HIV/AIDS and 
Page  5
responsibility for regular monitoring and reporting. An environmental audit of the Port 
will be carried out with PPF funding, which will establish baseline environmental 
conditions to be incorporated into eventual concession agreements. IDP will provide 
funding for environmental and safety management equipment including facilities for 
receiving ships' waste and equipment to address environmental accidents such as oil 
spills at the port. A study has already been carried out ("Maritime Pollution and 
Legislation") which focuses on management of oils spills in the harbor and other 
contingencies. It was funded by the International Maritime Organization.  
 
Freetown International Airport component  
 
Feasibility and design studies for the runway, turning loops, water and electricity supply 
include an Environmental Impact Assessment and Management Plan, which assesses 
environmental issues and specifies mitigation during the construction and post-
construction phases. The mitigation plan specifies contract clauses for environmental 
mitigation and measures to mitigate the risk of HIV/AIDS and responsibility for regular 
monitoring and reporting.  
 
Implementation  
 
During preparation of the IDP, the CMU has been strengthened by maintaining the 
position of the new environmentalist specialist. This specialist will ensure systematic 
monitoring of environmental and social development issues and assist consultants and 
contractors seeking guidance on environmental and social issues. Recently environmental 
units have been established in Sierra Leone Airports Authority (SLAA) and Sierra Leone 
Road Transport Authority (SLRTA), while the Sierra Leone Roads Authority (SLRA) is 
in the process of creating one. The environmental units consist of engineers trained by the 
CMU environmental specialist. The CMU environmental specialist has also established a 
HIV/AIDS Management Team for the Transport Ministry which includes ministry and 
parastatal officials and other stakeholders, such as representatives of the motor driver's 
union. In general, the CMU environmental unit functions as a resource center for the 
parastatals and provides information and support on environmental issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The two primary project roads are major sections of the country's East/West core primary 
road network, the Makeni-Matatoka road being part of the Northern link and the Bo-
Kenema part of the Southern link. In this context, these investments, together with other 
donor supported interventions, will benefit the population as a whole, but particularly the 
districts through which the roads pass, as well as the eastern, northern and southern 
regions who depend on connectivity to the rest of the country through the core road 
networks. Consultations were held during the project preparation with local officials and 
NGOs in the Southern, Northern and Eastern Provinces and in the Districts of Bo and 
Kenema.  
 
The primary stakeholders for the feeder/rural road investments will be residents in 4 
districts - Kailahun, Kono, Bombali and Koinadougou, aimed at achieving connectivity to 
the primary core road network and selected for maximum impact on poverty reduction 
Page  6
and food security. Consultations will be carried out during the initial screening and 
selection of the road subprojects, as specified in the Environmental and Social 
Management Policy Framework.  
 
As part of the Port reform supported by the Bank, consultations will be carried out with 
employees and workers who will potentially be made redundant under the privatization 
reform. The Airport Environmental Impact Assessment and Management Plan included 
an extensive socio-economic sample survey and focus group discussions of people in 
surrounding communities, although it was determined that the scope of the project will 
not affect them.  
 
The following environmental and social documentation will be disclosed no later than 
April 29, 2005:  
 
-
Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Plan for Bo-Kenema and 
Makeni-Matatoka Roads  
 
-
Environmental and Social Policy Framework for Feeder/Rural Roads  
 
-
Resettlement Policy Framework for Feeder/Rural Roads  
 
-
Port Environmental Management Plan for Freetown Port  
 
-
Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management Plan for 
Freetown International Airport.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/29/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/09/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/09/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  7
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Stephen Rudge 
05/09/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Robert A. Robelus 
05/09/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
05/09/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/09/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
05/09/2005 
Comments:   
