                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                        Report No.: 100634

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           21-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Sierra Leone           Project ID:                  P126180
 Project Name:                  Sierra Leone Energy Access Project - Sierra Leone Infrastructure
                                Development Fund (P126180)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Carol A. Litwin
 Estimated Board Date:          30-Oct-2012
 Managing Unit:                 GEE07
 Sector(s):                     General energy sector (100%)
 Theme(s):                      Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                     No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        16.00                         Total Bank Financing:       0.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     Borrower                                                                                              0.00
     Sierra Leone Infrastructure Trust Fund                                                               16.00
     Total                                                                                                16.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The Project Development Objective are to: : (i) reduce losses in electricity supply in Freetown Capital
 Western Area; (ii) improve commercial performance of the National Power Authority; and (iii)
 increase access to electricity in selected rural areas.




                                                      1
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The proposed new PDO is to reduce losses in electricity supply in Freetown Capital Western Area and
to improve commercial performance of the Electricity Distribution and Supply Authority (EDSA).

3. Project Description
The current scope of the project comprises three components. Component I includes the rehabilitation
of the primary distribution network, loss reduction and improvements of the operational and
commercial performance of the distribution utility. Component II includes a rural electrification pilot
program for the supply and installation of photovoltaic systems in public buildings for 14 rural
villages, and component III comprises implementation management and support to the Ministry of
Energy to strengthen capacity in key project management functions.

Project implementation has been delayed by about 18 months due to delays in the start-up of project
implementation and the outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in 2014. The project has also
experienced cost increases particularly for project management support which are a result of the delays
in implementation, and in compensation for project affected people (PAPs) impacted by the Freetown
upgrade contract. As a result, this restructuring is proposing to eliminate the rural electrification pilot
program (component II) and reallocate proceeds to components I and III to cover cost increases. This
restructuring is also proposing to extend the closing date of the project by 18 months, from October
31, 2015 to April 30, 2017 to allow for the remaining activities, which are critical for achieving the
proposed new PDO, to be implemented.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The key elements of the Freetown upgrade, financed under component I include (i) an increase of
distribution capacity from 11kV to 33kV from the Blackhall to Wellington substation (about 7.9 km)
(ii) replacement of 54 towers and (iii) a new substation at Ropotee with an associated access road. This
existing 33kV/11kV distribution line is located in the Freetown Western Capital Area which is densely
populated with commercial activities and slum settlements. Businesses and residences within the
right-of-way (RoW) of the distribution upgrade route will thus be impacted in varying degrees.

An initial RAP Completion Report was disclosed in November 10, 2011 under the Sierra Leone Power
and Water Project. Compensation payments for 29 households along the distribution line were
finalized in October 2011 as well as the implementation of five livelihood restoration programs
provided for small enterprises. However unfinished segments of the 11kV network between the
Blackhall Road and Wellington sub-stations was restructured to be covered under the Energy Access
Project for completion of rehabilitation work. In February 2012 a site inspection of the right-of-way
(RoW) of the distribution upgrade route was undertaken. Further site inspections were undertaken as
part of appraisal of the project. The site inspections concluded that while compensation had been paid
to PAPs in 2011, most of the relocations had not taken place. Furthermore, more people had moved
into the RoW and new structures had been built.

An updated RAP was prepared in 2012. However, this RAP was never implemented. A social audit of
the previous RAP implementations against the relevant local legislation and World Bank standards
was completed in July 2015. The findings of the social audit confirmed 122 PAPs of which 22 would
need to be permanently relocated. The recommendations from the social audit are being implemented,
including intensive consultations with PAPs, and an ARAP being finalized for re-disclosure by
December 2015. A new cut-off date, January 31, 2015, was established and disclosed in May 2015.
The contract for the Freetown upgrade has been signed but no civil works can commence until


                                                   2
compensation has been paid and clearing of land taken place. It is expected that compensation
payments will be completed by end of November 2015 to allow for land clearing and civil works to
commence in February 2016.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Franklin Kuma Kwasi Gavu ( GENDR )
Gloria Malia Mahama ( GSURR )

6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes            An Environment and Social Impact
                                                           Assessment (ESIA) was completed and
                                                           covered the areas where rehabilitation
                                                           and upgrading of the existing
                                                           distribution line and substations will take
                                                           place. Guidance on control of pollution
                                                           and waste management, especially in the
                                                           substations is included in the ESIA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No             The distribution line and substations will
                                                           not pass or even be close to any
                                                           protected areas or critical habitat,
                                                           including those with any high
                                                           biodiversity.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No             The distribution line and substations will
                                                           not pass through any forested areas
                                                           hence no impacts on forests are
                                                           expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No             No herbicides or pesticides will be used
                                                           in the maintenance of the right of way of
                                                           the distribution line.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No             There are no known physical cultural
                                                           resources in the project area. The project
                                                           does not entail large excavations or
                                                           movement of earth and hence no chance
                                                           finds are anticipated.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No             There are no indigenous people expected
                                                           to be present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         Yes            A RAP Completion Report was
                                                           disclosed in November 2011 for the
                                                           Blackhall to Wellington distribution line
                                                           under the Sierra Leone Power and Water
                                                           Project, which is covered under this
                                                           Project for completion of rehabilitation
                                                           work. During preparation, the status of
                                                           the RoW for this segment of the
                                                           distribution line was assessed. It was
                                                           found that previously compensated

                                                  3
                                                                project affected persons (PAPs) did not
                                                                relocate and new other “encroachers
                                                                have moved inside the RoW. A social
                                                                audit of the previous RAP
                                                                implementation was commissioned and
                                                                completed in August 2015. The audit
                                                                report confirmed about 122 PAPs will be
                                                                affected. Recommendations from the
                                                                social audit are being implemented and
                                                                an RAP is being finalized for
                                                                re-disclosure by December 2015 before
                                                                civil works can commence.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project does not entail construction
                                                                of dams, nor relies on dam structures.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                    The project will not affect international
7.50                                                            waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project is not located in a disputed
                                                                area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No new safeguards issues will be associated with this restructuring other than those identified during
concept stage and confirmed during appraisal. The application of safeguards policies (OP4.01
Environment Assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement) primarily concern the areas
surrounding the existing distribution line which includes 33kV upgrade of the line from Blackhall
Road to Wellington substations. This existing 33kV/11kV distribution line is located in the Freetown
Western Capital Area which is densely populated with commercial activities and slum settlement for
which the project will take into account to ensure that repairs and rehabilitation works are conducted
in an appropriate manner and consistent with the guidelines defined in the ESIA. A social audit was
commissioned to review the status of project affected persons (PAPs) who were allowed by GoSL to
remain within the ROW and the new “encroachers". The results of this assessment indicated that about
122 PAPs will be impacted.

Given these anticipated impacts, the project is classified as category B (partial environmental
assessment).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Removing critical distribution capacity bottlenecks along Freetown distribution network will enable
expanded, stable and more reliable electricity supply to Freetown residents. This is anticipated to
improve social and economic activities. On the other hand, communities living in and around the RoW
of the distribution line and in the perimeter of the substations to be rehabilitated under the project may
expect to receive electricity services, which are not at a direct output of the project. These expectations
will continue to be managed by the project and under ongoing community development programs
through intensive communication and consultations.


                                                    4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The routing of the distribution line in the Freetown area was set up several decades ago and the
distribution facilities to be rehabilitated under the project are already existing and there is no plan to
move them to alternate sites. Nonetheless under the Power and Water project, some of the
transmission line towers were relocated to minimize the impact of the line on the settlements. The
heights of the towers or span above the settlements were also increased, as an additional safety
measure Although the routing several decades ago was designed to avoid densely populated areas,
today the RoW is occupied by slum settlements. The project will continually take into account the
existing physical conditions and ensure that appropriate measures outlined in the ESIA and RAP are
conducted appropriately to minimize any adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Following site verification in February 2012, a social audit of the previous RAP implementations
against the relevant local legislation and World Bank standards was completed in July 2015. The
recommendations from the social audit are being implemented, including intensive consultations with
PAPs, and an ARAP being finalized for re-disclosure. A new cut-off date was established and an
inter-ministerial committee has been specifically set up for monitoring the RoW of distribution lines in
urban areas and ensuring that encroachments are controlled.

An Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared and describes the criteria
and procedures that the project should follow to help ensure compliance with the World Bank’s, as
well as national, environmental and social standards. Guidance on control of pollution and waste
management, especially in the substations is included in the ESIA. The ESIA also identifies the
institutional roles and responsibilities, capacity building, and budget requirements to effectively
implement these measures.

The PMU established at the MoEWR is largely staffed with personnel who worked on the Bumbuna
project and have experience with safeguards issues through previous World Bank-supported projects.
The PMU includes a qualified environmental and social development specialist to oversee
environmental and social management. A safeguard training program was sponsored by the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) in March 2012 and conducted by the Bank’s
Accra-based safeguards team. Nonetheless, the project is planning substantial safeguards-related
capacity-building, including training on the project cycle with roles and responsibilities. A high
priority will be safeguards-related training for EDSA (including the staff responsible for civil works)
to support implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations on ESIA and RAPs were undertaken with different stakeholders, including
environmental government agencies, local civil society groups, and community leaders. The ESIA
results were presented and discussed in several consultations with government and non-government
representatives.

The project also has designed a stakeholder engagement plan and is undertaking intensive
consultations with PAPs and other stakeholders. A grievance Redress Mechanism is functional to
receive feedback and address complaints.

The initial safeguards documents were all disclosed in-country and at the info shop. All updated

                                                    5
documents and reports stemming from the restructuring will be made available to project affected
groups, local NGOs, and the public at large as required by the laws of Liberia and the World Bank
safeguards policies.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  16-Jul-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               26-Sep-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Sierra Leone                                                                 26-Sep-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  19-Apr-2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               10-Aug-2004
"In country" Disclosure
Sierra Leone                                                                 23-Aug-2004
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X ]      No [ ]        NA [   ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]     No [     ]    NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ X ]   No [     ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [ X ]   No [     ]   TBD [   ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to     Yes [ X ]   No [     ]   TBD [   ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                   6
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Carol A. Litwin
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Johanna van Tilburg                  Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Meike van Ginneken                   Date:




                                                 7
