INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SKEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC390
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 21, 2005
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Sierra Leone                  Project ID: P078389
Project Name: Infrastructure Development  Task Team Leader: David Stephen Rudge
Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: April, 2005  Estimated Board Date: September 2005
Managing Unit: AFTTR                   Lending Instnrment: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (52%); Ports  Theme: Infrastructure services for private
(24%); Airports (24%)                  sector development
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Kristine Ivarsdotter
Loan/Credit amount ($ 28.8m.):
IDA: $ 28.8m
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower                     ($ 3.9m)
B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]
Users of the roads, port and international airport will travel in-country and to and from its
borders, via a continuous core road network and through efficient, economical and safe shipping
and air travel facilities. Also, the population as a whole will benefit from improved transport
infrastructure, which will reduce transport costs and travel times and afford access to markets,
essential services and development opportamities. WhVile, improved access will further facilitate
closer integration of the regions and help counter the development differential and isolation of
areas.
C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]
A sector lending instrument is proposed to: (i) fill selected gaps in the overall transport network
as donor of last resort; while (ii) actively supporting institutional reform and management
improvements to ensure sustainable service delivery and maintenance. The rationale for this
intervention is that, as the nation emerges from the post conflict period, there is an urgent need to
establish institutions capable of preserving and managing its stock of basic transport
infrastructure assets, which underpin all other economic and social activities. As noted, this
would be carried out in the context of supporting the SLNTP, as approved by Cabinet, and which
was developed tlrough Bank support. The following components (with indicative credit costs)
are proposed, following satisfactory PHRD feasibility and design studies:



Component A: Road Network (US$ 11.9m). The project would finance the rehabilitation,
resealing or strengthening of Bo-Kenema and Makeni-Matatoka roads (about 100 kin). The
project would also continue to support reform and restructuring of the road sector, aimed at
encouraging private sector participation and re-definition of government's role away from force
account works. This would include technical assistance and other support for the establishment
of an independent Road Fund entity and support to the reorganization of SLRA and SLRTA in
their new roles (Although no co-financing is currently planned, parallel financing by the EU for
SLRA technical assistance will need be coordinated).
Component B: Freetown Port (US$ 5.5m). The project would finance the expansion of the
container stacking area to handle increasing traffic; plus specialized equipment to meet
internationally recognized environmental and safety standards (particularly related to
navigational aids, oil spills, waste management and safety and security management). The
project would also finance support for transforming the Port of Freetown to a landlord port,
through targeted technical assistance to SLPA in organizational restructuring and outsourcing to
the private sector of its non-core functions.
Component C: Freetown International Airport (US$ 5.4m). The project would finance
rehabilitation and strengthening of the runway; upgrading the turing loops to safely
accommodate modern aircraft; and installationl/upgrading of the water and electricity supplies for
security, sanitation fire fighting and back-up supplies. The project would also finance support to
SLAA's efforts to increase efficiency and competitiveness, through an improved MIS and
technical assistance.
Component D: Proiect Coordination (US$ 2.0 m). The project would finance project
management and coordination for the three sector-based components, tlrough a Coordination
and Monitoring Unit (CMLU) of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MOTC). This
will include fiancial management, monitoring and performance indicators, environmental and
social safeguard expertise and technical audit and procurement capacity.
D. Project location (if known)
Anticipated roads: Bo-Kenema and Makeni-Matatoka (about 100 lcm); Freetown Port and Lungi
Intemational Airport. All developments for the port and airport are envisaged within the existing
boundaries of the port and airport.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
AFTS 1 judged current safeguards capacity at the CMU to be weak. During preparation, the
CMU will be strengthened through recruitment of a new environmentalist and social specialist to
ensure systematic monitoriilg of enlvironumiental and social development issues; and to assist
consultants and contractors seeking guidance.
HI. SAFEGUARD POLICIEES THAT MIGHT APPLY
No major environmental or social risks are foreseen. Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP
4-01, GP 4.01) applies. AFTS1 considers this project to be an environmental category B.
Standard screening, environimenlal planning and management will be defined in the



enviromnental and social assessments, to be carried out in the feasibility and design studies
during preparation, and incorporated into the implementation contracts. During preparation, the
Coordination and Monitoring Unit (CMU) will be strengthened through recruitnent of a new
environmentalist and social specialist to ensure systematic monitoring of environmental and
social development issues; and to assist consultants and contractors seeking guidance. It was
concluded that Resettlement (OP) 4.12 does not apply, since it was determined during
supervision in May 2003 that no people or property is likely to be affected by the rehabilitation
of Bo - Kenema and Makeni - Matatoka roads (no impact on cultivations, structures, trees etc).
An Environmental Anralysis was prepared for the roads in 1995 and an EnvirorLmental
Assessment for the Port of Freetown was prepared in 1996. In addition, as mentioned above,
environmental and social assessments will be carried out in conjunction with design and
feasibility studies for the two roads totaling 1t00 km (only minor adverse imnpact is expected on
the bio-physical environment in association with borrow pits and constructor's camps).
Applicable? Safeguard Policy
pp X a e . If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[XI      Environmental Assessment (P/IBP 4.01)
_   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
_j      Involuntary Resettlement (OP[BP 4.12)
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[111    Forests (P5/BP 4.36)
[ ]     Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[I J    Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[ l     Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBPIGP 7.60)t
IProjects on International Waterways (j/BP/CGP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A  [X] B  [ ] C  [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be deternined)
AFTS 1 considers this project to be an environmental category B.
By srupportin g the proposed project, tIe Bank toes nrot intend to prejurdice the fital deter-in cration ofthre parties' clairms oal the
dispuited areas



M. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enlhancement Review (QER): March 2005, at which time the
PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies: The specific studies
for road, port and airport investments will be carried out in conjunction with the feasibility
and design studies, which are planned to be completed prior to appraisal in April/May 2005.
Decision on Credit amount
PCN Review                               November 2003
Preappraisal Mission                     November 2004
QER Review                               March 2005
PAD Review/Decision Meeting              April 2005
Appraisal Mission                        April/May 2005
Board Presentation                       September 2005
Credit Effectiveness                     January 2006
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submittedby:
Task Team Leader:               David Stephen Rudge                   / March 21, 2005
Approved by:                                            /
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Thomas Walton                        è March 21, 2005
Comments
Sector Manager:                 C. Sanjivi Rajasingham                   March 21, 2005
Comments



