Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1481 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/25/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Slovak Republic 
Project ID: P094410 
Project Name: Slovakia E-Government TA Loan (SIDEM APL#2) 
Task Team Leader: Bruno Dominique Lanvin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 10, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: August 23, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Information technology (50%);General public administration sector (50%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
6.53 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the project is to contribute to the government's public administration 
modernization agenda. The project will specifically: (i) facilitate access to government 
information by citizens and businesses, and (ii) aim at enhancing the efficiency of government 
services. The enhancement of government efficiency, the simplification of administrative 
procedures and the easier access to information will reduce transaction costs in the economy and 
provide greater convenience to the users.  The development of e-Government would also help to 
enhance consistency between the central and regional levels of government, increasing efficiency 
and transparency at regional levels, and contributing to reducing regional disparities and 
marginalization of some parts of the Slovak population.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The e-Government Project is expected to be implemented over a period of two to three years.  It 
would finance technical assistance, training, study tours, and, possibly, some incremental costs 
associated with the Project implementation.  The Project would support the following three 
components:  
 
Page  2
(i)  Developing an e-Government Strategy and Framework (approx.  Eur 1.5 million).  This 
component will help Government of Slovakia: (a) formulating an e-government benchmarking 
and strategy, (b) establishing a coordination unit within the Ministry of Finance, and (c) 
enhancing back-office efficiency across the various parts of the GoS.  
 
(ii)  Establishing e-Government Services and Applications (approx.  Eur 1.5 million).  This 
component will help the Government to design and implement services and applications to be 
shared by several (or all) ministries.  These services may include interactive portals, one-stop e-
services, and/or procurement gateways. The World Bank's contribution to this effort would focus 
on providing technical advice on the overall design, implementation and evaluation of such 
applications.  
 
(iii)  Training and Capacity Enhancement (approx.  Eur 1.5 million).  This component will 
provide technical assistance to the GoS in the design and delivery of relevant training services to 
enhance capacity in e-Government.  Such training will combine class meetings/sessions and 
virtual courses (possibly through the use of GDLN).  
 
The project output will be a developed e-Government policy and structure that will be used by 
the relevant Ministries and citizens and businesses to exchange services and information between 
the government and the private sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bratislava (capital) and the regions (TBD)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
not required   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a TA loan; the Project will not finance civil works. No environmental impact will be 
made.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/25/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No specific studies will be launched   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bruno Dominique Lanvin 
04/12/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/13/2005 
Comments:  We concur with environmental classification of "C" category and please have a sentence in 
Section II under environmental assessment that the project will not finance any civil works. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tunc Tahsin Uyanik 
04/13/2005 
Comments:  The ISDS is approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
