INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPTSTAGE
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/23/2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Solomon Islands              Project ID: P152779
Project Name: Tina River Hydropower Development Project
Task Team Leader: Joel J. Maweni
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15,  Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2016
2016
Managing Unit: GEEDR                  Lending Instrument: Guarantee
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IDA Guarantee Amount (US$m.): up to 20.00
IDA Credit (US$m.):        2.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
Private Sponsors                                           120,00
Australia/DFAT                                               2.00
Financing Gap                                               00.00
122.00
B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1.    The proposed project development objective is to lower the system average cost of
electricity supply and mobilize private financing for power generation.
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
2.    The SIG and participating donors consider the TRHDP as a high priority investment that
will help to transform the performance of the Solomon Islands power sector by helping to
achieve a significant reduction in the cost of power and improving the reliability of its supply.
The project would have wider transformational benefits beyond the power sector. These would
include improving the image of the Solomon Islands as a credible destination for international
private finance for infrastructure, introducing innovative approaches to acquisition of community
owned land for project development and introducing a benefit-sharing scheme in a Bank
supported hydropower project for the first time and thus enhancing prospects for sustainability.


﻿Due to its transformational nature, the TRHDP is a multi-donor collaborative effort involving the
Bank as lead agency supporting project preparation, the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
as Transaction Affviser to the SIG, and a number of agencies--the Pacific Region Infrastructure
Facility, the Australian Government and the European Investment Bank all supporting
preparation. These agencies, and the Asian Development Bank and the Government of New
Zealand, are also considering continued support through provision of funding for various
activities during the implementation phase.
3.    In March 2014, independent consultants submitted a substantially complete feasibility
study that included confirmation of a viable site, preliminary designs for the project and a full
safeguards scoping assessment. Government, with the assistance of IFC as the Transaction
Advisor, has subsequently initiated an international tendering process to attract a private
developer.
4.    The TRHDP will consist of two components: (i) a hydropower facility (HPF) with an
installed capacity of 20 MW to be developed and operated by an independent power producer
(IPP) under a [33-year] concession and sell power to the SIEA under a long-term Power
Purchase Agreement (PPA); and (ii) technical assistance to the SIG to monitor and support
project implementation and to develop a benefit sharing scheme.
5.    Component 1: Tina River Hydropower Project Facility (HPF) (Estimated cost-
US$120 million): This component is to develop, finance, construct and operate a hydropower
generation plant with the capacity of 20 MW. The HPF will be located on the Tina River, east of
Honiara. The HPF will be implemented on a build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) basis by a
"Project Company" to be set up by an IPP to be selected through a competitive bidding process.
The Bank will offer a Guarantee of up to US$20 million to the successful bidder, backstopping
certain payment obligations of the government for the project. The HPF will comprise:
a. a 50m-high roller-compacted-concrete (RCC) dam located in a narrow gorge on the
river;
b. a 3.3km headrace tunnel, 3 m in diameter, to convey water from the dam to the power
station;
c. a powerhouse about 3-4 km downstream from the dam site that will house 4x5 MW
Francis turbine machines.
d.   two parallel (on separate towers) 33kV single circuit transmission lines connecting
the power station to the existing Lungga diesel power station; and
e. access roads and other ancillary facilities.
6.    Complementary financing of about US$8 million is under discussion with the New
Zealand government for construction of the access road and transmission line under component I
as ancillary facilities (as above) to be constructed by the project company. Options for
channeling the grant funds from the Government of New Zealand to the IPP are being
investigated. The grant funds would be provided as a capital subsidy that would result in a lower
power purchase price that could be passed on to the final consumers.


﻿7.    Key contractualframework for the HPF: The Project Company will enter into a [33-year]
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with the state-owned SIEA for sale of capacity and energy to
SIEA; and a [33-year] Implementation Agreement (IA) with the SIG, which will define the rights
and obligations of the parties and lay out the legal and tax regime. Under the IA the SIG will
guarantee to the Project Company the performance of the payment obligations of SIEA [and
other Government Entities] under the project agreements among others. After acquiring all of
the land necessary for the construction and operation of the project, a joint company to be
formed between SIG and the four core land tribes will lease the land to the Project Company.
8.    Risk allocation under the proposed heads of terms of key contracts is considered fair and
pragmatic, and in line with international practices for bankable hydropower projects in similar
developing countries, Hydrology and geological risks and adverse variations from the baseline
geological conditions indicated in the Geological Baseline Report (GBR) provided to bidders
will be borne by SIEA. Construction delays and cost overruns will be borne by the sponsors, as
these are commercial risks under the control of the project company.
9.    Component 2: Technical Assistance (Estimated Cost-US$4 million): As part of project
preparation technical assistance is being provided through various Bank-administered trust funds
to support the ongoing land acquisition process and the design and preparation of a scheme for
the affected communities to share in the benefits of the project. Under this component the Bank
and the Australian Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) will provide US$2 million
each to finance technical assistance for the SIG to help develop the IPP, monitor project
implementation, liaise with various government counterparts and other stakeholders, support the
ongoing land acquisition process, and support communities in utilizing their share of project
benefits for community development. A portion of the fuel cost savings [15%] arising from
generating power using hydropower instead of diesel oil will be provided to the communities in
the project area as their share of project benefits. The design, and piloting of the benefit-sharing
scheme will include the preparation of implementation and governance arrangements,
participatory planning, community capacity building, procedural and legal documentation and
other related activities. Additional donor resources are being sought to finance more extensive
support in this area, potentially including a series of demonstration projects (e.g. water supply,
education and health infrastructure), to build capacity for implementing the benefit sharing
scheme in advance of its activation upon the first electricity payment to the IPP.
D. Project location (if known)
10.   The hydropower potential is located on the Tina tributary of the Ngalimbiu River on the
north of Guadalcanal and thirty kilometers east of Honiara.
11.   The project was originally conceived as run-of-river. However, during the Phase I of the
Feasibility Study, several options for location and design were compared. Two run-of-river
options were considered, which have diversions near the upstream end of the Tina River and
involve long tunnels (11.7 and 5.5 km) to downstream powerhouses. Two quite different
impoundment options were also considered --one upstream with a 20-ha reservoir and the
powerhouse at the toe of the dam, and the other downstream. The downstream impoundment
(called Option 6) was identified as the preferred option at this stage on engineering and financial


﻿grounds and was the focus of detailed investigations under the second phase of the feasibility
study.
12.   Initially Option 6 appeared attractive because it would: (i) avoid construction of site and
access roads in undisturbed primary forest that is home to significant numbers of endemic
species; (ii) it would potentially impact river shoreline that is already affected by existing
villages and fishing activities; (iii) the availability of storage would provide more flexibility for
meeting environmental flow requirements both in the reach between dam and powerhouse and
below the tailrace; (iv) it would offer the potential for establishment of a reservoir fishery that
could, if successfully developed, provide a source of protein and income to residents and offset
some adverse impacts on fish populations that would likely occur with any of the options. On
the negative side Option 6 had more potential for social conflict between workforce and residents
and involved more resettlement than the other options. Nevertheless, these social impacts were
considered manageable.
13.   However, Phase 2 technical investigations revealed a number of geological problems
(rock instability, potential earthquake fault, deep alluvium on the river bed; etc.) with the initially
preferred Option 6. With the help of the Dam Safety Advisory Panel (DSAP) three additional
sites (7A, 7B and 7C) slightly upstream were investigated of which one (Option 7C) was found
suitable. The recommended option is further from settlement areas and does not require any
physical relocation of people and is therefore lower risk from a social perspective.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
14.   The project will be implemented through the contracting of a private sector developer
using a "Build, Own, Operate, Transfer" arrangement, and possibly include financing from IFC.
The responsibility for implementation of safeguard mitigation measures will, therefore, largely
lie with the developer and the Bank's Performance Standards will be applied via the triggering of
OP 4.03- Performance Standards for Private Sector. Importantly, the project would satisfy all of
the "Scope of Application" requirements in Clauses 3 - 6 of OP 4.03. Limitations identified in
Clause 7 of OP 4.03 would not apply. It is noted that the World Bank PS will apply to
Component I irrespective of whether IFC is involved in financing the private entity as use of
OP4.03 is linked to the private entity, not IFC. These activities are reflected in Component 1 of
the project. All eight of the Performance Standards would be triggered and assessed as part of
appraisal. The World Bank Performance Standards are:
*  Performance Standard 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social
Risks and Impacts
*  Performance Standard 2: Labor and Working Conditions
*  Performance Standard 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
*  Performance Standard 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security
*  Performance Standard 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement
*  Performance Standard 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of
Living Natural Resources
*  Performance Standard 7: Indigenous Peoples


﻿Performance Standard 8: Cultural Heritage
15.   Under Component 2, project implementation and implementation of the community
benefit sharing scheme will have the potential to have both environmental and social impacts.
Accordingly the Technical Assistance to support the SIG's monitoring of the implementation of
technical, social and environmental aspects implementation of the project and the community
benefit sharing scheme will require that the SIG be supported by skilled and experienced
consultants. The consultants will need to be able to build capacity in SIG on both the World
Bank Performance Standards which will apply to Component I (to ensure effective capacity
development), as well as be able to assist the SIG with effective implementation of the World
Bank Safeguard Policies which will apply to the benefit sharing scheme.
16.   Through its experience in preparing safeguard documentation for the benefit of the
developer, and to support preparation of the project, the Project Office (PO) in the Ministry of
Mines, Energy and Rural Electrification (MMERE) has gained considerable experience with the
oversight and management of the both Bank's Safeguards Policies and IFC's Performance
Standards. Notwithstanding this capacity, the Bank will, under Component 2, support the SIG's
monitoring of the implementation of technical, social and environmental aspects of project
implementation as well as to support implementation of a community benefit sharing scheme.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr Knut Opsal (SURR)
Mr Thomas E. Walton (Consultant)
Mr Ross Butler (SURR)
Mr. Nicholas Taylor (Consultant)
Mr. Real Courcelles (Consultant)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                          Yes       No       TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                 X
Environmental impacts would occur during the construction, operations and maintenance phases
of the project and would occur in locations including the upstream catchment area and the
reservoir, the dam site, tunnel corridor and power plant location, a section of the Tina River
between the dam and powerhouse that will experience significantly reduced flows, and the
corridors of the transmission line and access roads. Impacted areas would also include the
construction areas, quarry areas, spoil disposal areas and construction equipment service areas.
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing all eight World Bank
Performance Standards, beginning with Performance Standard 1: Assessment and
Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts. Government has contracted a
consulting firm to prepare a Draft ESIA as part of the Feasibility Study and tendering process to
attract a private developer. Comments on the Draft have been provided by the Project Office
(including its independent, Environment and Social Panel experts) and the Bank (IDA and IFC).
This ESIA will be shared with the bidders during the tending process (in December 2014/January
2015) so that mitigation actions can be incorporated into bid proposals. The selected developer


﻿Safeguard Policies Trigered                           Yes        No       TBD
will then submit a full ESIA and Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) to
government in order to receive Development Consent from the Director of Environment in the
Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, and Disaster Management and Meteorology's
(MECDM). The Bank will review the ESIA and ESMS and prepare an Environmental and Social
Review Summary (ESRS) prior to appraisal.
During preparation, in July 2013, two members of the Environmental and Social Panel were
contracted. They provide ongoing advice, in particular on the preparation of safeguards
documentation, including the design and costing of mitigation measures. Terms of Reference for
consultants advising the government on environment and social safeguard risks will continue to
be approved by the Bank to ensure the requirements of the World Bank PS and safeguards
policies are effectively integrated into the TA work under Component 2.
For Component 2, OP 4.01 is triggered as activities undertaken by the government, namely land
acquisition and the design and potential piloting of a benefit sharing scheme, may result in some
environmental and social impacts. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), drawing upon the mechanisms and lessons from the Rural Development
Program (which is currently financing small scale infrastructure in rural areas), will be prepared
prior to appraisal to manage these impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                     X
In preparation of the ESIA, fauna, flora and fish surveys have been carried out and project
affected communities have been extensively consulted through social surveys and mitigation
workshops. The main impact during operations would be on aquatic ecology, related to the
presence of the dam, an impassable obstacle to all fish due to its height. Alike other tropical
islands of the Indo-pacific, all native species encountered in inland fresh water are migratory
species with a life cycle between ocean and river. The draft ESIA concludes that while the upper
catchment plays an important role in fish life cycle it is not considered to be a critical one since
the fish do not show homing behavior (meaning that juveniles will colonize any rivers and not
only their native one), and the Tina River mouth is more critical to life cycle than upstream areas
being the only entry point to all fishes in the catchment. The draft ESMP proposes mitigation
measures such as an adjustable environmental flow (riparian flow), fish pass(es) targeting
juveniles of "climbing species"(gobbies, eels, prawns), protective devices for fish mortality in
turbines and fish monitoring, to allow major impacts to be mitigated to moderate significance.
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing PS 6, Biodiversity
Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources. Terms of Reference
for consultants advising government on topics related to this PS will be approved by the Bank to
ensure the requirements of the Performance Standards are effectively integrated into the TA
work under Component 2.
While the draft ESIA states that the Tina River catchment, including the upstream areas, is not a
critical natural habitat, the Project Office is supporting the expressed interests of affected
communities to establish a Protected Area in, and perhaps beyond the project area, and has
engaged the American Museum of Natural History's Department of Conservation and
Biodiversity as a partner in this effort.


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes        No        TBD
For Component 2, minor impacts on natural habitats may be created by small projects associated
with the benefit sharing scheme. These will be captured by the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) to be prepared prior to appraisal.
Forests (OP/BP,4.36)                                               X
Many areas on the left bank of Tina River have been logged, and some of the project area, in
particular the banks of the reservoir, is too steep to be accessible for logging. Nonetheless,
erosion due to logging is an important concern for the local population, as the slope is steep,
erosion quickly affects water quality of the river. Being located upstream from the dam site,
logging activity represents a potential threat to water quality and could increase siltation
processes in the reservoir and create landslides. The draft ESIA estimates that 5.85 ha of
undisturbed forest (mainly for quarry sites), 10.42 ha of disturbed forest, and 3.56 ha of remnant
forest would be affected by project construction. Due to the poor reputation of this industry in
the Solomon Islands and Guadalcanal, the draft ESIA recommends that the company responsible
for logging of project sites be subject to the strict contractual measures and best environmental
and social management practices, and that all its activity be monitored by an independent
environmental expert. Good practices such as keeping the canopy "sealed" by minimizing large
tree clearing to maintain canopy connectivity and reduce the edge effect are also recommended
and will be costed as part of the ESMP.
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing Performance Standard 6,
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources. Terms
of Reference for consultants advising on topics related to this PS will be approved by the Bank to
ensure the requirements of the Performance Standards are effectively integrated into the. TA
work under Component 2. Very small impacts on forests may result from small projects
associated with the benefit sharing scheme. These will be captured by the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be prepared prior to appraisal.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                          X
Neither Components I nor 2 will involve, or promote, pesticide use.
Physical Cultural Resources. (OP/BP 4.11)                          X
There are numerous tambu sites in the project area, many of which have been identified during
the Social Impact Assessment part of the draft ESIA. These are sites that have local spiritual,
historical, or other cultural importance and are considered sacred or restricted as to use or access.
The draft ESIA recommends that prior to any construction commencing, the government or
project developer carries out a survey to identify cultural heritage, tambu sites in the construction
areas. A suitably qualified heritage expert, working closely with knowledgeable elders and the
National Museum, should undertake this survey. All sites should be recorded and photographed
for monitoring purposes, but the details of the sites should remain confidential. This work has
already commenced as part of the land acquisition process, in identifying all assets of the tribes
occupying the core land area. Prior to construction, it is also recommended that the developer, in
conjunction with culturally knowledgeable locals and a botanist, should also survey the project
and road construction sites to identify culturally important medicinal and magical plants that may
need to be protected or relocated. A requirement for chance find procedures will also be included
in all bidding documents for the developer.


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes        No       TBD
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing Performance Standard 8:
Cultural Heritage. Terms of Reference for consultants advising on topics related to this PS will
be approved by the Bank to ensure the requirements of the Performance Standards are effectively
integrated into the TA work under Component 2.
For Component 2, some minor impacts are possible, albeit unlikely because of direct community
involvement in any development project. These will be managed via chance-find provisions in
the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                         X
As outlined in the ESIA Baseline Report, several groups or communities could be affected by the
project, including: the indigenous Malango people of the Bahomea district who own and occupy
the 'core land area' for the project; the indigenous Malango people of Malango district, some of
whom are customary 'shareholders' in the core area; the 'settler' Guale people in the Bahomea
district; the indigenous coastal Ghaobata people of the Guadalcanal Plains, and; 'squatter'
peoples of various origins, who are living on 'unoccupied' government/alienated land in the
northern part of the project area without the formal approval of the local indigenous customary
tribes. For the purposes of the social impact assessment and social safeguards compliance, the
vast majority of groups resident in the project area can be considered indigenous Solomon
Islanders.
Throughout project preparation, the Project Office has been engaged in extensive consultations
with affected indigenous communities, guided by the use of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan.
Numerous community consultations and meetings with a range of stakeholder groups on a range
of topics have been carried out during project preparation and these have been carefully
documented by the Project Office through reports, surveys, photos and videos. As part of the
land acquisition process, the Project Office has also worked with indigenous groups to identify
the tribes that are landowners of the core land area which has already been acquired by
government. The land identification process which has involved chiefs and storytellers who are
cognizant of the history of the land was initiated in November 2012. A number of meetings -
which were open to community members - were convened to reach consensus on ownership and
boundaries. This indigenous initiative has been of critical importance, not only because an
agreement has been reached on boundaries required for the subsequent land acquisition, but
perhaps more importantly because of the participatory process through which consensus was
achieved. The land identification process has also led to the emergence of legitimate community
leaders that can speak on behalf of the affected tribes which will be critical during the land
acquisition and benefit sharing processes.
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing Performance Standard 7:
Indigenous Peoples. Terms of Reference for consultants advising on topics related to this PS
will be approved by the Bank to ensure the requirements of the Performance Standards are
effectively integrated into the TA work under Component 2.
Under Component 2, IP communities will be affected by the project, government land
acquisition and benefit sharing arrangements. The ESMF will include provisions to incorporate
elements of an IPP into overall project design. Since the vast majority of potentially affected


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes        No       TBD
population is indigenous, no separate instrument - in addition to the social assessment - will be
required, but relevant elements of the policy are being integrated into project design and will be
summarized in the PAD.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                   X
The project will not cause any physical displacement requiring relocation. Based on the technical
design in the final feasibility study, the minimum area required for the hydroelectric plant and
auxiliary facilities, the transmission towers and lines, and during construction, for the access
roads, quarries, construction camps, and disposal sites has been identified and referred to as the
"core land area."
The Land and Titles Act provides two different ways by which the Government through the
Commissioner of Lands may acquire land. Part V (Division 1) provides a process through the use
of a Land Acquisition Officer who is appointed by the Commissioner. However, the experience
of the indigenous owners has been that this process does not lead the parties whom they consider
the "rightful' owners being correctly identified and dealt with in a culturally appropriate manner.
In an effort to address shortcoming, the government has approached the land acquisition process
through the use of another statutory process, one that exercises the provisions of Part V (Division
2), compulsory acquisition for public purpose.
Following an extensive consultation process with local stakeholders, the government has as
discussed above facilitated land identification by indigenous groups in the core land area.
Through the signing of a Process Agreement with the four identified tribes (Kochiabolo, Roha,
Buhu Garo and Vuralingi) in August 2014 they confirmed their agreement for the Government to
acquire the land for the purposes of the project. Subsequent to signing the Process Agreement,
Government acquired the core land, and it is now vested in the Commissioner of Lands.
Government is now proceeding with the statutory procedures under Division 2, beginning with
the registering of claims by parties claiming to have an interest in the acquired land. According
to the Act, parties have 3 months to lodge claims for compensation, and upon receiving such
claims, the Commissioner has 3 months to decide upon the compensation to be paid. Parties who
are in disagreement with the Commissioner's decision on compensation can appeal such a
decision to the High Court. It is important to emphasize that the signing of the Process
Agreement and the consensus on the statutory process would not have been possible without the
successful indigenous land identification process which in turn was based on many years of in-
depth stakeholder engagement.
To ensure that the compulsory land acquisition is in line with Bank, the Bank will undertake a
due diligence prior to Board. The due diligence would assess among other things eligibility of
land claims, compensation criteria, consultation process, access to grievance redress mechanisms
and livelihood restoration. The due diligence would further identify gaps between ongoing land
acquisition and the agreement and propose a corrective action plan if needed to address
discrepancies between WB land acquisition policies and the land acquisition that has taken place
or is ongoing. The Government will contract a consultant to prepare a Land Acquisition and
Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP) to ensure that affected individuals will have their livelihoods
restored, as necessary. The draft LARAP will be disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop prior
to appraisal, after review and approval by the Bank.


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes        No       TBD
Beyond the compensation provided by the Government for land claims, and the benefits
provided for in the Process Agreement, affected communities in the broader project area,
including downstream, will receive benefits from a benefit sharing scheme which Government
will develop with the affected indigenous peoples communities. Benefit sharing will be based on
project revenue, calculated based on a transparent formula with a mechanism for periodic review
and SIG will guarantee the communities a minimum level of annual benefits, a feature that will
provide predictability of revenue flows for the communities and facilitate their planning of
community projects. The scheme will not be fully implemented until payments for electricity
commence under the Power Purchase Agreement. In the meantime, government has already
begun to finance the delivery of benefits to the affected indigenous communities (e.g.
rehabilitation of schools and roads), and they are seeking support from donors to develop the
governance, legal and procedural arrangements, community capacity, and some demonstration
projects in advance of the launch of the scheme upon the first electricity payment. The benefit
sharing scheme is expected to be delivered in a highly consultative - community driven manner.
Involuntary resettlement is not expected to occur as part of the scheme.
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing any responsibilities that fall
beyond government's responsibility via its acquisition of land through compliance with
Performance Standard 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. Terms of Reference
for consultants advising on topics related to this PS will be approved by the Bank to ensure the
requirements of the Performance Standards are effectively integrated into the TA work under
Component 2.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                             X
For Component 1, the developer will be responsible for addressing Performance Standard 4:
Community Health, Safety and Security. Terms of Reference for consultants advising on topics
related to this PS will be approved by the Bank to ensure the requirements of the Performance
Standards are effectively integrated into the TA work under Component 2.
As part of project preparation, in July 2013, the Project Office contracted three international
experts, approved by the Bank, as members of the Dam Safety Advisory Panel, basing the
Panel's terms of reference on World Bank OP/BP 4.37. The members of the Panel provide
ongoing advice on technical aspects of the project. They have been particularly active in advising
on the completion of the Feasibility Study, including the preparation of a Geotechnical Baseline
Study which will be included in the bidding documents. The Panel members also played an
instrumental role in the selection of the final preferred location for the dam and other facilities,
recommending a site which was further upstream than the site which the Feasibility Study
consultants were investigating, but which turned out to have superior physical characteristics as
well as more favorable financial and economic returns.
As part of Component 2, the Panel will continue to advise the Project Office, and government
more broadly, through contracting, construction and initial operations.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50                    X
The Tina River is neither an international waterway nor a tributary to one.


﻿Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes        No       TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                        1   X
The project's area of influence lies entirely within the national boundaries of the Solomon
Islands and is not subject to any territorial dispute.
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN (UPDATE)
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared: N/A
B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
January 31, 2016.
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
For Component I the ESIA, incorporating a detailed social assessment and management plan, is
at an advanced stage of preparation and will be completed and made available to bidders by
December 31, 2014. Formal completion and approval of the ESIA and issuance of a
development consent by the government cannot occur before the investor is selected which is
planned for June 2015. This is because the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Disaster
Management and Meteorology (MECDM) does not allow the transfer of development consent; it
must be issued to the actual developer. However, the MECDM's participation in an early review
of the draft ESIA documents, in advance of official submission by the developer, will facilitate
more rapid approval of the study and issuance of development consent to the developer.
For Component 2 technical assistance is being provided to advise the SIG on the design and
implementation of the land framework agreement as well as the design and implementation of
the benefit sharing agreement. This work will be completed by December 31, 2015. A work
plan to this effect will be provided by the task team to the EAP Regional Safeguards Adviser for
review and approvaL
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:             Ms Jul Fraei
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards           M   ee    enr
Coordinator:
Comments:
Sector Manager:MsuiFae
Comments:


﻿
