                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 103588


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15 March 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: South Sudan                                        Project ID: P150253
                                                            Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: South Sudan: Economic Empowerment Training for Conflict-Affected Youth
Task Team Leader: Stavros Stavrou
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A – JSDF Small Grant            Estimated Board Date: N/A – JSDF Small Grant
Managing Unit: GSURR – AFR Social                           Lending Instrument: JSDF Small Grant
Sector (Major)                               Sector                                                   %
Education                                    Vocational training                                      40
Industry and trade                           Agro-industry, marketing, and trade                      20
Industry and trade                           General industry and trade sector                        20
Health and other social services             Other social services                                    20
Major theme                                  Theme                                                    %
Social Development /gender/inclusion         Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction     70
Financial and private sector development     Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support               15
Rural development                            Rural non-farm income generation                         15
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0
IDA Amount (US$m.): 0
GEF Amount (US$m.): 0
PCF Amount (US$m.): 0
Other financing amounts by source (JSDF): US$2.75m
Environmental Category: C – no adverse impacts expected
Simplified Processing             Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project     Yes [ ]                  No [X]

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

1. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide a holistic economic empowerment
   training program for conflict-affected youth in South Sudan through development of the curriculum,
   skilling of trainers and piloting the training.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

2. There is widespread agreement that livelihoods support for youth is a priority in South Sudan.
   Conflict-affected youth, defined as those that participated in conflict either over time or in
   short engagements and those whose lives were significantly altered by conflict, are a
   particularly vulnerable subset of the youth group. Unfortunately the livelihoods models
   primarily rely on traditional vocational training or TVET which has been found to be
   inaccessible to this group and not targeted for their needs. The proposed project aims to
   redesign the approach taken in traditional livelihoods programming to provide more realistic
   and targeted training for conflict-affected youth.

3. This project will develop the tools and trainers for a holistic suite of economic empowerment
   training specifically adapted to the needs of conflict-affected youth and pilot this new
   approach through a set of trainings for conflict-affected youth. The programming will be
   designed specifically for this vulnerable group, with particular recognition of low
   literacy/educational attainment levels, challenges resulting from exposure to traumatic
   experiences, and time-use cost-benefit realities. Traditional vocational training and TVET
   programming has been found to be largely ineffective as it presupposes levels of literacy,
   employment opportunities and long timelines of commitment which are not realistic for these
   youth. The innovative approach being piloted here instead builds skills that allow for
   immediate use in their communities while training for long-term economic flexibility and
   mobility.

4. The project will include development of the curriculum, the training of local national trainers,
   and the piloting of the training with conflict-affected youth. In this manner the beneficiaries
   of the project will include not only youth receiving training but also local tradespeople newly
   trained as trainers. The business and pedagogical skills gained will increase their capacity to
   expand their businesses and train additional youth as their business expands, as well as bring
   new approaches to their communities. This emphasis on expanding the pool of local trainers
   is necessary to provide services in local dialects to non-English or Arabic speaking
   individuals and developmentally preferable given the increased need for understanding of
   local contexts and challenges in the local business communities.

5. The training will include elements of vocational skills with immediate usage at the rural and
   semi-urban community level; imbedded entrepreneurship, cooperatives and business skills;
   functional literacy/numeracy; life skills on personal conduct, business conduct and conflict
   mitigation; and psychosocial support training. The skills training will cover both agrarian and
   non-agrarian options. This will build on the work of Japan International Cooperation
   Agency’s (JICA) Project for Improvement of Basic Skills and Vocational Training in
   Southern Sudan (SAVOT & SAVOT2) but in a manner that is accessible and digestible to
   vulnerable conflict-affected youth.

6. This project is guided by the following Key Principles: i) adopt a holistic approach to
   vocational training courses, integrating business skills and life skills as well as providing
   literacy, numeracy and English language courses in parallel; ii) Ensure a market-based and
   business orientation of services; iii) Ensure vocational training activities build upon
   traditional livelihoods; iv) Ensure conflict sensitivity; v) Ensure gender sensitivity; vi)
   Employ community-based, participatory mechanisms; and vii) place a strong emphasis on
   monitoring and evaluation.

7. The project includes three components:
       Component A: Training of Trainers
       Component B: Pilot the Training Approach & ToT Model through Training for
          Conflict-Affected Youth
       Component C: Project management and monitoring and evaluation
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of environmental
and social risks and impacts (if known):

8. The project will focus on a variety of areas to:
    (i) Ensure conflict sensitivity by covering social and ethnic diversity by representing South Sudan’s
            three Greater Regions – Bahr el Ghazal, Equatoria and Greater Upper Nile.
    (ii) Cover a range of livelihood zones to generate broad knowledge for future upscaling (ie Western
            Bahr el Ghazal groundnuts, sesame and sorghum; Eastern Equatoria highland forest sorghum;
            Nile fishing basin and agro-pastoral).

9. Training of Trainers (ToTs): The ToT training will be conducted at an existing Vocational Training
    Center and will draw trainers from all 10 states corresponding to the Greater Regions of BEG (4
    States), Upper Nile (3 States) and Equatoria (3 States).

10. Training of Conflict-Affected Youth: Trainings of conflict-affected youth will be offered in two
    modalities – 1) center based and 2) mobile training. This will (i) build the capacity of decentralized
    VTC facilities and (ii) provide youth with training on economic empowerment through a holistic
    training curriculum. For the center based modality, trainings will be offered at 3 state capitals for the
    youth from those respective states (youth will be selected from communities within commuting
    distance of the centers). Mobile training units will be utilized for trainings in 3 additional states in
    this pilot. Mobile training units will be utilized for trainings in 3 additional states (due to the
    insecurity in Upper Nile and Unity states, no trainings will be possible at this time). Mobile
    training units will be utilized for trainings in 3 states and youth in these states will be selected
    from peri-urban and rural areas apart from the capital.

11. In view of the vulnerability-based, conflict-sensitive approach recommended - alongside the
    participatory approach and small scale nature of proposed activities there would be no significant
    irreversible adverse social and environmental impacts. The project will use existing facilities and is
    thus not building facilities.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
   The proposed project does not trigger any of the Bank’s Safeguard Policies and is expected to have no
   negative environmental or social impact.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Environmental Safeguard Specialist: John Bryant Collier
    Social Safeguard Specialist: Varalakshmi Vemuru

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies                         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        No            The proposed project involves no works and
                                                           is not expected to have any negative
                                                           environmental impact; therefore, no
                                                           environmental assessment is required.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
  Pest Management OP 4.09                    No
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     No
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        No
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No
  Projects on     International   Waterways No
  OP/BP 7.50
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be disclosed
   and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

   The proposed project is an environmental screening category C small grant; therefore, no further
   ISDS is required.

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

   NA

IV. APPROVALS
 Signed and submitted by:               Name:                                            Date:
 Task Team Leader:                      Stavros Stavrou                               7 May 2015
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:       Alexandra Bezeredi                            8 May 2015
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:                      Markus Kostner                                8 May 2015
   Comments:
