                                                 96378
             DISCUSSION PAPER	                    NO. 1502




       Social Protection in Fragile and
           Conflict-Affected Countries
                                  Trends and Challenges

Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero




                                              April 2015
Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries:
                  Trends and Challenges




                       Mirey Ovadiya
                       Adea Kryeziu
                       Syeda Masood
                       Eric Zapatero




                         April 2015
Abstract: This study examines the role of social protection programming, and programming
design and implementation features, that are prominent in fragile and conflict-affected states.
The main objective is to build on existing, available information from a sample of fragile and
conflict-affected countries and develop operational guidance that addresses policy, design, and
implementation issues and offers operational solutions for social protection programming and
policy making in different fragile settings. The analysis showcases the universe of social
protection objectives that are evident in these countries as well as the programming trends,
types, coverage, and expenditure patterns. The paper also examines dimensions specific to
fragile and conflict-affected settings in implementing social protection and labor programs, such
as social cohesion, the role of community-driven development, and postwar benefits. Finally, the
study highlights social protection and labor program delivery in seven different country contexts,
and discusses the country-specific programming options chosen to achieve the objectives and
overcome capacity and operational constraints.

Keywords: Social protection and labor, fragile and conflict-affected states, capacity, enabling
environment, social assistance, social insurance, labor market programs, community-driven
development (CDD), trends, challenges.

JEL classification: H53, H54, I38




                                                2
                                       Acknowledgments


The paper has benefited from valuable advice, inputs and guidance from Lucy Bassett, Carine Clert,
Aylin Isik Dikmelik, Ugo Gentilini, Samira Ahmed Hillis, Matthew Hobson, Mira Hong, Kelly Johnson,
Maddalena Honorati, Alex Kamurase, Cem Mete, Montserrat Pallares Miralles, Suleiman Namara,
Matthew Norton, Junko Onishi, Stefano Paternostro, Nicola Pontara, Lucian Pop, Laura Rolston,
Nina Rosas Raffo, Anita Schwarz, Victoria Strokova, John Van Dyck, Briana Wilson, Emily Weedon,
Ruslan Yemtsov, Giuseppe Zampaglione, and Yongmei Zhou. It was developed under the overall
guidance of Anush Bezhanyan. The document was edited by Nita Congress.




                                                i
                                    Abbreviations


ASPIRE   Atlas of Social Protection—Indicators of Resilience and Equity

CPIA     Country Policy and Institutional Assessment

GDP      gross domestic product

PMT      proxy means testing




                                          ii
                                                                          Contents


1.     Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 1

2.     Basic Concepts: Social Protection and Fragility ........................................................................................ 2

     2.1.    Social Protection ................................................................................................................................ 3

     2.2.    Characteristics of Fragility ................................................................................................................. 5

     2.3.    Fragility and Poverty .......................................................................................................................... 6

3.     Arriving at a Typology ............................................................................................................................... 8

4.     Trends and Findings on the Role of Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries ........ 12

     4.1.    Objectives ........................................................................................................................................ 13

     4.2.    Programming Choices ...................................................................................................................... 14

     4.3.    Coverage .......................................................................................................................................... 18

     4.4.    Expenditures .................................................................................................................................... 23

     4.5.    Delivery Mechanisms....................................................................................................................... 27

5.     Highlights of Social Protection Program Delivery in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries ............... 29

6.     Conclusions ............................................................................................................................................. 36

7.     Bibliography ............................................................................................................................................ 39



Box 4.1: Evaluation Results for the Yemeni Social Fund for Development ................................................... 28



Figure 2.1: Moving from Fragility to Institutional Resilience, Security, Justice, and Jobs ............................... 4

Figure 2.2: Characteristics of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations ........................................................... 6

Figure 2.3: The Share of the World’s Poor Living in Fragile States .................................................................. 7

Figure 3.1: Typology of Fragile and Conflict-Affected States........................................................................... 9

Figure 4.1: Total Number of Social Assistance Programs in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries, by
Program Type ................................................................................................................................................. 15


                                                                                iii
Figure 4.2: Total Number of Social Assistance Programs in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries, by
Program Type ................................................................................................................................................. 17

Figure 4.3: Social Assistance and Social Insurance Coverage in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries, as a
Percentage of Total Population ..................................................................................................................... 20

Figure 4.4: Social Assistance and Social Insurance Coverage, as a Percentage of the Poorest Quintile ....... 21

Figure 4.5: Social Insurance Expenditures in Selected Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries as a
Percentage of GDP ......................................................................................................................................... 25

Figure 4.6: Share of Safety Net Spending of GDP in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries ....................... 27



Table 4.1: Benefits Incidence of Social Protection in Selected Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries ...... 19

Table 4.2: Safety Net Spending as a Percentage of GDP in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries ............ 26




                                                                               iv
                                             1. Introduction


This discussion paper is the first output under the umbrella of the programmatic work on social
protection in fragile and conflict-affected states. This work aims to develop operational guidance
to teams on the likely determinants of effective social protection programming and policy making
in fragile and conflict-affected settings.

This paper elaborates on the role of social protection programming, and programming design
and implementation features, that are prominent in fragile and conflict-affected states. In
particular, the paper describes the universe of social protection objectives in these countries,
reflects on their revealed objectives, and discusses programming options chosen to achieve those
objectives as well as how several countries have overcome particular operational and capacity
constraints.

It is important to understand how social protection works in these settings, which often feature
a combination of circumstances such as the following:

      Acute poverty either concentrated or widespread (areas affected by conflict have lagged
       behind) and vulnerability to shocks

      Lack of social cohesion/weak social fabric

      Weak or destroyed infrastructure (physical, financial, etc.)

      Implicit need for conflict management among special groups (e.g., war veterans)

      Implicit need for developing citizen trust in the state

Despite many common characteristics, fragile and conflict-affected states are actually quite
diverse, particularly with regard to metrics of state capacity and the extent to which they have
an enabling environment. This paper presents a methodology that has been devised to group
countries based on income, capacity, and extent of enabling environment. Use of this


                                                   1
methodology will aid in understanding trends, patterns, and key factors in policy making and
programming choices—good and bad.


                       2. Basic Concepts: Social Protection and Fragility


One and a half billion people (nearly 30 percent of the world’s poor) live in areas affected by
fragility, conflict, or large-scale organized criminal violence. To date, no low-income fragile or
conflict-affected country has achieved a single United Nations Millennium Development Goal.
While much of the world has made progress in reducing poverty in the last 60 years, areas
affected by cycles of conflict have lagged economically and have not advanced their human
development indicators (World Bank 2011h).

Poverty and fragility become mutually reinforcing in such settings. In this regard, “fragility”
should be recognized as a dynamic and multidimensional concept. Fragility extends over a broad
spectrum of circumstances that manifest in a range of countries, including Iraq, Malawi,
Myanmar, Sierra Leone, and Timor-Leste, among others. As suggested in the literature, perhaps
a better way of approaching fragility is to differentiate among contexts by considering an entity’s
level of resilience. Resilience is defined (e.g., in OECD 2008 and World Bank 2011h) as a political
and social system’s capacity to adapt to shocks. Unlike the more amorphous concept of fragility,
this is a highly useful concept, in that it is more aligned with the process any entity—a person, a
family, a community, a country—must go through when facing multiple challenges.

One of the main mechanisms to help build resilience and protect the poor and vulnerable is
context-specific, effective social protection programming. However, it is often the case that ‘‘the
greater the need for social protection, the lower the capacity of the state to provide it” (Devereux
2000); this is particularly true in fragile contexts. Government capacity is likely to be even weaker
in terms of social protection than for social services such as health and education, since line
ministries often retain some capacity even in postconflict and fragile situations. These realities
highlight both the need for social protection in fragile and conflict-affected states, as well as the
difficulties in setting up programs with limited capacity, funding, and—at times—political will.


                                                 2
2.1. Social Protection

By definition, social protection plays an important role in providing income support and access
to basic social services to populations most at risk of being affected by systemic shocks, such as
cycles of conflict and violence. In fragile settings in particular, social protection often has a dual
and simultaneous role of contributing to state building and to reducing social inequalities and
exclusion. By design, social protection policies can provide income security to individuals through
income support, access to employment opportunities, and insurance mechanisms. These policies
then lead to improved social cohesion and reduced probabilities of social conflict and violence.
Governments often rely on short-term youth employment, entrepreneurship support, and/or
input or food distribution programs (e.g., as in Iraq, Liberia, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, and Timor-
Leste), as they realize the political and social significance of these programs in building
confidence, including disenfranchised groups, and reducing social tensions.

The 2011 World Development Report (World Bank 2011h) argues that strengthening legitimate
institutions and the ability of a state to provide stability, justice, security, and jobs lessens the
probability of conflict and fragility. Social protection thus plays an important role in restoring
confidence; transforming the institutions that provide security, justice, and jobs; addressing
external stresses; and mobilizing international support to overcome fragility, violence, and
conflict (figure 2.1). For instance, through the provision of short-term employment to
disenfranchised individuals, public works programs have the potential to restore a sense of
identity to individuals and confidence in the ability of the state to deliver services and improve
social inclusion and equity (Andrews and Kryeziu 2013). This, in turn, contributes to the objective
of state building.




                                                  3
      Figure 2.1: Moving from Fragility to Institutional Resilience, Security, Justice, and Jobs




Source: World Bank 2011h.


While evidence on the impact of social protection programming and policies on social cohesion
is scant, international experience suggests that social protection can be an important platform
for

         Promoting voice and participation through program processes,

         Improving social inclusion and equality through temporary labor market participation,
          and

         Smoothing social tensions and building trust in response to sudden shocks as well as
          longer-term fragility (Andrews and Kryeziu 2013).

A recent stocktaking exercise of World Bank–supported community-driven development
operations implemented in fragile and conflict situations notes that, even though many
operations do not explicitly have peace-building objectives and emphasize service delivery
instead, the implicit theory of change is one of short-term service delivery outcomes improving
voice; instilling trust, confidence, and cohesion; and leading to improved governance and a
compact between citizens, service providers, and the state (de Regt, Majumdar, and Singh 2013).




                                                  4
Yet, particularly in emergency situations, immediate relief and long-term social cohesion may be
contradicted by the need to rebuild the state quickly. Some interventions that may be necessary
to provide assistance quickly may trigger unintended consequences, inequalities, and tensions.
Thus, while social protection can make an important contribution toward state building and
conflict reduction, it must also be acknowledged that not every type of social protection program
or policy can or does contribute effectively, and in a timely manner, to these objectives.

There is much to be learned about social protection in fragile states, particularly in the move
away from fragmented programs and toward effective institutions and systems. Many
operational challenges remain. For example, quite a number of fragile countries may have long-
standing, politically difficult-to-revoke social protection policies that are ineffective, regressive,
and benefit very small and/or fairly well-off populations; or that may have spawned a plethora
of small and fragmented programs that do not inform or complement one another. Common
logistical issues include low coverage, high costs, information gaps, and poor administrative
infrastructure and physical settings.

2.2. Characteristics of Fragility

The World Bank categorizes countries as fragile if they have a harmonized average Country Policy
and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating of 3.2 or the presence of a United Nations and/or
regional peace-keeping or peace-building mission during the past three years. A total of 36
countries constituted the list of fragile states in 2014. They are generally characterized by weak
institutional capacity, weak governance structures, fragmented societies and competing elites, a
tendency to repeated cycles of conflict, poor infrastructure, poor access to services, often very
high poverty and vulnerability to multiple sources of shocks, and weak financial capacity (figure
2.2). They also often have non-inclusive political and economic institutions (Acemoglu and
Robinson 2012).




                                                  5
              Figure 2.2: Characteristics of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations

                                                           Poor            Weak financial
                                                      infrastructure         capacity

                                           Weak                                             Poor access to
                                         governance                                           services



                              Low
                                                                                                         Fragmented
                         institutional
                                                                                                           societies
                           capacity



                                                          Fragile &                                          Non-inclusive
                   High poverty                           conflict-                                          political and
                       and
                                                          affected                                             economic
                   vulnerability
                                                                                                              institutions
                                                           setting


Source: Adapted from World Bank 2012a.


Although many non–fragile and conflict-affected countries may face most of these issues, what
exacerbates the situation in fragile and conflict-affected settings is that deficiencies exist across
multiple issues at the same time and the deficiencies are mutually reinforcing (Andrews et al.
2012). In these environments, building social protection systems requires an analysis of the
above constraints, as well as of context-specific challenges to identify suitable objectives and
solutions. It is important to analyze how a combination of various fragile and conflict-affected
country characteristics affects the needs of the population, the universe of possible policy and
programming responses, and—ultimately—the trajectory to building social protection systems
in different settings.

2.3. Fragility and Poverty

Recent analysis of global poverty trends suggests that poverty is increasingly becoming an issue
closely associated with fragility (Chandy and Gertz 2011; Sumner 2012). High prevalence of
poverty in fragile states is a by-product of fragility, but it is also a cause of fragility. This conclusion
is consistent with the 2011 World Development Report’s finding that the gap in poverty is
widening between those countries affected by violence and other countries (World Bank 2011h).
The poor are disproportionately found in fragile states, regardless of the list of fragile states used
(i.e., the Fund for Peace’s Fragile States Index or the World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile

                                                                       6
Situations). It is estimated that while less than one-fifth (about 18.5 percent) of the world’s
population lived in fragile states in 2010, these countries hosted about one-third of the world’s
poor (400 million out of 1.2 billion). This makes for a more than twofold difference in the
prevalence of poverty between fragile states and nonfragile states: about 40 percent compared
to 20 percent (OECD 2013; Sumner 2012).1 This trend is likely to continue (figure 2.3).

                      Figure 2.3: The Share of the World’s Poor Living in Fragile States




Source: Chandy and Gertz 2011.


As expected, human development indicators in fragile contexts are some of the worst. “No fragile
country has yet achieved a single MDG [Millennium Development Goal], and fragile states are
home to half of all children not in primary school and half of all children who die before reaching
their fifth birthday” (Chandy and Gertz 2011). As the list of fragile and conflict-affected states and
territories covers a broad spectrum from low income to middle income, the nature of poverty is
quite varied. However, vulnerabilities are more acute for children and women in most of these
settings. Child poverty and malnutrition are very high, often resulting in increased morbidity and




1
    These calculations are based on a list of fragile countries in the “Alert” category of the Fragile States Index.

                                                              7
poor educational outcomes. A third group that is most affected is youth, a demographic
comprising large numbers of working-age populations in many fragile and conflict-affected
countries.


                                           3. Arriving at a Typology


To more precisely characterize social protection programming in fragile and conflict-affected
settings, the universe of fragile and conflict-affected states, as listed by the World Bank in its
2014 Harmonized List of Fragile Situations, was divided into five different clusters.2 Figure 3.1
illustrates these groupings. The two key variables used to map the clusters are

        Capacity, which is here approximated by (1) the CPIA index, which rates countries against
         a set of 16 criteria in four clusters: economic management, structural policies, policies for
         social inclusion and equity, and public sector management and institutions; and (2)
         country per capita income, grouped according to 2012 gross national income per capita,
         calculated using the World Bank Atlas method;3 and

        Enabling environment, approximated by the Corruption Perception Index.

Other measures, including resource wealth and net developmental assistance (i.e., official
development assistance) as a percentage of gross national income, and the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development/Development Assistance Committee International
Network on Conflict and Fragility classification of fragile and conflict-affected countries,4 have
also been factored into the cluster analysis.




2 The classification was arrived at based on (1) cluster analysis of the fragile and conflict-affected country data set
(using STATA), (2) updates based on recent political and economic developments from the literature, and (3) the
team’s judgment on countries’ overall positions vis-à-vis their capacity and enabling environment.
3 The groups are low income, $1,035 or less; lower middle income, $1,036 –$4,085; upper middle income, $4,086 –

$12,615; and high income, $12,616 or more.
4 This classification is as follows:




                                                           8
                      Figure 3.1: Typology of Fragile and Conflict-Affected States




Note: The typology represents the authors’ rendition based on (1) a cluster analysis of the fragile and conflict-
affected country data set (using STATA), (2) updates based on recent political and economic developments from
the literature, and (3) the team’s judgment on countries’ overall positions vis-à-vis their capacity (using the CPIA
index as a proxy) and the enabling environment. Resource-rich countries are determined based on wealth in
hydrocarbons and/or minerals.




(1) Deterioration (deteriorating governance environment/ongoing conflict): States where the ability (or willingness)
of the state to perform its functions is in decline. This poor performance frequently springs from chronic low
capacity and is often associated with very weak rule of law and territory beyond the control of government. These
countries are often experiencing conflict or are highly vulnerable to conflict.
(2) Prolonged crises or impasse (arrested development): States that fail to use their authority for pro-poor
outcomes. The state’s ability to exert its will might be very weak, or very strong donors are typically unwilling to
deal with the state directly.
(3) Postconflict/crisis or political transition: The states offer a window of opportunity for stakeholders to work
together with government on a program of reform. However, the transition is fragile, with the prospect of return
to conflict remaining high.
(4) Early recovery/gradual improvement: Countries where some effort is being made to improve performance but
where performance is patchy. These countries might be postconflict or countries where conflict is not the primary
driver. Often, there is no strong leadership championing reform within government, and capacity to implement
reforms is weak.
Frequently, countries can move from one category to another in a short amount of time.
http://www.gsdrc.org/go/fragile-states/chapter-1--understanding-fragile-states/definitions-and-typologies-of-
fragile-states

                                                          9
Cluster A: The first group comprises countries with relatively high administrative capacity,
lower/upper-middle-income status, and a weak enabling environment. Countries are
characterized by recent or ongoing political conflict, violence, or instability. Iraq, Syrian Arab
Republic (resource rich), and West Bank and Gaza are included in Cluster A.

Cluster B: The second group consists of countries with low capacity, low income, and a weak
enabling environment. Countries may still be in conflict and/or move in and out of conflict with
certain regions/territories outside government control or weak rule of law, and highly fragile due
to institutions’ weakness. This group includes Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Chad,
and South Sudan (resource rich); and Haiti and Somalia (resource poor).

Cluster C: The third group is a set of countries with medium capacity and average (or medium)
enabling environment. This is a mixed group with countries that may have faced sporadic
violence due to prolonged political impasse, or sporadic conflict. This group includes Côte
d’Ivoire, Mali, Sudan, and the Republic of Yemen (resource rich); and Nepal and Zimbabwe
(resource poor).

Cluster D: The fourth group comprises relatively higher-income countries (i.e., lower-middle
income), with relatively high administrative capacity and a strong enabling environment. Among
the countries in this cluster are Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo.

Cluster E: The final group includes two subsets of countries based on their resource status, all of
which are low capacity and have a relatively strong enabling environment. Countries may have
been out of conflict over an extended period yet still face a variety of governance challenges. The
countries in the resource-rich group include Burundi, Republic of Congo, Madagascar, Sierra
Leone, Timor-Leste, and Togo; the resource-poor group includes Comoros, Malawi, Myanmar,
and the Solomon Islands.

Countries classified as having a weaker enabling environment in the typology (mainly Clusters A
and B) also have a higher total ranking in the 2013 Fragile States Index. Fragile and conflict-
affected countries are generally characterized as facing numerous demographic, economic, and
social pressures. In terms of demographic pressures (including high population density relative

                                                10
to the availability of food, settlements that restrict human freedoms, border disputes and
occupied lands, skewed population distributions, natural disasters, epidemics, and
environmental hazards), most fragile and conflict-affected countries have a ranking of 8 or above
in the Fragile States Index—e.g., Chad, 9.5; Haiti, 9.6; and Sierra Leone, 9. By way of contrast, the
nonfragile states of the United Kingdom and the United States have rankings of 2 and 3,
respectively. Not surprisingly, most fragile and conflict-affected countries suffer from uneven
development (with real or perceived economic and social disparities), weak human rights
records, highly (or completely) illegitimate governments, and weak and divided political ruling
elites.

Using the typology, this paper intends to contribute to the discussion on social protection policy
making in fragile and conflict-affected countries by presenting some of the trends and challenges.
Going forward, some of these experiences will be further studied and developed in-depth to
identify key processes and factors that can lead to successful social protection programming and
policies.

The analysis in section 4 is based on a review of experiences of a representative sample of fragile
and conflict-affected countries. The sample was chosen from data available in the World Bank’s
ASPIRE (Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity) database. The analysis
describes the mix of social protection policies and programming, delivery mechanisms, and likely
determinants of success in delivering or scaling up social protection programming in fragile and
conflict-affected countries. The trends presented are based on analysis done using available data
in ASPIRE for a group of fragile and conflict-affected states and supplemental research on seven
countries.

The analysis should be caveated by noting the scarcity of data and empirical evidence on social
protection across fragile and conflict-affected countries, including labor force surveys and
poverty and demographic data. Accurate or up-to-date data on total national expenditures on
social protection are also unavailable, mostly due to the fragmented and externally sourced
nature of social protection in fragile and conflict-affected countries. Finally, and perhaps most
importantly, it should be noted that social protection programming in fragile and conflict-

                                                 11
affected countries could greatly benefit from rigorous impact evaluations on those interventions
that have been successful in reaching their objectives.


   4. Trends and Findings on the Role of Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                                           Countries


Social protection programs and policies in fragile and conflict-affected settings occupy an
especially broad spectrum, balancing short-term emergency needs (i.e., in response to conflict
or natural disaster) with longer-term needs of reducing chronic poverty and inequality.

Though interest exists in building systems, most social protection interventions in fragile and
conflict-affected countries remain somewhat ad hoc and opportunistic. The World Bank’s social
protection assessment review reveals that, in most low-income countries, there are serious
challenges at the policy level to strategic visioning, often entailing a lack of coordination
mechanisms and high dependency on donor funding (Honorati and Rodriguez forthcoming). In
addition, the majority of programs are fragmented by design, with poor administrative linkages
between them. Across all 36 fragile states, there is a noticeable trend in social protection
programming toward cash transfers, public works, and skills development programs/self-
employment support; maintained support for community-based services; and a shift away from
in-kind interventions. The balance between social assistance and social insurance varies, but
social insurance is much lower on average.

Research suggests that the composition of social protection is not static, and the mix of
programming and the emphasis of social protection changes with shifts in the degree of fragility
and the distance from conflict. The typology captures a snapshot in time; transitions continually
occur, and there is steady movement between the various clusters as emergencies recur. This
fluidity is most apparent in Clusters A and B, but is also observable in the other clusters in
response to multiple and arising challenges such as Ebola, weather events, political upheavals,
and others.




                                               12
4.1. Objectives

Social protection objectives in fragile and conflict-affected settings are multifaceted. Although
the primary objective of social protection is to protect the individual against life events/risks and
economic and other shocks, in fragile and conflict-affected settings, social protection
interventions are used—often following a conflict period—to reduce social tensions, promote
social cohesion and social inclusion, and serve as a peace dividend for certain parts of the
population. Social cohesion in this context is associated with sustaining peace and social stability
in a country with a history of conflict; social inclusion means supporting groups that have
historically been marginalized. There are noticeable differences in the social protection
objectives of high- and low-capacity countries (as per the typology developed above) as well. In
high-capacity countries (Clusters A, D, and to some degree C), the scope of social protection is
broader and used as a platform to develop a rights-based social contract between the citizens
and the state. In low-capacity states, social protection has a more limited scope and mostly serves
to help the poor and vulnerable. Similarly, in resource-rich countries with low capacity and low
income per capita, social protection policies often seem to be used to maintain social stability.

In Cluster D countries (high capacity and strong enabling environment), social protection has a
strong legal basis and is viewed as a right. For example, Kosovo provides a noncontributory
pension to all its citizens over the age of 65 regardless of whether they are rich or poor. Cluster
E countries (low capacity and strong enabling environment) mostly use social protection for
supporting the most vulnerable. Togo, for example, spends 59 percent of its social protection
expenditures on food and in-kind transfers. In resource-rich Cluster E countries, social protection
is used to promote social cohesion.5 In Timor-Leste, most of the social protection spending goes




5
  The 2010 International Institute of Social Studies’ Indices of Social Development, which are measures of social
cohesion and fragility, illustrate that fragile and conflict-affected countries have lower civic activism scores (and in
turn, lower awareness and information on political processes) than nonfragile developed states, among other
measures (http://www.indsocdev.org/). The range of civic activism scores is between 0.41 in Chad (a low-capacity
country with a weak enabling environment) to 0.51 in Bosnia and Herzegovina (a high-capacity country with a
strong enabling environment). This finding reflects the fact that civil societies in fragile and conflict-affected
countries have a lower level of engagement in civic activities, such as peaceful protests. In terms of intergroup


                                                           13
to provide cash transfers to volatile groups such as the veterans of the freedom struggle. In
Cluster C countries (moderate capacity and average enabling environment), social protection is
mostly used for social inclusion. For instance, Nepal provides social assistance to low-caste
individuals and widows, both historically marginalized groups. The Republic of Yemen, a
resource-rich Cluster C country, has used social protection to maintain social and political
stability. The government has been reluctant to abolish the financially unsustainable petroleum
subsidies, because any indication of doing so triggers protests. In addition, it has substantially
scaled up the Social Welfare Fund, a cash transfer program, in the aftermath of the anti-
government protests and crisis in 2011/12. In countries with weak enabling environments
(Clusters A and B) which face sudden bursts of violence or political turmoil, social protection is
still fairly strongly associated with emergency humanitarian aid; in Cluster A countries with higher
capacity, there is a more noticeable transition or attempts toward systematic social protection
approaches. For example, West Bank and Gaza have been progressively transitioning from in-
kind to cash transfers and to better delivery systems such as registries, targeting, and payment
systems.

4.2. Programming Choices

Overall, fragile and conflict-affected states tend to have a stronger focus on social assistance
than any other type of social protection programming, though there are notable cases—such
as Kosovo, Nepal, and West Bank and Gaza—where more is spent on social insurance than on
social assistance. Social insurance coverage is typically limited to public sector employees or the
unemployed. Within social assistance, most of the fragile and conflict-affected countries
analyzed in this programmatic work have unconditional cash transfer programs or in-kind
assistance programs with categorical benefits being prominent. A few countries also have cash
transfer programs with soft conditionalities in place. Labor programs are scarce and serve very




cohesion, fragile and conflict-affected countries are very heterogeneous. This is because the index measures the
probability of violence and terrorism in the country; thus, a fragile and conflict-affected country with recent or
ongoing violence such as Iraq has a very low score (0.18), while Togo has a rating (0.72) on a par with the United
Kingdom and the United States.

                                                         14
few people. They have a narrow focus on public works, employment, or entrepreneurship
support programs; and a very limited focus on job brokerage or formal employment services.

As shown in figure 4.1, food, in-kind, or near-cash programs are most prominent in fragile and
conflict-affected countries, followed by public works and cash transfers.

    Figure 4.1: Total Number of Social Assistance Programs in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                                 Countries, by Program Type

                                                                                                   Zimbabwe
                                                                                                   Yemen, Rep. c
                                                                                                   West Bank & Gaza
        40
                                                                                                   Togo
                                                                                                   Timor-Leste
        35                                                                                         Syria
                                                                                                   South Sudan
        30                                                                                         Solomon Islands
                                                                                                   Sierra Leone
        25                                                                                         Nepal
                                                                                                   Mali
                                                                                                   Malawi
        20                                                                                         Madagascar
                                                                                                   Kosovo
        15                                                                                         Iraq
                                                                                                   Haiti
        10                                                                                         Cote D'ivoire
                                                                                                   Congo, Rep
         5                                                                                         Comoros
                                                                                                   Chad
                                                                                                   Central Afr. Rep.
         0                                                                                         Burundi
             Food and near cash       PW                UCT                CCT
                                                                                                   Bosnia & Herz.
              (conditional and                                                                     Afghanistan
               unconditional)

Sources: World Bank 2014e, annex 5; and readily available information on ASPIRE for fragile and conflict-affected
countries.


Further insights on the dynamics of social protection programming emerge on analyzing coverage
by program type:

        Cash transfers are most prevalent among Cluster D countries, which have high
         capacity/strong enabling environments; they are also common in Cluster A countries,
         which have challenging environments of current or partial conflict.

        In high-capacity countries with strong enabling environments (Cluster D), social
         protection is largely systematic and delivered through a few social assistance programs
         and social insurance. For example, in Kosovo, the basic pensions program covers almost

                                                        15
    all of the targeted population (over the age of 65), in line with the concept of the program
    being a citizenship right provided by the state.

   Other social assistance (primarily subsidies for fuel and food) is most prevalent among
    resource-rich countries in Cluster C (e.g., Sudan and the Republic of Yemen).
    Nevertheless, In Cluster C (moderate capacity and average enabling environment), a
    number of countries appear to be moving toward cash transfers as the preferred method
    of social assistance despite a continued reliance on subsidies. The Republic of Yemen
    recently and considerably expanded its Social Welfare Fund—which provides
    unconditional cash transfers to the elderly, orphans, and other vulnerable groups—from
    100,000 beneficiaries in 1996 to 7 million in 2011. On the other hand, coverage of
    subsidies appears to be three times higher than any other social assistance program
    (figure 4.2).

   School feeding/in-kind assistance is most prevalent among Cluster E countries comprised
    of primarily low-income, low-capacity countries with low human development indicators.
    These countries have also successfully used community structures to provide social
    assistance to target populations. The village chiefs in Timor-Leste are instrumental in
    helping with beneficiary selection; in Togo, an already existing social institution of
    femmes-mamans has been used to deliver food for the school feeding program. Both
    Sierra Leone and Togo have active community-driven development programs.




                                            16
Figure 4.2: Total Number of Social Assistance Programs in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                             Countries, by Program Type

         Average Coverage (%) - Cash Transfer                             Average Coverage (%) - Other
                                                                               Social Assistance
    6
                                                              14
    5                                                         12
    4                                                         10
                                                                  8
    3
                                                                  6
    2                                                             4
    1                                                             2
                                                                  0
    0                                                                      Cluster C      Cluster E    Cluster B
         Cluster D Cluster A Cluster C Cluster E Cluster B




           Average coverage (%)- School Feeding/                            Coverage (%) - Public Works or Cash for
                         In Kind                                                             Work
20
                                                                      8

15                                                                    6

                                                                      4
10
                                                                      2
    5                                                                 0
                                                                              Cluster B        Cluster C       Cluster E
    0
         Cluster E   Cluster A    Cluster C   Cluster B




       In countries with weak enabling environments (Clusters A and B) and those prone to
        frequent emergencies, infrastructure breakdown, and dysfunctional markets, social
        protection is largely in the form of in-kind social assistance. Haiti has a Targeted Nutrition
        Program in place, which provides food-based assistance to the vulnerable. Numerous
        countries in Clusters B, C, and E (e.g., Afghanistan, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, South
        Sudan, Togo, and the Republic of Yemen), which have lower capacity settings, make use
        of community structures to deliver social protection—in particular, to facilitate access to
        services and to implement public works, livelihood support, or school feeding programs.

        Such approaches have supported significant postdisaster reconstruction efforts, and have
        helped shape new dynamics at the community level by working to restore social cohesion.

                                                             17
       Sierra Leone’s community-driven development project assisted fragile and vulnerable
       war-affected communities in reducing poverty and building local capacity for collective
       action, thereby contributing to the country’s stability, peace, and sustainable growth. In
       the Republic of Yemen, under the Social Fund for Development, 4.5 million poor and
       vulnerable individuals (representing 65 percent of the population living in extreme
       poverty) benefited from over 2,000 community projects. Among the positive impacts
       were an increase in girls’ schools, an increase in enrollment rates, improved access to
       rural roads, and reduced travel costs and times. Through Afghanistan’s National Solidarity
       Program, community development councils allocated funds to rebuild infrastructure,
       repair schools, and install water pumps to the benefit of over 13 million people
       countrywide, promoting the state’s credibility and local governance.

      Regarding labor market interventions, about half of all countries and territories in fragile
       situations (19 out of 36 on the 2015 list) have some type of youth employment programs
       in place. Globally, 62 youth employment programs out of 733 (8 percent) are in fragile
       and conflict-affected states. These interventions are most commonly used in Africa and
       the Middle East and North Africa, and have a strong focus on skills training and
       entrepreneurship promotion.

4.3. Coverage

Typically, fragile and conflict-affected countries suffer from low coverage of social protection
programs; this is particularly true for social insurance and labor market programs. A high
percentage of the population in these countries generally lives below the poverty line, and access
to services is often limited. Moreover, usually due to less-than-optimal targeting mechanisms, a
high number of benefits accrue to the nonpoor. This last is borne out by ASPIRE data: the global
average for benefit incidence for the poorest quintile for all social protection is calculated at
about 23 percent; among fragile and conflict-affected countries, it is only about 14 percent (table
4.1). The remainder of this section examines trends in coverage of social assistance and social
insurance programs in fragile and conflict-affected countries, using data from ASPIRE where
available.

                                                18
  Table 4.1: Benefits Incidence of Social Protection in Selected Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                                           Countries

                                        Benefits incidence in    Benefits incidence in   Benefits incidence in
                                        poorest quintile (%)     poorest quintile (%)    poorest quintile (%)
 Country/economy                         all social assistance    all social insurance   all social protection
 Afghanistan                                    8.24                     3.76                    7.02
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                         30.58                   14.13                   14.63
 Iraq                                           17.93                   10.18                   12.22
 Kosovo                                         43.38                   19.02                   25.35
 Malawi                                         6.44                     0.57                    2.88
 Mali                                            —                       0.47                    0.47
 Nepal                                          15.76                    0.94                    6.24
 Timor-Leste                                    1.39                      —                      1.32
 West Bank and Gaza                             63.65                   45.30                   62.57
 Yemen, Rep.                                    19.08                   17.15                   10.96
 Average                                        22.90                   12.30                   14.30

Source: ASPIRE data retrieved January 2015.


On average, coverage of social protection programs in fragile and conflict-affected settings is
around 27 percent, compared to a global average of 43 percent. Note, however, that this rate
can be misleading, as there is large variation within and between social insurance and social
assistance programs. Overall, coverage of social insurance lags that of social assistance (figure
4.3), and the poor are more likely not covered by either social assistance or social insurance
schemes. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo are the main exceptions in this regard, primarily
due to their inheritance of the Yugoslav pension schemes. In Iraq, which has social assistance
coverage of 80 percent, universal food vouchers account for the high coverage rate.




                                                        19
  Figure 4.3: Social Assistance and Social Insurance Coverage in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                          Countries, as a Percentage of Total Population

  90
  80
  70
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0




                Coverage of SA- % total population          Coverage of SI- % total population



Source: ASPIRE data retrieved January 2015.
Note: Coverage data corresponds to different years for each country/economy, as follows: Afghanistan, 2007;
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2007; Republic of Congo, 2005; Côte d’Ivoire, 2002; Haiti, 2001; Iraq, 2006; Kosovo, 2006;
Madagascar, 2010; Malawi, 2010; Nepal, 2010; Sierra Leone, 2011; Timor-Leste, 2007; West Bank and Gaza, 2007;
and Republic of Yemen, 2005.


Figure 4.4 goes one step further in explaining the low coverage of the poor in fragile and conflict-
affected countries. Looking at the poorest quintile of the population, of the 14 countries included
in the figure, 10 have social assistance coverage of less than 30 percent. The range of social
insurance spending is from 0 to 48 percent, with nine countries spending less than 10 percent,
for an average of 3 percent.

For fragile and conflict-affected states, it is not uncommon to see such low coverage of social
insurance, given the relatively small percentage of the population in formal employment and the
unavailability of contributory social protection schemes beyond the civil service (which accounts
for a small percentage of the total population). Also, there are often large information and

                                                       20
capacity gaps mitigating effective maintenance of such systems; moreover, records are lost
during conflict/fragile situations, and the organizations and institutional settings tend to be
damaged. Especially in Middle East and North African fragile and conflict-affected countries,
where social insurance schemes exist, they impose an enormous financial burden. Consequently,
the schemes tend to have low coverage, be fragmented, yet still account for a high level of
spending—for example, in West Bank and Gaza, pension schemes equal 4 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP), and cover only 15 percent of the population.

  Figure 4.4: Social Assistance and Social Insurance Coverage, as a Percentage of the Poorest
                                             Quintile

    90
    80
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0




                   Coverage of SA- poorest quintile (%)        Coverage of SI- poorest quintile (%)


Source: ASPIRE data retrieved January 2015.
Note: Coverage data corresponds to different years for each country/economy, as follows: Afghanistan, 2007;
Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2007; Republic of Congo, 2005; Côte d’Ivoire, 2002; Haiti, 2001; Iraq, 2006; Kosovo, 2006;
Madagascar, 2010; Malawi, 2010; Nepal, 2010; Sierra Leone, 2011; Timor-Leste, 2007; West Bank and Gaza, 2007;
and Republic of Yemen, 2005.


Among the countries analyzed, key determinants of social protection coverage are level of
administrative capacity and government policy/vision. For instance, in Sierra Leone (Cluster E), a
country classified as a low-capacity setting with a relatively strong enabling environment, the
government established a series of social assistance programs to address the most urgent needs
of the population following the decade-long civil war. The programs, however, suffer from low

                                                          21
coverage, high leakage, and inefficient administration. Programs remain small, underfunded, and
highly dependent on donors. Similar experiences are evident in Nepal, where the government
has not been able to consolidate programming and prevent the inclusion of the nonpoor in social
assistance programs.

In contrast, in West Bank and Gaza (Cluster A), with a high capacity and a very weak enabling
environment, 16 existing social safety net programs cover more than half of the poorest
quintile—a rate above the world average. The West Bank and Gaza’s cash transfer program,
which uses a proxy means testing (PMT) formula to ensure greater inclusion of the poor, reached
65 percent of the poor population in 2013 (97,000 households). The World Food Programme also
distributes food aid to about 800,000 beneficiaries, with the help of the Ministry of Social
Assistance and other nongovernmental organizations; this accounts for nearly a third of all safety
net spending. In Kosovo, another high-capacity case, coverage is relatively high for social
insurance/pensions, with the basic pension reaching 35 percent of the population. However, the
country lags with regard to social assistance and labor programs: social assistance reaches 11
percent of the entire population, and 30 percent of the poorest quintile (Gassmann and Roelen
2009).

Timor-Leste (Cluster E) and the Republic of Yemen (Cluster C) (low capacity–strong enabling
environment, and medium capacity–average enabling environment, respectively) have also
managed to cover larger portions of their populations. In the Republic of Yemen, the Social
Welfare Fund reaches close to 7 million beneficiaries or 1.5 million households, which represents
7 percent of the population. In Timor-Leste, 53 percent of the population receives some sort of
social assistance. However, in both countries, the benefits tend to accrue more to the nonpoor.
In the Republic of Yemen, 70 percent of the beneficiary population was not in the intended target
group; of these untargeted beneficiaries, 75 percent were not classified as poor. Similarly, in
Timor-Leste, the three major social assistance programs fail to reach 60 percent of the bottom
two quintiles. Thus, inefficient targeting (to undeserving or unintended groups) in social
protection programming remains a serious issue, even in fragile and conflict-affected countries
where coverage is relatively high.


                                               22
4.4. Expenditures

Trends. Most fragile and conflict-affected countries—especially those with low capacity and
those that lack natural resource wealth—rely on external funding for social protection. This
dependency raises concerns regarding the financial sustainability of social protection in such
countries. Some high- and medium-capacity countries like Kosovo (Cluster D) and Nepal (Cluster
C) or resource-rich countries like Timor-Leste (Cluster E) are the exceptions to this generalization.

The majority of fragile and conflict-affected countries also direct a large proportion of social
protection expenditures to social insurance programs and categorical benefits, though the
coverage of these programs remains low with poor benefit incidence, as shown above. Social
insurance programs, in particular, can be regressive in many fragile and conflict-affected
countries because they cover civil servants (sometimes solely) and, in high-capacity countries,
formal sector employees; these are typically nonvulnerable groups. In fragile and conflict-
affected countries with an aging covered population, the cost of social insurance will rise quickly
and soon. The coverage of pension systems in most fragile and conflict-affected countries
remains overwhelmingly low, and the populations are predominantly young. This combination
leads to pension system dependency ratios (beneficiaries/contributors) that are fast increasing.
Although the rationale behind social assistance programs and subsidies in fragile and conflict-
affected countries—as in many other countries—is that they would support vulnerable groups,
the nonpoor benefit disproportionately, making these programs and expenditures highly
regressive and ineffective. Nonetheless, they fulfill political and social objectives.

Sources of financing. In Kosovo, a Cluster D country (high capacity and strong enabling
environment), the government budget finances social protection schemes apart from the social
insurance program, which is funded by employers (Including the government for public sector
employees) and employee contributions. These schemes constitute 5.8 percent of GDP, which is
almost the same as the global average at 6 percent. Cluster E (low capacity and strong enabling
environment) consists of both resource-rich and resource-poor countries. Timor-Leste, a
resource-rich country, funds all social protection programming through its $7 billion petroleum
fund. Togo a resource-poor country, funds only 25 percent of its social protection programming

                                                 23
through its own revenues. In Cluster D (low capacity and weak enabling environment) countries,
most social protection programming is externally funded and off budget, as in Haiti. In Cluster A
countries (high capacity and weak enabling environment), social protection financing is mixed:
ranging from, e.g., West Bank and Gaza with a high dependence on external sources to Iraq,
which has less dependency. Nevertheless, spending is within a budget framework and
concentrated around national programs.

Remittances. Overall, empirical evidence suggests that remittances represent an important
source of income for many fragile and conflict-affected households, and that the impact of
changes in remittances due to shocks (such as a conflict) can be large, at least for those
households that benefit from them (World Bank, n.d.). Remittances tend to serve as insurance
against risks and help mitigate vulnerability (as in Haiti and Pakistan in response to natural
disasters). Unlike foreign aid, remittances tend to have a countercyclical nature, as they increase
during downturns in the recipient countries. They can constitute a high level of household
income; however, they cannot be a substitute for domestic growth and employment-generation
efforts. In Mali, remittances are saved for unexpected events and serve as a private safety net
(Ratha 2013).

While the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s list of fragile states differs
slightly from the World Bank’s, the trends it portrays regarding remittances in a recent report
mirror those noted above (OECD 2014). It finds that in many fragile and conflict-affected
countries, particularly middle-income ones, remittances have outpaced aid as the major source
of development funding; this is in contrast to nonfragile developing countries, where foreign
direct investment constitutes the larger share.

Level of expenditure. In many fragile and conflict-affected countries, expenditures on social
protection (including government and fairly substantial external sources) are close to the global
average as a percentage of GDP. However, a large majority of these expenditures are skewed
toward categorical benefits and social insurance. Within social protection spending, there is
considerable heterogeneity with regard to expenditure by category of social protection. For
example, social insurance spending ranges from 0.4 percent to 9.4 percent of GDP, with the

                                                  24
average pension spending among the fragile and conflict-affected countries at about 2 percent
of GDP (of the representative sample shown in figure 4.5). This level of expenditure is
unsustainable, considering the low coverage and young demographic profile in most of these
countries, where an average of less than 5 percent of the population is over 65 years of age.
Comparisons to other countries with similar proportions of an elderly population confirm the
heavy burden of pension expenditures in many fragile and conflict-affected countries.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an outlier with respect to its spending on social insurance, as figure
4.5 shows. While its spending is nearly 10 percent of its GDP, its coverage is also quite high at 30
percent (total old-age beneficiaries/population over 65 years).

 Figure 4.5: Social Insurance Expenditures in Selected Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries
                                   as a Percentage of GDP

              10
               9
               8
               7
               6
               5
               4
               3
               2
               1
               0




Source: Data retrieved from HDNSP (Human Development Network Social Protection) Global Pensions Database
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/socialprotectionlabor/brief/pensions-data), January 2015.


In Cluster C countries (moderate capacity and average enabling environment), there has been a
noticeable increase over the last few years in social protection spending. For example, Nepal
increased its social protection spending from 1.5 percent of GDP in 2008 to 2.5 percent of GDP
in 2012 following its period of conflict; 95 percent of the expenditures were financed by tax


                                                    25
revenues. Mozambique and Rwanda, although not formally classified as fragile and conflict-
affected countries, have also increased allocations to social protection in the aftermath of
conflict. Mozambique’s expenditures rose from 0.2 percent of GDP in 2010 to 0.5 percent in 2014.

In many fragile and conflict-affected countries, social protection programming is used to benefit
former “freedom” fighters/war veterans and their survivors. Due to low coverage, these schemes
and benefits are highly regressive and absorb significant portions of social protection spending.

The recent State of Social Safety Nets 2014 report (World Bank 2014e) illustrates the range of
spending patterns across fragile and conflict-affected countries, with most relying on external
sources of funding for their social safety net expenditures. Table 4.2 and figure 4.6 show the
variation in this spending as a percentage of GDP across 14 countries with comparable data
available from 2008 onwards.

    Table 4.2: Safety Net Spending as a Percentage of GDP in Fragile and Conflict-Affected
                                          Countries


              Country/economy                       % of GDP             Data as of
              Timor-Leste                             5.91                 2009
              Sierra Leone                            3.50                 2011
              Bosnia & Herzegovina                    3.33                 2010
              Kosovo                                  1.47                 2012
              Yemen                                   1.44                 2008
              Iraq                                    1.22                 2009
              Nepal                                   1.20                 2009
              Madagascar                              1.10                 2010
              Syria                                   1.00                 2010
              West Bank and Gaza                      0.81                 2010
              Mali                                    0.50                 2009
              Togo                                    0.50                 2009
              Solomon Islands                         0.26                 2009
              Afghanistan                             0.02                 2009

Source: World Bank 2014e.


                                               26
  Figure 4.6: Share of Safety Net Spending of GDP in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries


               6
             5.5
               5
             4.5
               4
             3.5
               3
             2.5
               2
             1.5
               1
             0.5
               0




Source: World Bank 2014e.




4.5. Delivery Mechanisms

Targeting. Administrative capacity plays a crucial role in the ability of a government to target the
poor or other deserving populations. Several countries—including Mozambique, Sierra Leone,
and the Republic of Yemen—use a combination of targeting methods including categorical,
geographical, community, and self-selection to select beneficiaries for social protection
programs. In Sierra Leone and the Republic of Yemen, there has been a move away from simply
using categorical, community, or self-targeting toward adding PMT so as to minimize inclusion
errors. The West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Program uses a single registry and fully functioning
PMT system. Nepal and Timor-Leste have less administrative capacity; they continue to rely
primarily on categorical and community targeting, respectively. Overall, it is evident that longer-
term and better-established programs, in attempting to target a higher percentage of the poor,
are turning to PMT methods to minimize inclusion/exclusion errors and establish more
sophisticated mechanisms for targeting (e.g., West Bank and Gaza, the Republic of Yemen).

Payment systems. As with other administrative processes, capacity and financial infrastructure
are needed in order to use effective methods of payment. However, the availability of mobile
technology has allowed many low-capacity countries with relatively weak enabling environments


                                                27
to overcome the challenge of low administrative capacity. Although sophisticated payment
methods are available in Cluster B countries—such as Haiti and Somalia—coverage remains quite
low. Higher-capacity countries, such as Kosovo, rely on financial institutions and primarily
electronic payments to transfer social insurance benefits. West Bank and Gaza has recently
switched from post offices to banks in delivering cash benefits, as has Nepal. At the other
extreme, Mozambique and Timor-Leste still use trucks or person-to-person methods to deliver
cash benefits.

Monitoring and evaluation. While building an evaluation base can take years and substantial
resources, few impact evaluations associated with the countries discussed here have been
completed. Evaluations do exist of the Republic of Yemen Social Welfare Fund (see box 4.1), the
West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Program, the Togo School Feeding Program, and the Sierra
Leone Public Works Program. The impact evaluations, by nature, are not systematic; thus, it
remains difficult to build evidence on the effectiveness of programs in fragile and conflict-
affected countries. When they are available and show positive results (as in West Bank and Gaza,
Sierra Leone, and the Republic of Yemen), they provide a strong basis for scaling up and
systematizing programming.



            Box 4.1: Evaluation Results for the Yemeni Social Fund for Development

 The Republic of Yemen’s Social Fund for Development focuses on pro-poor long-term development
 through Community and Local Development, Capacity-Building, Small- and Micro-Enterprise
 Development, and Labor-Intensive Public Works Programs. The Labor-Intensive Public Works Program
 played a crucial role in cushioning beneficiary communities from the economic shock of 2010 –11, and
 averted potential longer-term consequences related to selling off assets and incurring debt. The public
 works program was scaled up to increase relief and humanitarian responses. By employing community
 members in public works activities, the program effectively reached a large number of rural households,
 increased average wages, shifted the structure of the workforce away from work in the lowest-paid
 sectors and caused a significant increase in the probability of female employment.

 Similarly, the Rain-fed Agriculture and Livestock Program has helped improve agricultural productivity
 by fostering the formation and training of small producer groups in the country’s rural regions. The
 program allowed villagers to self-select into participation in project groups where they would make
 investments in agriculture, receive training in organization and agricultural best practices, and receive




                                                    28
 subsidies for the purchase of livestock. The program had strong impacts on increasing community
 solidarity and—to some degree—female empowerment.




Grievance and redress mechanisms. These mechanisms seek to capture complaints related to
program functions (e.g., targeting of program beneficiaries) and provide redress. Such
mechanisms are available in three forms: government agencies, independent redress
institutions, and the courts. In many Latin American countries with mature social protection
programs—including Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico—beneficiaries have the option of utilizing
different channels for complaints, both at the national and program levels. Because such systems
require dedicated administrative capacity, they tend to be less available in fragile and conflict-
affected states. A few of these countries with long-standing programs are attempting to
incorporate grievance mechanisms to the extent possible. In the Republic of Yemen, the public
works program under the Social Welfare Fund offers a complaint box for any issues raised by
program beneficiaries. The issues are compiled and discussed, and measures are taken each
month to respond to the beneficiaries.


5. Highlights of Social Protection Program Delivery in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries


This section presents lessons learned from selected policies and programs applied in various
fragile and conflict-affected settings and illustrating different social protection approaches. The
intent is to provide a sense of what is happening on the ground to bring to life the data presented
in section 4. It is also intended to provide an understanding of the challenges and issues
confronting social protection in fragile and conflict-affected settings.


                                                 29
Categorical Benefits May Be Critical for Social Cohesion and Political Stability, but Are
Unsustainable. Veterans’ pension programs are a common part of social protection
programming in a number of fragile and conflict-affected countries, regardless of income or
capacity levels. Often, these programs are deemed critical for maintaining social balance in the
aftermath of a conflict, and providing a dividend to those who took part in liberation wars. Timor-
Leste, an oil-rich East Asian state, has such a program. The Timorese fought a war of
independence from Indonesia between 1975 and 1999. At that time, the leaders of the
movement promised the fighters jobs and a better life after independence. This commitment
was also reflected in the constitution when the country was formed in 2002. However, after
independence, there was a feeling that these promises were not being fulfilled. Mass riots in
2007 and an assassination attempt on the prime minister in 2008 are largely attributed to this
sense of discontent.

In response, the government expanded its social protection efforts. The increasing size of the
Petroleum Fund played a role in this decision as well. Timor-Leste uses its natural resource wealth
for social protection funding. It spends 15 percent of non-oil GDP and 5.9 percent of total GDP
on social protection, a majority of which goes to veterans’ pensions. The current level of funding
appears financially unstable. A 2011 fiscal sustainability analysis undertaken by the National
Directorate of Budget of the Ministry of Finance shows that the fund will reach zero in 2026 if
growth in expenditure is not constrained and non-oil economic growth is below expectations.
Out of the total social assistance spending in Timor-Leste, 60 percent goes to veterans’ benefits,
covering only 1 percent of the population. Despite concerns regarding financial sustainability,
veterans’ pensions are used to contain a volatile group and maintain political stability.

Rapid Scale-Up Is Possible If There Is Political Will, Relative Capacity, and Financing. The
Republic of Yemen has been very successful in rapidly scaling up its Social Welfare Fund, which
today provides cash benefits to close to 7 million people (28 percent of the population) in all 21
governorates. The fund has expanded its coverage from 100,000 beneficiaries at its start, to
almost 1 million poor and vulnerable Yemeni households over a 10-year period; it expanded to
1.5 million households during the political crisis in 2011. The fund’s budget has grown from $4


                                                30
million at the outset to $200 million in 2008/09 and around $300 million in 2012. This is a clear
example of how—with moderate capacity and an average enabling environment—rapid scale-up
is possible, provided there is political will.

Sound technical assistance from the World Bank also helped improve targeting. Technical
assistance in 2009 funded by the Bank introduced PMT as a targeting method and applied it to
the 2008 Social Welfare Fund beneficiary and applicant survey. PMT helped the country identify
existing nonpoor beneficiaries and new poor beneficiaries, thereby improving targeting; although
there are still problems with inclusion errors.

Programs Can Be Successful If Based on Pre-Existing Social Institutions. Togo has used an
existing informal social mechanism for its school feeding program, which has proven to be
successful in a low-capacity setting and has reached a large number of beneficiaries. The program
benefits approximately 20,000 children annually in the most deprived, geographically isolated,
and disaster-prone areas of the country. Its aim is to provide adequate calories to children
vulnerable to malnourishment. The meals are prepared by selected village women, or femmes-
mamans (Andrews et al. 2011). These femmes-mamans are a familiar feature in Togolese villages
preparing and selling food in the market or on the street. By employing these women to cook the
school meals in the beneficiary schools, the program also provides income-generation
opportunities for the poor.

The program has made an important contribution toward attracting and retaining beneficiary
children in school, providing school access to children who are older and have not yet enrolled,
and—increasingly—attracting young girls. Results show increases in enrolment, decreases in
dropout and absentee rates, and a reduction of the age at entry in primary school in all regions;
the findings have been particularly positive among girls. An increase in new enrolments in
beneficiary schools in 2009–10 was 16 points higher than in the group of control schools. The
dropout rate was 0.9 percent in beneficiary schools compared to 1.4 percent in control schools.
The retention rate expressed in terms of percentage of children attending school every day is 2
percent higher than that of the control schools. Further, the meals served provide necessary
calories to the children. A nutritional assessment of the food served at beneficiary schools shows

                                                  31
that school meals are providing between 60 and 90 percent of the daily caloric intake needed for
primary school–age children.

Proxy Means Testing Can Improve Targeting Efficiencies of Existing Social Protection Programs.
The West Bank and Gaza’s dramatic shift in social safety net policy in 2004 emphasized the need
to provide assistance to extremely poor households and the importance of using a PMT
mechanism to verify the eligibility of beneficiaries. With the help of the World Bank, the Cash
Transfer Program in West Bank and Gaza has been able to effectively—and in a relatively short
time—develop, implement, and secure donor and Palestinian Authority buy-in for an effective
and objective poverty-based targeting system. The system accurately identifies and provides
regular and timely cash transfers to poor households, using benefit levels that are tailored to
household composition and poverty levels. The use of PMT has been found to be highly accurate,
having identified almost 70 percent of target cases correctly; a large majority of the beneficiaries
are extremely poor. The inclusion/exclusion errors are lower than other programs that are widely
considered to be successful (e.g., Bolsa Familia in Brazil and Oportunidades in Mexico). As such,
the Cash Transfer Program is highly efficient, with cost-benefit ratio analyses showing that for
each unit of currency spent on transfers by the Ministry of Social Affairs, 0.66 units goes toward
reducing the extreme poverty gap. Many partners of social protection programs in West Bank
and Gaza—including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, the World Food Programme, and UNICEF—have had access to, and many rely on, the
PMT database managed by the Ministry of Social Affairs for designing and targeting their own
programs.

The West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Program benefits close to 100,000 households and
600,000 individuals (about 14 percent of the total population). It is considered one of the most
advanced cash assistance programs in the Middle East and North Africa region, using a
sophisticated management information system and a uniform payment modality. Moreover,
West Bank and Gaza provides a best practice example regarding the creation and use of a unified
registry of beneficiaries across social safety net programs which has significantly improved
targeting accuracy and crisis response capacity. In normal times, unified registries can reduce


                                                32
costs and facilitate coherence and convergence because all agents work with the same database.
In times of crisis, unified registries can be used to quickly disburse additional benefits to the
target population or quickly expand coverage by adjusting eligibility criteria.

Note that PMT is not used in postconflict or emergency situations, as in such cases, the extreme
poor are not the only targeted households and most PMT indicators (i.e., household assets) are
difficult to calculate and may have been affected by the conflict.

PMT and Unique Identifiers Are Effective Tools to Curtail Inclusion Errors. In fragile and conflict-
affected countries with high capacity and a strong enabling environment such as Kosovo, best
practice processes can be employed to reduce inclusion errors. The Kosovo Social Assistance
Program covers 11 percent of the total population and 13 percent of all children; coverage rates
are higher for the poorest quintile (30 percent) and 35 percent of the poorest children (Gassmann
and Roelen 2009). Using a combination of eligibility criteria and proxy means and means testing
to target beneficiaries, Kosovo has only a very small inclusion error in the program. The majority
of benefits are awarded to families in the two poorest quintiles, and only a small share of benefits
is awarded to nonpoor families. Over 70 percent of spending on the social assistance scheme
went to households in the bottom quintile, while less than 3 percent in the top quintile benefited.
This compares favorably with regional averages of 62 and 4 percent, respectively. The
combination of eligibility criteria, PMT (asset), and means testing (income) works well in
differentiating between the poor and the nonpoor. Moreover, the unique identification system
that has been put in place allows rapid and accurate verification of beneficiaries with little room
for fraud and misuse of benefits.

Certainly, the reasons for the relatively successful delivery of social assistance programs through
PMT and a common registry are the institutional legacy of social protection in Kosovo and the
resulting relatively high administrative capacity and number of qualified staff. Also, distance from
conflict has been an important factor in building and maintaining delivery systems over time. It
would be difficult to administer PMT or establish a reliable registry in an ongoing or recent
conflict situation in which many households may be displaced or difficult to locate or identify; or
that may lack the assets needed to build a PMT mechanism and measure relative welfare.

                                                33
Mobile Technology Can Overcome Implementation Challenges and Improve Community-Based
Programs in Low-Capacity Settings. Sierra Leone is characterized as having low capacity and a
strong enabling environment, with resource wealth. Despite its low administrative capacity, the
country provides an example of how mobile technology can help improve community-based
programs and make implementation processes more efficient.

Mobile technology is being used in the Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support Project. The
project—which seeks to provide capacity building to youth institutions, to finance policy studies
and analysis, and to promote the effective national coordination of all youth employment
support initiatives in Sierra Leone—has benefited about 10,000 youths each year over the last
three years and has helped them become more employable and/or to transition into the labor
market. Beneficiaries of the Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support Project have adapted easily
to the new mobile technology. As in many other countries, e-payments have proved to work well,
despite low capacity and a fragile setting. Communities have played a pivotal role in ensuring
these successes.

Under the Youth Employment Support Project, and its Cash for Work component in particular,
several implementing challenges were identified, including registry, payment system, and
monitoring and evaluation. In tackling these implementation issues, the use of smart
phones/mobile technology proved to be a very cost-efficient solution. Smart phones were used
to register a comprehensive range of information/inputs. The phones were also operated on- and
offline and used to upload data in real time, provided the beneficiaries had a SIM card and
network coverage.

Given the low capacity and absence of efficient beneficiary targeting and registry mechanisms,
there was a general lack of identification documents, and the existing paper documentation
suffered from errors and was difficult to access (Rosas and Martin 2014). Mobile technology was
introduced in order to find a solution to the lack of documentation. Staff members were quickly
trained to use smart phones to collect information on potential beneficiaries and to take photos
for the beneficiary IDs. Each subproject registration with mobile technology lasted one day. Thus
far, more than 6,600 beneficiaries have been registered in over 86 subproject sites. Where paper

                                               34
documentation existed, smart phones were used to digitize the information, which resulted in a
digital beneficiary database. The database allows for enhanced coordination among different
social protection players and institutions, by allowing for data sharing and comparison of
information (Rosas and Martin 2014).

The use of mobile technology in improving beneficiary registration resulted in a better payment
system as well, through better data and payment flows. Upon registration, all beneficiary
information is added to an electronic timesheet, wherein the payment amount is directly
computed and beneficiaries receive their SIM cards which are registered to be used for electronic
payments.

Social Protection Can Be Used as a Peace-Building Tool. Following the end of its armed conflict
and the signing of a peace agreement, Nepal has expanded its social protection coverage
considerably from 2006 on to forge social unity and ease tensions, targeting social protection
programs in particular conflict-affected regions. Spending has increased from 0.5 percent of GDP
in 2004/05 to about 2.5 percent of GDP in 2012. Social protection investments have concentrated
on various categorical cash transfer programs, school feeding, and public works.

The commitment of the Nepali state to social protection and social inclusion can be inferred from
the interim constitution drafted in 2007. The document views employment and social security as
fundamental rights of every citizen. The state especially aims to ensure the socioeconomic
security of marginalized and vulnerable groups through such measures as child grants,
scholarships, and senior citizen and disability allowances. The current programs aim to support
vulnerable groups including the elderly, women, and children, especially in remote parts of
Nepal, as a way of reducing structural inequities in the country.

Despite the numerous programs and policies in place, the breadth and depth of social protection
remains quite low. Existing social assistance programs reach less than a quarter of the most
vulnerable populations; and, in particular, cash transfer programs do not appear to be as efficient
or effective as they could be. Total coverage of the cash transfer programs does not exceed 3
percent of the Nepalese population, while poverty rates are 31 percent nationally.


                                                35
In the context of transition and peace building, the visibility of the state in social protection policy
and programming in Nepal is something needs to be viewed positively. The majority of the
country’s social protection schemes are in the fiscal budget and are funded through tax revenues
(rather than through external aid). They could thus be interpreted as elements in a nascent social
contract between citizens and the state. The government has demonstrated a greater
commitment to social protection than many other, richer, surrounding countries—an attempt at
addressing socioeconomic security in a systemic manner.


                                           6. Conclusions


Social protection plays a significant role in fragile and conflict-affected settings in maintaining
or regaining social balance, but the cost can be significant. Although there is weak empirical
evidence on the impact of social protection in promoting and improving social cohesion,
measures such as subsidies and categorical cash benefits are widely used in fragile and conflict-
affected countries to ease political and social tensions and as rewards to certain population
groups following an episode of conflict. In some countries, such as Mozambique and Rwanda,
qualitative studies and anecdotal evidence point to social protection including measures that
promote voice, social inclusion, and more equitable access to services and benefits. Nepal has
instituted several categorical programs that increase coverage dramatically, even though they do
not always benefit the poorest.

History, social dynamics, and in-place institutional structures predetermine social protection
policy and programming choices. Countries often make policy and programming choices as a
response to the situation on the ground. Social protection objectives and interventions are
influenced by a country’s social needs and the relationship it has had with its citizenry (i.e., in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, long-standing programs, particularly social pensions, have
created strong ties with the citizens. Similarly, in resource-rich countries, subsidies have helped
shape relationships and set long-term trends. To a large extent, existing institutions, informal
networks, and cultural understanding of government responsibility to social welfare determine
the social protection agenda.

                                                  36
Programming choices and balance between social assistance, social insurance, and labor vary
widely in fragile and conflict-affected countries, and depend on the capacity, income, and
extent of an enabling environment in the country. Level of administrative capacity, together
with the relative strength of institutions and rule of law in the country, determines the type of
interventions that are possible to implement in fragile and conflict-affected countries. Low-
capacity countries with weak enabling environments have a concentration of emergency-type
and fragmented policies and programs with low coverage and coherence, which are largely in
kind. High-capacity countries with strong or moderately strong enabling environments have been
able to establish longer-term social assistance, social insurance, and some labor programs.
Additionally, such countries are working on first- and second-generation design and
implementation issues such as increasing coverage, reducing targeting errors, and establishing
more effective management information systems, as well as rationalizing policies and programs.
Frequently in fragile and conflict-affected countries, the populist measures undertaken to
support the poor and vulnerable tend to have regressive outcomes and to suffer from major
errors of exclusion (e.g., categorical benefits, subsidies).

Financing sources are critical determinants for the direction of social protection policy and
programming in fragile and conflict-affected settings. A large majority of fragile and conflict-
affected countries are low income and resource poor, and face serious budget constraints for
social programming. External financing is a major source for social protection expenditures for
the medium term. In many cases, external financing steers and shapes the medium- to long-term
policy discourse. Although with different income and capacity levels, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, West
Bank and Gaza, and the Republic of Yemen have all forged, to varying degrees, a national social
protection vision with strong technical support and financing from external partners. All of them
have reformed, rationalized, and scaled up their social protection programming following
emergency situations and long-standing conflict.

Political leadership is a critical determinant of the direction of social protection policy and
programming in fragile and conflict-affected settings. Reforms and rapid scale-up in program
coverage in fragile and conflict-affected settings have been possible with enabling institutional


                                                  37
environments. More important, however, is political leadership that is willing to bear the
financial, social, and institutional costs and to mobilize public opinion. West Bank and Gaza and
the Republic of Yemen have moved forward in reforming their targeting mechanisms and cash
transfer programs, while Bosnia and Herzegovina and Timor-Leste have resisted rethinking
categorical benefits for war veterans and their families—programs that are highly regressive.

Design and implementation choices, and particularly the delivery of social protection
programs, vary widely depending on country capacity and the enabling environment. It is
possible to use modern technology successfully (e.g., for payments) even in very high-risk and
low-capacity environments such as Haiti, Somalia, and South Sudan. Such interventions remain
small scale, however, and scale-up is difficult in the absence of an enabling institutional
environment. To put long-term delivery platforms in place, such as identification and targeting
mechanisms, an institutional enabling environment and modest administrative capacity are
necessary.

Social protection in fragile and conflict-affected settings is dynamic, and its composition shifts
with changes in country circumstances. As emergencies occur and recur, or as countries
stabilize, the composition of social protection shifts to meet needs. For example, periodic surges
in in-kind assistance are common as scale-up of cash transfer programs.




                                               38
                                       7. Bibliography


Acemoglu, Darren, and James Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power,
Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown Publishers.

Andrews, Colin, Maitreyi Das, John Elder, Mirey Ovadiya, and Giuseppe Zampaglione. 2012.
“Social Protection in Low Income Countries and Fragile Situations: Challenges and Future
Directions.” Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper 1209, World Bank, Washington, DC.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-Discussion-
papers/430578-1331508552354/1209.pdf.

Andrews, Colin, Elena Galliano, Carolyn Turk, and Giuseppe Zampaglione. 2011. “Social Safety
Nets in Fragile States: A Community-Based School Feeding Program in Togo.” SP Discussion
Paper No. 1117, World Bank, Washington, DC.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-Discussion-
papers/Safety-Nets-DP/1117.pdf.

Andrews, Colin, and Adea Kryeziu. 2013. “Public Works and the Jobs Agenda: Pathways for
Social Cohesion?” Background Paper for World Development Report 2013, World Bank,
Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTNWDR2013/Resources/8258024-
1320950747192/8260293-1320956712276/8261091-
1348683883703/WDR2013_bp_Social_Cohesion_and_Public_Works.pdf.

Asian Development Bank. 2012. Nepal: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.

Assaf, Nabila. 2013. Stimulating Business and Employment in Yemen. World Bank.

Bagash, Thabet. 2012. Transforming Cash Transfers: Beneficiary and Community Perspectives
on the Social Welfare Fund in Yemen. et al. ODI and UKAID.

Barma, Naazneen H., Elisabeth Huybens, and Lorena Viñuela. Institutions taking root: Building
State Capacity in Challenging Contexts.

Borges, Antonio. 2011. Kosovo—Policy Note for the First Assessment of Performance Under the
Staff Monitored Program.

Braithwaite, Jeanine, and Daniel Mont. 2008. Disability and Poverty: A Survey of World Bank
Poverty Assessments and Implications. The World Bank.

Breisinger, Clemens, Wilfried Engelke, and Olivier Ecker. 2011. “Petroleum Subsidies in Yemen:
Leveraging Reform for Development.” IFPRI Discussion Paper 01071, International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington, DC.
http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp01071.pdf.



                                              39
Brisson, Nathalie Lamaute. 2013. Systèmes de protection sociale en Amérique latine et dans les
Caraïbes: Haïti. Commission économique pour l'Amérique latine et les Caraïbes (CEPALC).

Camnahas, Lourenco. 2012. Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste: Updating and Improving the
Social Protection Index. ADB.

Chandy, Laurence, and Geoffrey Gertz. 2011. “Poverty in Numbers: The Changing State of
Global Poverty from 2005 to 2015.” Policy Brief 2011-01, the Brookings Institution, Washington,
DC.

Cho, Yoonyoung. 2011. Informality and Protection from Health Shocks: Lessons from Yemen.
The World Bank.

Commission of the European Communities. 2009. Kosovo Under UNSCR 1244/99 2009 Progress
Report.

de Regt, Jacomina, Shruti Majumdar, and Janmejay Singh. 2013. Designing Community-Driven
Development Operations in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations: Lessons from a Stocktaking.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Devereux, S. 2000. “Social Safety Nets for Poverty Alleviation in Southern Africa.” ESCOR Report
R7017, Department for International Development, London.

Elgazzar, Heba, Firas Raad, Chokri Arfa, Awad Mataria, Nisreen Salti, Jad Chaaban, Djavad
Salehi-Isfahani, Sanaz Fesharaki, and Mehdi Majbouri. 2010. “Who Pays? Out of Pocket Health
Spending and Equity Implications in the Middle East and North Africa.” HNP Discussion Paper,
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Elgazzar, Heba. 2011. “Raising Returns: The Distribution of Health Financing and Outcomes in
Yemen.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Engelke, Wilfried. 2012. Joint Social and Economic Assessment Republic of Yemen. The World
Bank.

Engineering and Management Consulting Center. 2012. “Assessment of Mosa Targeting System
under the Cash Transfer Program CTP (P129124): Gaza Strip.”

Estrategia Nacional de Seguranca Social Basica. Ministerio da Mulher e Accao Social. 2009

European Commission. 2008. Social Protection and Social Inclusion in Kosovo: Under UN
Security Council Resolution 1244—Executive Summary.

FAO. Social Protection for Food Security. High Level Panel of Experts and Committee on World
Food Security. 2012. Rome.




                                               40
Gassmann, Franziska, and Keetie Roelen. 2009. “Impact of Social Assistance Cash Benefit
Scheme on Children in Kosovo—Report to UNICEF Kosovo.” Maastricht Graduate School of
Governance, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

Gouvernement de la République d’Haïti. 2014. Plan D’action Pour L’accélération De La
Réduction De La Pauvreté Extrême.

Gubbels, John, David Snelbecker and Lena Zezulin.Kosovo. 2007. Pension Reform:
Achievements and Lessons. World Bank.

Hackstein, Dr. Katharina, Dr. Candace Miller, Dr. Esam Mahdi. 2008. European Union
PEGASE Programme of Direct Financial Support. Impact Evaluation of the EU Contribution to
the Palestinian Cash Transfer Programme (CTP) in the Framework of the PEGASE Programme of
Support to “Vulnerable Palestinian Families” (VPF). Final Report-volume 1. July 2013.

Hamad, Bassam Abu (Al-‐Quds University, Gaza) and Sara Pavanello. 2012. Transforming Cash
Transfers: Beneficiary and community perspectives of the Palestinian National Cash Transfer
Programme. Part 1: The Case of the Gaza Strip.

Hillis, Samira, Phillippe Leite, Laura McDonald, and Lillian Frost. 20133. Designing an advanced
cash transfer program in the Palestinian territories. MENA Knowledge and Learning: Quick Note
series Nr. 98. World Bank.

Holmes, Rebecca, and Shizu Aphadiya. 2009. The Role of Cash Transfers in Post-Conflict Nepal.

Holmes, Rebecca, and Adam Jackson. 2007. Ministry of Finance, Sierra Leone. Cash Transfers in
Sierra Leone: Appropriate, Affordable and Feasible? ODI Social Protection: Cash Transfer Series.

Honorati, Maddalena and Rodriguez, Luz. Forthcoming. “Social Protection Assessment Review.”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Instituto Nacional de Accao Social. 2013. Plano Economico e Social 2013. 2013. Mocambique.

International Crisis Group. 2011. Timor-Leste's Veterans: An Unfinished Struggle.

International Finance Corporation and African Development Bank. 2007. Economic and Social
Development Brief.

International Labour Organization. 2004. “Social Protection for People in the Informal Economy
of Nepal.” http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---ilo-
kathmandu/documents/publication/wcms_113829.pdf.

International Monetary Fund. 2009. IMF Staff Visit to Kosovo: Concluding Statement.

—. 2011a. Republic of Mozambique: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.



                                               41
—. 2011b. Statement by IMF Mission to Kosovo.

Jones, Nicola, and Mohammed Shaheen. 2012. Transforming Cash Transfers: Beneficiary and
community perspectives of the Palestinian National Cash Transfer Programme. Part 2: The case
of the West Bank.

Khanal, Dilli Raj. 2012. Social Protection/Social Security in Nepal. Situational Analysis. ILO.

Koehler, Gabriele. 2011. Social Protection and Socioeconomic Security in Nepal.

Lombardo, Annalisa. 2012. “Mapping of Social Protection Programmes in Haiti.” UNICEF/Oxfam,
UK.

Ministerio da Planificacao e Desenvolvimento de Mocambique. Programa Estrategico de
Reduccao da Pobreza Urbana. 2010.

Ministry of Social Affairs, Palestinian National Authority. 2010. “The Palestinian National
Program for Social Protection Cash Transfer Strategy.”

—. 2010. “Social Protection Sector Strategy.”

—. 2011. “Business Strategy.”

Monchuk, Victoria. 2013. “Reducing Poverty and Investing in People The New Role of Safety
Nets in Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Mountfield, Ben. 2012. “Cash Voucher Programme: Review of Voucher Assistance as a Safety-
Net Transfer Modality in the Gaza Strip.” Study conducted for Oxfam GB and UN World Food
Programme.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008. Concepts and
Dilemmas of State Building in Fragile Situations: From Fragility to Resilience. Paris: OECD.

—. 2013. Fragile States 2013: Resource Flows and Trends in a Shifting World. Paris: OECD.

—. 2014. Fragile States 2014: Domestic Revenue Mobilization in Fragile States. Paris: OECD.

Ratha, Dilip. 2013. “The Impact of Remittances on Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction.”
Policy Brief No. 8, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Rosas, Nina, and Andrea Martin. 2014. “Using Smartphones to Improve Delivery of Safety Net
Programs in Sierra Leone.” Social Protection Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Sawada, Naotaka, and Jian Zhang. 2012. “Promoting the Rural Farm and Non-Farm Businesses:
Evidence from the Yemen Rural Investment Climate.” World Bank, Washington, DC.



                                                 42
Schwartz, Anita, and Aylin Isik-Dikmelik. 2014. “Chapter 7: Kosovo Public Finance Review.”
Social Protection. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Shaipi, Kushtrim. 2005. “Report on the Present State and Future of Social Security in Kosovo.”
Kosovar Research and Documentation Institute. Pristina.

Silva, J., V. Levin, and M. Morgandi. 2012. “Inclusion and Resilience: The Way Forward for Social
Safety Nets in the Middle East and North Africa.” MENA Development Report 72975 , World
Bank, Washington, DC.

Social Security Administration. 2013a. “Social Security Programs Throughout the World: Africa,
2013.” SSA Publication No. 13-11803, Social Security Administration, Washington, DC.
http://www.socialsecurity.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2012-
2013/africa/ssptw13africa.pdf.

—. 2013b. “Social Security Programs Throughout the World: Asia and the Pacific, 2012.”
SSA Publication No. 13-11802, Social Security Administration, Washington, DC.
http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2012-2013/asia/ssptw12asia.pdf.

Strokova, Victoria, Clert, and Lucy Bassett. 2014. Social Protection chapter of the Haiti Poverty
Assessment. World Bank.

Sumner, A. 2012. “Where Do the World’s Poor Live? A New Update.” IDS Working Paper 393,
Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Sussex, UK.

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees. “UNRWA Medium Term
Strategy 2010–2015.” http://www.unrwa.org/userfiles/201003317746.pdf.

Upreti, Bishnu Raj, Sony KC, Richard Mallett, and Babken Babajanian. 2012. “Livelihoods, Basic
Services and Social Protection in Nepal.” Working Paper No. 7, Secure Livelihoods Research
Consortium, London. http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-
opinion-files/7784.pdf.

World Bank. 2007. “Timor-Leste Youth Development and the Labour Market.” World Bank,
Washington, DC.

—. 2008a. “Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund Project Paper on a Proposed Additional
Financing Grant under the Global Food Crisis Response Program in the Amount of US$7 Million
to the Republic of Togo for the Community Development Project (CDP).” World Bank,
Washington, DC. http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2008/10/13/000333037_20
081013011351/Rendered/INDEX/452370PJPR0P111LY10IDASecM200810610.txt.

—. 2008b. “Integrated Safeguards Datasheet: Appraisal Stage.” World Bank, Washington,
DC.


                                                43
—. 2008d. “International Development Association Emergency Project Paper for a
Proposed Grant in the Amount of SDR 10.6 Million (US$17.2 Million Equivalent) to the Republic
of Togo for a Community Development Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2009. “Integrated Safeguards Datasheet Appraisal Stage: Togo—Financial Sector and
Governance Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2010a. “Coping Strategies in Rural Yemen and Policy Implications.” Report No. 51927-
YE, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2010/07/02/000333037_20
100702004450/Rendered/PDF/519270ESW0P1061Yemen1Revised0Jun028.pdf.

—. 2010b. “Project Paper on a Proposed Additional Grant Under the Pilot Crisis Response
Window in the Amount of SDR 5.8 Million (US$8.7 Million Equivalent) to the Republic of Togo
for the Community Development Project (CDP).” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2010c. “US$11.0 Million Equivalent and Grant in the Amount of SDR 6.2 Million (US$9.0
Million Equivalent) to the Republic of Sierra Leone for a Youth Employment Support Project.”
Report No: 54419-SL, World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2011a. “Can Social Safety Nets Help Peace Building in Nepal? Results from a Social
Protection Technical Assistance Program.” Presentation, World Bank, Washington, DC.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SAFETYNETSANDTRANSFERS/Resources/281945-
1131468287118/BBL-SSN_Nepal_7-21-2011.pdf.

—. 2011b. “Human Development—Social Protection Pilot Project. Project Information
Document (PID).” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2011c. “Palestinian National Plan 2011–2013. Social Protection Sector Strategic Plan
Summary. Part 1: The Social Protection System.”

—. 2011d. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount of US$10
Million to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) for the Benefit of the Palestinian
Authority (PA) for the West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Project.” Report No: 59698-GZ, World
Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2011e. “Project Appraisal Document on a Rapid Social Response MDTF Grant.” World
Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2011f. “Project Information Document: Appraisal Stage—TL Social Protection
Administration Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2011g. “Project Information Document (PID) Concept Stage Togo Community
Development and Safety Net Project (PDSplus) (P127200).” World Bank, Washington, DC.



                                             44
—. 2011h. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

—. 2012a. Gender Equality and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

—. 2012b. “Implementation Completion and Results Report on a Grant in the Amount of
SDR 45 Million to the Republic of Yemen for a Private Sector Growth and Social Protection
Policy Development Policy Grant.” Report No: ICR00002250, World Bank, Washington, DC.
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2012/07/19/000333038_20
120719003833/Rendered/PDF/ICR22500P122410C0disclosed070170120.pdf.

—. 2012c. Implementation Status & Results: Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support
(P121052). Report No: ISR6586, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/AFR/2012/05/21/44AD9F93D5
5C756085257A0500811B0D/1_0/Rendered/PDF/ISR0Disclosabl021201201337643010647.pdf.

—. 2012d. “Kosovo: Country Partnership Strategy FYs12-15 Concept Note.” World Bank,
Washington, DC.

—. 2012e. “Mozambique: Social Protection Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2012f. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount of SDR 9.2
Million (US$14 Million Equivalent) to the Republic of Togo for a Community Development and
Safety Nets Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2012g. “Social Safety Net Reform Project: Implementation Completion and Results
Report (ICR).” Report No: ICR2488, World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2012h. “Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy.” World Bank,
Washington, DC.

—. 2012i. “West Bank and Gaza Targeting Assessment of the Cash Transfer Program.”
MENA Report No: ACS890, World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2012j. “Yemen: Joint Social and Economic Assessment for the Republic of Yemen.”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013a. “Aide-mémoire République du Togo Mission d’Appui à la mise en œuvre du
Projet Secteur Financier et Gouvernance (PSFG).” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013b. “Country Partnership Strategy for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste for
the Period FY2013-FY2017.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013c. “Labor Market Issues in Timor-Leste: Current State, Prospects and Challenges.”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                            45
—. 2013d. “Project Information Document (PID) Additional Financing. Community
Development and Safety Nets Project Additional Financing.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013e. “Restructuring Paper on a Proposed Project Restructuring of the Community
Development Project (p110943) IDA Grant H602-TG June 29, 2010 to the Republic of Togo.”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013f. “Restructuring Paper on a Proposed Project Restructuring of Togo-Financial
Sector and Governance Project Grant H454-TG Approval Date 03/21/2009 to the Republic of
Togo.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2013g. “Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment.” Report No. 78195-SL, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

—. 2013h. “Timor-Leste Social Assistance Public Expenditure and Program Performance
Report.” Report No: 73484-TP, World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2014a. “Implementation Completion and Results Report (IDA-H4090 IDA-H6020TF-
93124) on IDA Grants in the Amount of SDR 16.4 Million (US$25.9 Million Equivalent) and on a
Co-Financing Grant from the Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund in the Amount of US$7.0
Million to the Republic of Togo for a Community Development Project.” World Bank,
Washington, DC.

—. 2014b. “International Development Association Project Appraisal Document on a
Proposed Grant in the Amount of SDR 9.1 Million (US$14.0 Million equivalent) to the
Republique of Togo for a Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition Services Support Project.”
World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2014c. “Project Paper on a Proposed Restructuring and Additional Credit in the Amount
of ADR 7.9 Million (US$12.1 Million Equivalent) to the Republic of Togo for the Community
Development and Safety Nets Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

—. 2014d. Seeing Is Believing: Poverty in the Palestinian Territories. Washington, DC: World
Bank. http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/03/14/000333037_20
140314125844/Rendered/PDF/860380WP0P12860rty0in0Palestine0web.pdf.

—. 2014e. The State of Social Safety Nets 2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.

—. n.d. “Beyond ODA: Philanthropy, Remittances, and Other Transfers.”
http://go.worldbank.org/0AHMR4ULS0.

World Food Programme. 2014. “Secondary Impact of WFP Voucher Programme in Palestine.”




                                              46
Zarazua, Miguel Nino, Armando Barrientos, David Hulme, and Sam Hickey. 2010. “Social
Protection in Sub-Saharan Africa: Will the Green Shoots Blossom?” Working Paper No. 116,
Brooks World Poverty Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Zimmerman, Jamie M., and Kristy Bohling. 2013. “Helping Ti Manman Cheri in Haiti: Offering
Mobile Money-Based Government-to-Person Payments in Haiti.” Washington, DC: Consultative
Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP)/World Bank.




                                             47
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2013-2015

No.    Title

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012
1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406   Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
       by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405   Botswana Social Protection
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
       and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404   Cameroon Social Safety Nets
       by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403   Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402   Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
       Women
       by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014
1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014

1308        Youth Employment: A Human Development Agenda for the Next Decade
            by David Robalino, David Margolis, Friederike Rother, David Newhouse and Mattias Lundberg, June
            2013

1307        Eligibility Thresholds for Minimum Living Guarantee Programs: International Practices and
            Implications for China
            by Nithin Umapathi, Dewen Wang and Philip O’Keefe, November 2013

1306        Tailoring Social Protection to Small Island Developing States: Lessons Learned from the Caribbean
            by Asha Williams, Timothy Cheston, Aline Coudouela and Ludovic Subran, August 2013

1305        Improving Payment Mechanisms in Cash-Based Safety Net Programs
            by Carlo del Ninno, Kalanidhi Subbarao, Annika Kjellgren and Rodrigo Quintana, August 2013

1304        The Nuts and Bolts of Designing and Implementing Training Programs in Developing Countries
            by Maddalena Honorati and Thomas P. McArdle, June 2013

1303        Designing and Implementing Unemployment Benefit Systems in Middle and Low Income Countries:
            Key Choices between Insurance and Savings Accounts
            by David A. Robalino and Michael Weber, May 2013

1302        Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta Regression Analysis
            by Yoonyoung Cho and Maddalena Honorati, April 2013

1301        Skilled Labor Flows: Lessons from the European Union
            by Martin Kahanec, February 2013


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract


This study examines the role of social protection programming, and programming design
and implementation features, that are prominent in fragile and conflict-affected states. The
main objective is to build on existing, available information from a sample of fragile and
conflict-affected countries and develop operational guidance that addresses policy, design,
and implementation issues and offers operational solutions for social protection programming
and policy making in different fragile settings. The analysis showcases the universe of social
protection objectives that are evident in these countries as well as the programming trends,
types, coverage, and expenditure patterns. The paper also examines dimensions specific to
fragile and conflict-affected settings in implementing social protection and labor programs,
such as social cohesion, the role of community-driven development, and postwar benefits.
Finally, the study highlights social protection and labor program delivery in seven different
country contexts, and discusses the country-specific programming options chosen to achieve
the objectives and overcome capacity and operational constraints.




About this series...

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.



                                   © 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
