Page  1
 
 
Page  2
 
 
Integrated Safeguards [w1]Data Sheet (ISDS[w2]) 
Section I – Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 31, 2004 
Report No.:AC454
 
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P086747 
Project: Second North-East Irrigated 
Agriculture Project (NEIAP II) 
TTL: Nihal Fernando 
Total project cost (by component): 
Appraisal date: May 2004 
Loan/Credit amount($m):  
IDA: $70.0 m 
Board date: June 22, 2004 
  
Other financing amounts by source: 
 
No 
Managing unit: SASRD 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (80%); Roads 
and highways (10%); Other social services 
(10%) 
Lending instruments: Specific investment 
loan 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (emergency 
recovery? 
Yes?
[ ] 
No? 
[ X] 
Environmental category: B 
Safeguard classification: S2 
A.2. Project Objectives 
 
The proposed project is a repeater project to ongoing North-East Irrigated Agriculture 
Project [NEIAP}  
[ID P058070]. Its development objective (PDO) is 
“to help conflict-affected communities 
in the North-East Province and adjoining areas to restore livelihoods and enhance 
agricultural and other production and incomes, and build their capacity for sustainable 
social and economic reintegration.”
  
 
The PDO would be achieved by: a) creating, restoring, or improving essential village-level 
social and economic infrastructure and facilities; b) rebuilding, supplementing and 
enhancing individual household economies; c) building community skills and capacity and 
decentralizing powers for decision making, control of resources and implementation of 
programs at community level; and d) implementing targeted livelihood support programs 
for the most vulnerable (such as land-mine victims, people with war-induced deficient 
abilities, widows, women-headed households and ex-combatants). 
 
 
A.3. Project Description 
 
The project would have the following components:  
 
Component 1:  Village Rehabilitation and Development for Sustainable Social and Economic 
Reintegration
  
 
Page  3
 
 
This component would include the following sub-components: 
  
i) Building, strengthening and empowering community based organizations
:
 
 This 
subcomponent would include: a) community mobilization leading to the formation and/or 
revitalization of inclusive community- based organizations and institutional arrangements 
at the village level; and b) building capacity and improving technical, organizational and 
management skills to plan, execute and manage development activities on a demand-
responsive manner. 
 
ii) Creation, rehabilitation and improvements to essential village level social and economic 
infrastructure, services and facilities
:
 
This subcomponent would include essential village-
level social and economic infrastructure facilities and services such as: a) minor and 
medium irrigation scheme rehabilitation, improvement and augmentation; b) rehabilitation 
of ground water recharge ponds, dykes, and barrages in Jaffna district; c) rural access roads 
and link roads to markets and townships; d) drinking water wells; e) community centers 
and storage facilities for agricultural inputs and produce; and f) implementation of 
agricultural productivity enhancement activities . 
 
iii)
 
Livelihood assistance activities for vulnerable groups and people
: 
This sub-component 
would include: a) financial grants to village-level Community Based Organizations (CBOs) 
and women rural development societies to provide small loans to most vulnerable people in 
the community, using principles of micro-finance and revolving fund programs; and b) 
other special development and assistance programs targeting women, land-mine victims 
and ex-combatants.  
 
Component 2: Essential rehabilitation and improvements to selected major/medium irrigation schemes 
and creating opportunities for enhanced agricultural productivity and production 
 
This component would include the following subcomponents: 
 
i) Essential repairs and improvements to major irrigation structures to ensure structural stability and safety 
of major components including dams and embankments
: This subcomponent would finance: a) technical 
assistance and essential civil and mechanical works to ensure structural stability and safety of embankments 
and major structural components of selected major irrigation schemes; and b) essential repairs and 
improvements to major irrigation and drainage canals. 
 
ii) Pilot initiatives to promote crop diversification and commercial production: 
This subcomponent would 
support: a) pilot initiatives to test organizational models, commercial crops and cropping systems, new low- 
cost irrigation and agricultural technologies, and public-private-sector community partnerships to promote 
potential, capacity and opportunities for enhancing production, productivity and incomes; b) provide essential 
facilities necessary for pilot initiatives; c) technical assistance; and d) capacity building of farmer 
organizations (FOs), CBOs, and staff of the concerned provincial and local government agencies associated 
with the pilot initiatives. 
 
Component 3:  Institutional capacity building, project implementation support and project oversight
:  
 
This component would include the following subcomponents: 
 
i) Capacity building of national, provincial and local government agencies
: This subcomponent would 
support: a) enhancement of equipment and facilities; b) improvement and establishment of regional 
labo
r
atories for construction materials testin
g
, construction of civil works and 
q
ualit
y
 assurance, and 
Page  4
 
 
agricultural soil testing; c) short-term local/international training and study tours to selected staff; d) 
provision of essential office equipment and facilities; and e) technical assistance for special studies and 
research. 
 
ii) Project implementation support and oversight
: This subcomponent would finance a) 
hiring international/local consultants and staff for the project management unit and district 
project offices; b) nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). 
 
 
A.4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguard 
Analysis:  
 
The proposed project is a repeater operation to the ongoing North-East Irrigated 
Agriculture Project (NEIAP). The project location is the North-East province and selected 
areas of the adjoining four administrative districts affected by the civil conflict in Sri 
Lanka. Project beneficiaries will be the conflict- affected people. The project components 
would mostly deal with small-scale civil works related to dilapidated and dysfunctional 
irrigation schemes, village roads and individual household-level income- generating 
activities that do not lead to serious negative environmental and social impacts.  
 
Given the repeater nature of the project, the social and environmental safeguard 
assessments are greatly benefited with the existing knowledge, information and 
implementation experience. District Social Baseline Profiles, Village Social Profiles, 
Village Development Plans, Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework and 
implementation experience and monitored data of the parent project (Sri Lanka NEIAP) are 
of paramount importance. Recent Needs Assessments and various reconnaissance surveys 
conducted by international donors for relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction planning in 
the NE also provide supplementary information.  
 
There are salient characteristics and situations of the physical location of the project that 
would be relevant to safeguard the analysis. Those characteristics would become 
safeguard-relevant and social-risk-relevant 
only if
 
project investments are made: 
 
a)  In protected areas (natural habitats, forests and wildlife reserves, and national parks 
that are known to project stakeholders).  
b)  In land-mined areas (declared by the government and known to project 
stakeholders).  
c)  To improve water-storage capacity of the existing irrigation tanks in a manner that 
will lead to potential water-right disputes consequent to the disturbance to existing 
hydrological balance of typical small-tank cascades, existing agricultural and water-
use practices of the people downstream using the same water source or stream.  
d)  When involuntary land acquisition is required. 
e)  That would benefit lands of the displaced people presently encroached illegally and 
occupied by other people.  
 
Focal village-selection criteria will exclude project interventions to ensure that cases a) and 
b)
 above will not arise. The 
p
ro
j
ect will carr
y
 out a 
p
rior h
y
drolo
g
ical anal
y
sis of tank 
Page  5
 
 
cascades to address the safeguard issue c) above at subproject planning and design stages. 
Adequate design guidelines and practices are currently in force to appraise and screen the 
subprojects against this potential risk. The project will not require involuntary land 
acquisition, for example, land required for construction of wells and community buildings 
have been either voluntarily donated by the community members or state in the ongoing 
pioneer project. With regard to item e) above, the project has developed a framework to 
monitor encroachments by the communities and has clarified the mechanism for dealing 
with such situations. The ongoing project has applied the framework successfully.  
 
 
B. Check Environmental Category 
A [
 
], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ] 
 
The nature of project activities is similar to that of NEIAP, which is classified category B. 
An additional component in the repeater project is the financing of essential and urgent 
rehabilitation to existing major irrigation schemes (irrigation schemes serving a command 
area exceeding 400 hectares. In terms of rehabilitation of major irrigation schemes the 
project will only fund selective rehabilitation of dam embankments to enhance structural 
stability and not finance any increase in dam height or storage capacity and/or change to 
existing hydrological balance. A large majority of project investments will include 
localized, labor-intensive, small-scale civil works and household-level, individual, 
livelihood-support income-generating activities. Civil works would be typically 
rehabilitation and improvements of small and medium irrigation schemes and intra-village 
rural roads, and construction of drinking-water facilities and buildings that mostly utilize 
local construction material. Individual household-level income-generating activities are 
likely to be highland and home-garden agriculture and livestock and poultry rearing, etc. 
Therefore, the proposed NEIAP II is classified as category B. 
 
Comments 
 
Potential negative environmental impacts that may arise in relation to the project’s village-
level infrastructural rehabilitation, improvement and construction activities and household-
level income- generating activities are not significant. These can be easily managed with 
proper planning, oversight and monitoring with the involvement of the beneficiary 
communities through the participatory process built into the project design. The 
environmental safeguards screening, monitoring and implementation framework developed 
and put into practice under NEIAP will be used with necessary modifications.  
 
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
 
 Yes 
No 
 
Environmental assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 4.01) 
[ X] 
[ ] 
 
Natural habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Pest management (
OP 4.09
) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Cultural property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 
11.03
-) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Involuntary resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Indigenous peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
[ ] 
[X ] 
 
Page  6
 
 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
[ ] 
[X ] 
 
Safety of dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
[ X] 
[ ] 
 
Projects in disputed areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Projects on international waterways 
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.50) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Section II – Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
. 
 
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Environmental Safeguards
  
 
As outlined above and as evident from the implementation experience of the ongoing NEIAP, the repeater 
project is not expected to result in significant potential environmental safeguard issues and negative impacts. 
Overall, the project will result in a net positive impact on the environment. If there are any potential negative 
impacts they are site-specific related to the project’s village-level infrastructural rehabilitation, improvement 
and construction activities and household-level income-generating activities. These potential positive impacts 
can be enhanced and negative impacts easily managed with proper planning, design, construction 
supervision, monitoring and post-project operation and maintenance.  
 
The rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and ponds will include: a) strengthening, 
improving and filling breaches of earthen embankments, repairs to sluices and spillways; 
and b) cleaning, repairing and improving the earthen irrigation canals and cement/concrete 
canal structures. These are structures with embankment less than 15 m in height. Beside 
rehabilitation and improvements, there would be new minor construction of some key 
structures like falls, division boxes and regulators measuring structures at off-take points in 
the canals for effective irrigation and water management. The rehabilitation of village 
roads will include filling depressions and potholes and grading existing road platforms with 
burrowed earth, provision of culverts and other cross-drainage structures and side drains. 
Construction of buildings and drinking water wells will involve earth excavations and 
construction of cement/concrete structures. Improvements to dam safety of major irrigation 
works would include repairs and improvements to protect downstream slopes of dam 
embankments (e.g., runnel filling and providing lateral drains, etc., to provide safe passage 
of rainwater and seepage drainage), providing toe-filters and toe-drains to improve 
downstream drainage and arresting excessive seepage flows, upstream slope protection 
(e.g., rearranging and/or providing rip-rap to prevent dam slope against wave action), 
strengthening weak sections of the dam, improvements to canals and structures, and 
installation of dam settlement, seepage and water-level surveillance equipment. The 
anticipated activities will result in an overall enhancement of structural safety of the small 
earthen embankments and dams of major irrigation works, improved drainage, reduced 
waterlogging and stagnation, etc.  
 
These activities can also result in adverse impacts, if not managed consciously. However, 
those will be site-specific and restricted to those areas close to the existing infrastructure. 
There can be some 
p
otentia
l
 of
f
-site im
p
acts too that will encom
p
ass 
p
lannin
g
 and desi
g
n, 
                                                
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims 
on the disputed areas.
 
Page  7
 
 
construction and operation phases, as outlined below.  
 
Planning and design.
 Tank rehabilitation that will increase existing storage capacity of a 
small tank arrayed in cascades may disturb the existing hydrological balance and lead to 
reduction of water availability downstream of the cascade system. (“Tank Cascade” is an 
existing connected series of tanks physically and hydrologically organized in a such way 
that tanks capture and store rainwater falling on a specific meso-watershed that drains to a 
common reference point of a natural stream and where excess rainwater spilling from one 
tank in the cascade is captured in the next one downstream and so on).  
 
Construction phase.
 
 Accelerated soil erosion and damage to local vegetation due to earth 
excavation and use of construction equipment, water-logging and stagnation in borrow-
pits, and disposal of construction spoils and excavated material.  
 
Operation phase.
 a) Impacts due to poor operation and negligence of maintenance that 
would include impact on soil (inadequate drainage and waterlogging); b) incidence of 
waterborne diseases (poor cleaning of canals, roadside drains and maintenance of 
structures); c) damage to lands and public property (in the event an earthen tank 
embankment/dam fails due to inferior design, poor quality of construction, poor operation 
and neglected maintenance); d) pollution of streams and wells by agrochemicals (fertilizers 
and pesticides); and e) spread of pests that affect agriculture and public health. 
 
Social Safeguard/Development Issues and Risks
 
 
As is evident from the implementation experience of the ongoing NEIAP, this repeater 
project is not expected to result in significant, potential, social-safeguard issues and 
negative impacts. The project does not envisage involuntary resettlement, land acquisition, 
and does not affect cultural property and indigenous people. If there are any potential 
negative impacts or risks they are mostly village-specific and can be easily managed 
through the participatory and community-based planning (village social profiles, Village 
Rehabilitation Plans, landownership and encroachment inventory), implementation and 
monitoring mechanism of the project.  
 
A. Social 
Safeguards
  
 
i)     OP 4.12 is not triggered because the project need not acquire lands involuntarily  
  
The Repeater Project’s activity portfolio, similar to the current project, would comprise: a) 
rehabilitating village tanks for irrigated agriculture, b) rebuilding needed infrastructure 
such as rural roads, c) mobilizing the rural population in the focal villages for collective 
action in development activities, and d) supporting a menu of livelihood support activities 
(LSA) to provide supplementary income to the poor and vulnerable segments of the 
population. None of these activities require the state to acquire land involuntarily from the 
owner, who had no course of legal redress.  Rather, civil strife caused widespread 
displacement, and a corollary deterioration in productive infrastructure characterizes the 
project area. Population displacement over the past 20 years has greatly changed the 
demographic profile of the rural (and urban) areas. Large areas are completely depopulated 
toda
y
, while other areas have absorbed lar
g
e numbers of internall
y
 dis
p
laced, either in 
Page  8
 
 
camps or in towns and villages in more secure areas. The cessation of hostilities and the 
promise of the ongoing peace process now make it possible for displaced populations to 
return to their original areas or others as they wish. NEIAP II would simply assisting 
farmers who remained in their present villages, returned to their original villages or joined 
host villages to restart agricultural production.
 
 
Given this activity menu, the project need not trigger OP 4.12 in the case of roads, social 
mobilization and LSA components of the project as they do not require land, which is the 
trigger for OP 4.12. In the case of rural roads, existing roads are being rehabilitated. The 
social mobilization activities of the project foster only local organizational development. 
LSAs are meant to assist in grounding income-generating micro-enterprises, such as 
livestock, poultry, dairy, agro services, petty trade, sewing, etc., which require no lands. O 
P 4.12 could, therefore, arise only in the case of: a) reassigning (if done) of the command 
area of the rehabilitated tanks; and b) probably, tank-bed encroachments.  
 
 
 
ii)  OD 4.20. Indigenous peoples is not an issue 
 
The project area covers the entire Northern and Eastern provinces of the country, and 
neighboring conflict-affected villages of the three adjoining districts (North-Central, Uva, 
and North-Western). Historically, Veddha community had been living in the Eastern and 
Uva provinces of Sri Lanka.  According to statistics of Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL), 
there were no Veddhas in the other parts of the country, including the Northern Province.  
Although, the GOSL recognizes “Veddhas” as Indigenous Peoples (IPs), at present,  they 
do not exist as a distinct socio-cultural group due to linguistic assimilation and 
intermarriage with Sinhalese and Tamil community.  Also, most of the traditional Veddha 
villages in Uva and Eastern Provinces have been integrated into the GOSL’s village 
expansion, human settlement and colonization programs implemented from 1935 to late 
1980s, through which beneficiary people were provided with physical infrastructure, and 
land and water for settlement and irrigated agriculture as a full government subsidy.    
 
Given the menu of activities of NEIAP II, the project will not affect IPs adversely, rather, it 
would benefit them. Therefore, the main issue relates to the design of project targeting 
processes and mechanisms to ensure that the project is “inclusive” of Veddhas.  In the area 
covered by the project, only six ( 6 ) Veddha villages in the Eastern province and two (2) in 
the North-Central-Province have been recorded. Of these eight (8) villages, Veddhas 
constitute a significant proportion only in four (4) villages (Muruthanai and Madurankaeni 
in Batticola district; and Akurana and Pollebedda in Ampara district) which therefore fall 
within the purview of IP intervention. Of these four villages, IPDPs have been prepared 
and implemented in three villages under the ongoing NEIAP.  Of these three IPDPs, one 
was implemented under the NEIAP and the other two under the ADB financed, ongoing 
NECORD project, as those two included the provision of housing facilities to IPs and the 
NEIAP did not include provisions for housing.   Therefore, only one IP village is left to be 
assisted for which IPDP will be prepared and implemented either under NECORD or the 
NEIAP durin
g
 the current 
y
ear de
p
endin
g
 u
p
on whether the 
p
lan includes housin
g
 or not.  
Page  9
 
 
Thus, no intervention is required on account of  IPs in NEIAP- II. 
 
iii) OP 4.11- Policy on cultural heritage does not arise
 
 
The OMS on Cultural Heritage triggers when a development project disturbs the 
environment with historical value and interest. Inasmuch as NEIAP engages exclusively in 
the rehabilitation of village tanks and command areas and the reconstruction of existing 
roads, it is very unlikely that project activities would disturb any area or site of historical or 
archaeological interest.  
 
Given the very limited extent of the issue, members of NEIAP staff are apprised of the 
possibility of such considerations (during the regional and national workshops) and advised 
to seek specialized archaeological expertise if cultural remains of historic significance are 
uncovered in the tank rehabilitation and road reconstruction process.
 
 
B. 
Social Development Issues
  
 
Diversity
.  Following the ongoing negotiations between the government and the LTTE, the 
ground situation is now gradually improving with heightening prospects for peace. With 
this, displaced communities have started returning to their original homes. Since 2002, 
about 100,000 internally displaced families are reported to have returned to date.  
Consequently, communities in a village are becoming more and more heterogeneous. Apart 
from ethnic and religious diversity, the nature and intensity of the impact of war on the 
individuals have resulted in now identifiable different subgroups such as widows, women-
headed households, landless, etc. Identifying various subgroups and their expectations and 
incorporating this information into the project design are a challenging task.  
Exclusion
.  
There is a risk of exclusion in the targeting of project activities. This arises due to issues related to 
differential resources endowments (landless vs. landed households) and/or gender (de jure and de facto 
female-headed households). Identifying these poor and vulnerable subgroups and ensure their inclusion in the 
project is important. In particular, women (who have suffered the most as a result of conflicts) need to be 
accorded special attention.  
 
Security, institutions and networks
. Conflict has induced a sense of insecurity among the communities. 
Traditional institutions cease to exist, social/economic safety nets have crumbled and social networks have 
disintegrated. Any development intervention necessarily needs to take these into account. 
 
Social disputes.
 
Enlarging the storage capacity of an upstream tank in a cascade may 
reduce water availability to downstream users, and may create disputes between 
beneficiaries and losers. 
 
 
Community-driven development (CDD).
 Mainstreaming key principles of the CDD approach, such as 
autonomy, subsidiarity, self-selection and demand-driven approach, cost-sharing, participation, inclusion and 
equitability, accountability and sustainability, will be a new challenge in the conflict environment. 
 
Institutional delivery: Private-sector participation
. As the coverage and size of the repeater project expand 
substantially, a more responsible and responsive institutional delivery with a provision for private-sector 
participation is highly essential.  
 
Page  10
 
 
C. Social 
Risks
  
 
Encroachment.
 Encroachment is the unauthorized occupation and use of lands originally occupied and used 
by persons who had got displaced and had left the original homes as a result of the ethnic conflict. This is 
likely to be a major issue in the context of resettlement, rehabilitation and reconstruction of the northern and 
eastern provinces. It may be noted that, in Sri Lanka, “resettlement” relates to displaced people being 
resettled in their homesteads. This is distinct from “relocation,” which relates to displaced people being 
relocated to a new place.  
 
 
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area 
 
The project is not expected to create serious cumulative negative environmental impacts 
due to application of more than one safeguard policy or due to the implementation of 
multiple project components. The ongoing NEIAP has been the first major community-
based, rural-focused, village-level social and economic infrastructural project undertaken 
by the government in the North-East after the eruption of ethnic hostilities in 1983. Thus 
the application and use of a conscious, potential, social safeguard framework and an 
environmental-management framework have become an unprecedented component in any 
community-based rural development program in the North-East. Although, not formally 
and systematically evaluated and documented this initiative has no doubt contributed to the 
building of a social and environmental consciousness and capacity of project stakeholders 
including communities in development planning and implementation. NEIAP II will 
continue to treat social and environmental aspects as integral parameters of project 
planning, implementation and monitoring and will, therefore, further contribute to these 
long-term positive impacts. 
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant) 
 
The community-led needs assessment and village-level planning process in partnership 
with governmental and nongovernmental partners will consider alternatives, deviations and 
modifications to project activities during planning and design as well as during 
implementation to mitigate adverse social and environmental aspects and issues outlined 
above. 
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower [w13]to address safeguard issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
The project has developed and operationalized a comprehensive social and environmental 
safeguard framework for the ongoing NEIAP, which has been cleared with South Asia 
Regional Environment and Social Development Sector Unit (SASES). It provides an 
appropriate basis to proceed with the repeater project with minor improvements. Members 
of the project staff are skilled and conversant with the application of engineering practices 
and manuals that have been developed to carry out a hydrological analysis of tanks and 
tank cascades, design dams and embankments, and quality control of dam embankments 
durin
g
 construction. Satisfactor
y
 environmental trainin
g
 manuals for 
p
ro
j
ect staff, NGO 
Page  11
 
 
staff and communities have been developed, and selected project stakeholders have already 
been trained. At present, social and environmental safeguard compliance is an integral part 
of project planning, implementation and monitoring, and the project monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) framework includes safeguard indicators. In addition, the PIU is 
updating the social and environmental framework to cover new components added to the 
repeater to be applied in NEIAP II. The key provisions of the framework will be applied as 
follows.  
 
A. General 
 
Selection/eligibility criteria for subprojects
  
 
The focal village selection criteria as well as subproject selection/eligibility criteria will, inter-alia, include 
provisions that will exclude investments:  
 
• 
In protected areas (natural habitats, forests and wildlife reserves, and national 
parks that are already known by all project stakeholders).  
• 
In land-mined areas (already declared and demarcated by the government and 
known to all projects stakeholders);  
• 
The subproject selection criteria will require the project to carry out an adequate 
hydrological analysis to ascertain the potential reduction of water availability to 
downstream users that may result from increasing the water storage capacity of 
the existing tanks upstream of the cascade.  
 
B  Management of Environmental Safeguards  
 
Environmental assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)
 
 
The project activities would be identified by the communities through a transparent 
participatory needs assessment and planning process through the development of village 
baseline social profiles (VSPs), Village Rehabilitation Plans (VRPs) and village 
agricultural development plans (VADPs). The data and information pertaining to potential 
social and environmental impacts and issues of the identified subprojects (as discussed 
above) will be primarily collected through this process.  
 
During the initial needs assessment process to develop VRPs and VADPs, communities 
will be provided awareness on relevant social and environmental aspects. All project 
activities and subprojects that will be prepared on the basis of VRPs and VADPs will 
undergo environmental screening using the checklists (already available and used under 
NEIAP) by the communities as well as project implementing staff.  The environmental 
screening process will distinguish subprojects and activities that will require thorough 
environmental review to prevent/mitigate negative environmental impacts or those that will 
provide opportunities to enhance positive impacts. For medium irrigation schemes 
(schemes serving 80-400 ha) feasibility reports will be prepared on a case by case basis 
using the templates used for NEIAP and cleared by the Bank task team. Feasibility reports 
will include a comprehensive assessment of the environmental parameters associated with 
the schemes and 
p
otential environmental im
p
acts of the 
p
ro
j
ect 
p
ro
p
osals. Based on this 
Page  12
 
 
assessment, specific measures will be designed and implemented to mitigate the negative 
environmental effects. Services of the district environmental officers or subject matter 
specialists will be obtained to modify project designs and incorporate environmental 
management aspects depending on the complexity of the issue.  
 
The project will provide environmental awareness and skill development training to field-
level project staff, social mobilizers and community members to carry out environmental 
screening, monitoring and incorporating appropriate mitigation measures during subproject 
formulation and execution. The training manuals as well as the environmental assessment 
checklists developed and made operational in NEIAP will be used.. In addition, 
specification of civil works contract documents will continue to include and enforce 
generic and activity-specific clauses requiring environmental compliance in the execution 
of the project’s civil works (e.g., safe disposal of construction spoils and excavated waste 
material, treating earth burrow pits etc.). Provisions will be included in estimates of civil 
works to undertake measures to enhance positive environmental impacts and 
mitigate/prevent negative effects.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37):
 
 
The project will not include the creation of new reservoirs or dams. It will only finance the 
rehabilitation of small and medium irrigation works and the urgent measures to improve 
stability of dam/embankments of selected major irrigation works in the project area. 
Embankments of all small and medium irrigation works are less than 15 m in height, while 
those of a few major works are 15–20 m. For the latter, the project investments will be 
targeted primarily to enhance structural safety of dams and related major structures.  
 
The project will employ full-time irrigation and water-resources engineers at the levels of 
the project management unit (PMU) and district project offices to design, supervise and do 
quality control of the rehabilitation of small and medium irrigation works. Satisfactory 
design manuals developed by the PMU for NEIAP will be used. In addition, the PMU has 
developed a detailed design manual for the rehabilitation of groundwater ponds in Jaffna, 
which is satisfactory. For the design of dam-safety- enhancement measures for major 
irrigation schemes the project will use the services of dam-safety specialists. A dam safety 
panel, consisting local specialists from the Irrigation Department and the private sector will 
guide and oversee construction and post-rehabilitation O&M. In addition, O&M plans will 
be developed for all irrigation works rehabilitated by the project and communities and 
project staff will be trained on the basic managerial and technical skills required to carry 
out O&M after the rehabilitation.  
 
The project will continue the initiatives of NEIAP to enhance the capacity of project 
engineers, technical staff and community members for quality assurance of civil works 
construction. It will provide training to engineers on quality assurance and control (QA 
&QC) norms and measures of civil works, and employ independent audits to monitor the 
compliance on a sample basis. A comprehensive QA &QC procedural and technical 
manual has been prepared and is being enforced under the NEIAP. The project will provide 
financial assistance to the establishment of two regional civil engineering material-testing 
Page  13
 
 
and construction QA & QC laboratories in the project area to increase the capacity of the 
service agencies of the NE.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09): 
 
The project will provide extension support to farmers in small and medium irrigation 
schemes and limited pilot initiatives in the major irrigation schemes to enhance agricultural 
production and productivity. Some of these interventions will increase the use of 
agrochemicals, but the incremental use is not expected to create significant on-site and off-
site adverse impacts. Nevertheless, the project will be used as a vehicle to increase the 
environmental awareness related to agriculture and to promote environmentally friendly 
agricultural practices, such as Integrated Pest Management (IPM). Toward this end, as a 
part of project preparation (PIP), the borrower will develop an IPM plan as an integral 
component of its agricultural development activities. The Provincial Department of 
Agriculture and private-sector consultants will provide inputs to this task. This would 
include a generic inventory of NE-specific pests and natural enemies, cultural practices, 
pest-resistant crop varieties and a strategy for sustainable pest management, a plan for 
training and developing a cadre of trainers among agricultural extension staff and farmers, 
and for budget and outputs of the training. etc. 
 
The project will finance the implementation of the IPM plan. To complement this, the 
project will support the development of capacity of the Provincial Department of 
Agriculture to adopt IPM on a sustainable manner. In addition, the project will support the 
University of Jaffna to develop agricultural soil-testing facilities. 
 
B.   Management of Social Safeguards 
 
Social Safeguard and Risks have been dealt in detail under the current project (NRIAP-I). All these activities    
been reviewed and cleared by SASES (Please refer, “Social Safeguards and Risks in Post-Conflict  Manageme
n
CASE of North East Irrigated Agriculture Project (NEIAP), Sri Lanka,” prepared by the Bank Task Team and 
P
Unit, available as a Mimeograph, December 2002). This publication followed a comprehensive consultancy, w
h
number of stakeholder           consultations/workshops during 2003. A summary of the same and additional req
u
of the       recent developments are provided below.  
 
C.  Management of Social Risks 
 
Encroachment
. As peace sets in and the ground situation changes from the “conflict” to 
“post-conflict,” one expects displaced people to return to their original “homes.” 
Livelihoods of the returnees primarily depend upon: a) the extent of usage of their 
properties, particularly, lands that could be put into agricultural use, and b) rights of access 
to their properties, particularly, lands. While the NEIAP is specially designed to address 
the former (to enable the lands to be put into agricultural usage) the latter is fundamental to 
establishing livelihoods. Also land encroachment1 poses a serious social and reputational 
risk to the project, in particular, and the country, in general.  
 
                                                
 
1
 In this report “encroachment” means the unauthorized occupation and use of lands originally occupied 
and used by persons who got displaced and left the original homes as a result of the ethnic conflict.  
Page  14
 
 
Encroachment is, in fact, typical of any post-conflict situation. With the view to addressing 
this, the current project has strived toward laying bare the institutional mechanisms 
available in the country. A campaign to create awareness among the general public as well 
as the officials about the safety measures outlined in the state regulations has also been 
undertaken.  
 
Additionally, it is well recognized that the issue of land encroachment is a much larger and 
more pertinent issue for the NEIAP than the possibility of involuntary disenfranchisement 
of private landowners through administrative procedures. Also, the judicial process is 
lengthy, costly and time-consuming and hence, while the NEIAP must remain vigilant 
about the possibility of involuntary acquisition, the project needs to deal with the larger 
issue of land encroachment and land-dispute resolution in the command areas of the tanks 
that it rehabilitates. Hence, a need for systematic and comprehensive project monitoring 
including social aspects has been recognized as critical toward addressing social 
safeguards/risks. Toward this, the following plan of action has been drawn under the 
current project: a) developing a Framework of Implementation Monitoring; b) a land 
register to form a part of the Village Social Profile; c) enhancing land-dispute management 
skills; and d) sensitizing officials as well as launching awareness campaigns. These will 
continue under the proposed project. 
  
 
Land register. 
The social mobilization officer (SMO) in each focal village will maintain a 
land register for the command area that records the plot number, area and the name of the 
original owner in the pre-conflict period and the current owner or permit holder. Where the 
plot owner has changed, the mobilizer will record the reason for the change in ownership 
(e.g., sale, inheritance, encroachment). If there are any instances of encroachment, the 
mobilizer will keep a detailed account of the dispute-resolution process. This information 
will form a part of the comprehensive VSP. In this way, the project will have documentary 
evidence of the incidence, if any, of involuntary land reassignment that might trigger O.P. 
4.12. Fortunately, this mandate is not onerous. The information is already available in the 
district land records, and can be verified at village meetings. NEIAP I has developed a 
draft template form for collection and compilation of the land registry data for all the 
project villages.  
 
Reassigning and/or tank-bed cultivation.
 Tank-bed encroachments (if any) necessarily 
needs to be addressed by the project. Once, a tank is rehabilitated, it is likely that the tank-
bed area will get inundated and the tank-bed lands will not be available for cultivation. 
This could affect the livelihoods of people dependent on it. Though tank-bed lands are the 
property of the state, such a situation warrants that the project/state address the issue. The 
number of persons involved and the area under tank-bed cultivation will be recorded by the 
NGOs
2
 as a part of the village social profile (VSP)
3
. The project/state has agreed that 
persons affected as a result of the tank-bed inundation will be: a) allowed to harvest the 
standin
g
 cro
p
 before the tank rehabilitation is com
p
leted and water is im
p
ounded; and b
)
 
                                                                                                                               
                 
 
2
 NGOs are enlisted in the project to provide social intermediation services to the village communities. 
3
 The Village Social Profile, developed employing PRA/ PNA approaches, is meant to provide baseline 
information on social, institutional, economic and agricultural aspects of the particular village along with 
the related key issues/difficulties/deficiencies. 
Page  15
 
 
provided equivalent alternative lands either in the command area (if technically feasible ) 
of the rehabilitated tank or in the nearby vicinity. So far, under the current project, there 
have not been any cases of tank-bed encroachments.  
 
Security, institutions and networks
: The repeater project will invest in: a) community 
mobilization to revitalize and strengthen traditional CBOs that functioned prior to conflict; 
b) form, empower and build capacity of new CBOs such as women societies; c) special 
assistance programs targeting mostly affected and vulnerable segments, such as livelihood 
support activities as adopted in NEIAP.  
 
Social disputes
:
 
During project design, a hydrological sensitivity analysis will be carried 
out to assess the potential impact on hydrology and water balance of tank cascades 
consequent to the enlargement of storage capacity of any tank in the cascade. If the 
hydrological analysis proves that the proposed interventions would affect the existing 
water availability and use at any downstream point, such improvements will not either be 
financed or will be tailored to result in no harm. Such assessments would also include 
verification of any downstream impacts, including potential water shortages for 
downstream users, if tank capacity improvements are envisaged. If disturbance to the 
existing hydrological balance and downstream users are anticipated then a separate Social 
Assessment and Environmental Assessment would be undertaken on a case by case basis 
and a decision to fund the improvements would be made on the basis of this assessments. 
Also the project would consult and reach consensus between upstream and downstream 
users, before investing on any upstream modifications.  
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The stakeholders include conflict-affected rural communities (women, farmers, youth and 
others). Staff members of the government department (at village, district and provincial 
levels), NGO partners, private consultants and representatives of the LTTE (at village, 
district and provincial levels), and community- based organizations. The project design and 
implementation will involve consultation and participation of all stakeholders at different 
levels.  
 
The preceding project (NEIAP) was the first major community-based, rural-focused, 
village-level social and economic infrastructural restoration project successfully 
undertaken by the government in the North-East province after the eruption of ethnic 
hostilities in 1983. Thus the application and use of a conscious social and environmental 
safeguard/risk management framework has been an unprecedented effort in the North East. 
Although not formally and systematically evaluated and documented, this initiative has no 
doubt contributed to the building of social and environmental consciousness and capacity 
of project stakeholders including communities in rural development planning and 
implementation. The PMU has already taken action to disseminate its social and 
environmental safeguard and risk management framework and has operationalized it at the 
community and village levels. It has published the framework for wider dissemination. 
NEIAP II will continue to treat social and environmental aspects as integral parameters of 
p
ro
j
ect 
p
lannin
g
, im
p
lementation and monitorin
g
 and will, therefore, further contribute to 
Page  16
 
 
this long-term objective.   
 
Both the Social and Environmental Assessments will be summarized and translated into the local language. 
Copies of these will be shared with relevant stakeholder groups at the three levels – district, province, 
national – as well as with local governments, NGO agencies and academics. Special workshops will be 
organized to evince feedback, and will be incorporated into the project designing. Once the project becomes 
effective, a special campaign toward creating awareness on the social/environmental development provisions 
will be made through NGOs among the communities.  
 
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select one)
 
[ ] S
1
. –The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there are 
significant potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.  
[ 
X]
 S
2
. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered but effects are limited to their 
impact and are technically and institutionally manageable.  
[ ] S
3
. – No safeguard issues 
[}] S
F
. – Financial intermediary projects 
 
Page  17
 
 
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  Date  
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
For category A projects, date of distributing the 
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive 
Directors Not 
Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
Pest-Management Plan  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2004 
(planned date)
    
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
05/15/2004 
(planned date)
    
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2004 
(planned date)
    
Dam Safety Management Plan  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2004 
(planned date)
    
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
05/15/2004 
(planned date)
    
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2004 
(planned date)
    
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why. 
 
Section III – Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 
Yes
 No
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including an EMP) report? 
(No - - the framework developed and used for the parent project will be 
adopted) 
 
2
 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the 
EA report? 
n/a n/a 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
n/a n/a 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
Yes
 No
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
 
2
 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of 
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation 
measures acceptable to the Bank? 
 
2
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
Yes
 No
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest-management issues? 
2
 
 
Is a separate PMP required? 
2
 
 
Page  18
 
 
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design? 
2
 
 
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property 
Yes
 No
 
Does the EA include adequate measures? 
n/a 
n/a 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
n/a n/a 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: 
Yes
 No
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the indigenous people? 
n/a n/a 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan 
n/a 
   n/a 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been 
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
n/a 
   n/a 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement: 
Yes
 No
 
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been 
prepared? 
n/a n/a 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan / policy framework/policy process? 
n/a n/a 
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests: 
Yes
 No
 
Have the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and 
constraints been carried out? 
n/a n/a 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
n/a n/a 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting and, if so, does it include 
provisions for a certification system? 
n/a n/a 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: 
Yes
 No
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
2
 
 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of 
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? (
will be done 
in April 2004)
 
 
2
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training? (
Under 
preparation
) 
 
2
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: 
Yes
 No
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
n/a 
n/a 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and 
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
n/a n/a 
What are the reasons for the exception? 
n/a 
n/a 
Please explain: 
 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
:
 
Yes
 No
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with 
the Legal Department and sent to the RVP? 
n/a n/a 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the 
n/a 
n/a 
Page  19
 
 
OP? 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: 
Yes
 No
 
Have relevant safeguard policy documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
2
  
(
The final ISDS will be sent in May 2004 after Appraisal 
) 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-
affected groups and local NGOs?  
2
 
 
All Safeguard Policies: 
Yes
 No
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures? 
2
 
 
Have costs of safeguard measures been included in project cost? 
2
 
 
Will the cost of safeguard measures be funded as part of project 
implementation? 
2
 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures? 
  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
2
 
 
Signed and submitted by:
 Name
 
 
Date
 
Task Team Leader: 
Nihal Fernando 
04/07/2004 
Project Safeguards 
Specialist 1: 
Malcolm Jansen  
01/30/2004 
Project Safeguards 
Specialist 2: 
Suryanarayan Satish 
03/22/2004 
 
  
Approved by:
 Name
 Date
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Bruseberg 
04/07/2004 
Comments: 
Sector Manager: 
Gajanand Pathmanathan 
04/07/2004 
Comments: 
 
