                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/30/2005                                     Report No.: 33742

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Sri Lanka                             Project ID: P086411
Project Name: SL- Road Sector Assistance Project
Task Team Leader: Isabel Chatterton
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,        Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2005
2005
Managing Unit: SASEI                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and
infrastructure (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            100.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                44.12
                                                                          44.12
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes [ ]      No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to lower transportation costs through sustainable delivery
of an efficient national road system that serves the needs of road users and the Sri Lankan
public at large.

3. Project Description
(i)     Maintenance and Rehabilitation of National Roads Component: This consists of
civil works along national roads comprising resurfacing and improvement of about 620
km of Class A and B highways, and the technical assistance for the feasibility study, and
the design and construction supervision of these works.

 (ii)   Maintenance and Rehabilitation of Rural Roads Pilot Component: This consists of
(a) developing a strategy for the management of rural roads, (b) rehabilitation and
maintenance of about 635 km of rural roads in nine local government areas (Pradeshiya
Sabhas) whose selection is based on the poverty map recently completed for Sri Lanka,
and capacity building.

 (iii) Institutional Strengthening and Policy Support Component: This component
comprises of TA, training, equipment support and incremental operating costs, to help:
(a) design and implement the civil works to be funded under the project; (b) implement
improved sub-sectoral policies, and (c) strengthen institutional capacity.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
N/A

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Sumith Pilapitiya (SASES)
   Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is designed to provide beneficiaries with improved and sustainable road
transport by enhancing the durability, efficiency and economic impact of the national and
rural road network. Improved road surfaces can reduce travel times and lower the costs
of vehicle use, while increasing access to markets, jobs, education and health services as
well as reduce transport costs for both freight and passengers. Therefore, the project will
improve the economic and social welfare of the people.

 Considering the scope of the project, which is limited to maintenance and rehabilitation
approximately 620 km of Class A and B national roads and 635 km of rural roads, with
drainage improvements where needed, it is anticipated that there will be no significant
and/or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts. Therefore, any potential
adverse impacts due to road resurfacing and drainage improvement can be easily
managed with proper planning, design, construction, supervision, monitoring and post-
project operation and maintenance. Resurfacing of roads has minimal on-site
environmental impacts. Disturbances to land, interference to soil stability and the
hydrology in the area will not take place. Impacts on air quality and noise levels will be

limited only to the construction period. Longer term impacts depend on the projected
traffic flow increases and the anticipated reduction in traffic congestion, which is likely to
arise due to improved road conditions. It is felt that the net effect on air quality and noise
levels will be positive over the long term. Any potential adverse environmental impacts
triggered under this project will be seen off-site where road-building material would be
sourced. If not managed properly, quarry and borrow sites can have substantial impacts
on the surrounding environment as well as intrusion on the aesthetic quality of the sites.
As a pre-condition, Contractors will be required to produce relevant GOSL licenses for
quarries and borrow sites where construction material will be sourced. The EMP will
focus on proper management of the borrow sites and quarries.

 In the event that minor land acquisition is unavoidable (e.g. where minor road
alignments widening or other improvements require small scale land acquisition) the
project will be designed to cause minimum social, cultural and economic disruption.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
With road improvements, it is anticipated that there is a possibility for increased vehicle
traffic which could result in road safety issues. GOSL has just embarked on a program to
better enforce road rules in a bid to reduce traffic accidents and improve road safety. The
resurfacing of existing roads would not significantly increase development in the area and
therefore, long term impacts would be minimal. Air quality and noise in the areas should
improve since there should be less traffic congestion if the roads are of better quality.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The civil works to be financed under the Project are expected to cause minimal negative
environmental or social impacts. Road resurfacing materials will be determined based on
the projected use of the roads as well as the ability to maintain the roads, especially with
regard to the rural roads component. For first year works, alternative designs and
locations have been considered to avoid land acquisition and minimize adverse social
impacts as much as possible. For works to be undertaken during years 2-5 of project
implementation, alternative designs will also be considered.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since not all national and rural roads to be resurfaced under the project have been
selected at this stage, civil works specific environmental assessments cannot be
undertaken. Therefore, in keeping with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies, the Road
Development Authority (RDA) has prepared an Environmental Assessment and
Management Framework (EAMF) and a Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF)
that will provide the necessary background for environmental and social considerations to
be built into the design of the project so that environmentally sustainable implementation
can take place. These Frameworks will be used as a guide and template by sub-project
developers (RDA in the case of national roads and PSs in the case of rural roads) to
undertake environmental and social analysis and ensure compliance with the World

Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies and the relevant provisions under the
National Environmental Act (NEA) and associated regulations. The final EAMF and the
draft SIMF have been prepared in consultation with key stakeholders and disclosed in
accordance with Bank guidelines. All roads to be resurfaced during the first year of the
project have undertaken environmental analysis and rapid social impact assessments and
have prepared specific EMPs in accordance with the EAMF. These documents have
been disclosed in accordance with Bankâ TMs safeguard disclosure policy for first year
works.

 In addition to the preparation of the EAMF and the SIMF, the Borrower is in the process
of establishing an Environmental and Social Cell at RDA to integrate environmental
issues into the planning process as well as in the areas of environmental monitoring. In
support of this, the project will provide training for appropriate RDA staff in the Planning
Division and in the newly created Environmental and Social Cell

 Moreover, the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established with the environmental
regulatory agency, Central Environmental Authority (CEA), having EIA review
experience of over a decade. The CEA has benefited by several institutional
strengthening programs supported by USAID, the Netherlands and the World Bank,
therefore, it has adequate technical capacity. The weak link in the EA process in Sri
Lanka is in the area of post approval monitoring. Therefore, the project proposes several
initiatives to address this weakness, including: (i) making the contractor responsible for
the implementation of the EMP; (ii) requiring the supervisory consultants to have
environmental specialists monitoring the implementation of the EMP; and (iii) recruiting
appropriate staff at RDA and the PMU. Overall, the Central Environmental Authority
will have a responsibility to ensure that GOSL environmental clearance conditions are
met. IDA missions will emphasize EMP implementation in regular project reviews.
These safeguards should ensure effective implementation of post approval safeguard
conditions.

 Finally, whilst the EA process in Sri Lanka is well established, the experience in
managing social impacts is rather limited. Due to this, significant emphasis has been
placed by other donors in the sector, namely ADB and JBIC, on the proper planning and
management of resettlement issues arising from road sector operations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Environmental Assessment and Management Framework was prepared with
stakeholder consultation and was placed for public comment for a 30 day period. Civil
works specific environmental analysis and EMP preparation for first year works has been
undertaken closely with stakeholder involvement and were placed for a mandatory 30 day
pubic comment period prior to approval by GOSL and IDA. Same procedure will be
followed for works to be undertaken during years 2-5 of the project. Similarly, the Social
Impact Management Framework was prepared following the same procedures.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     09/26/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/01/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  09/30/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA     No
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        No
credit/loan?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                            Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                 Ms Isabel Chatterton      08/30/2005
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Sumith Pilapitiya      05/28/2005
Social Development Specialist     Ms Zia Al Jalaly          08/29/2005
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Jeffrey S. Racki       09/28/2005
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Guang Zhe Chen         08/29/2005
 Comments:

