Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC862 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 19, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P084580 
Project Name: Sri Lanka Education Sector 
Operation 
Task Team Leader: D. H. C. Aturupane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2005 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General Education Sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for 
the knowledge economy (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sumith Pilapitiya 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 1,550 
IDA: 50 
Other financing amounts by source:  Government of Sri Lanka 
($m 1,500) 
B.  Project Objectives  
The sector program supported by the proposed credit has four key development objectives [
see 
NEC(2003)
]. First,  promoting equity by enabling all children in the country to access and complete basic 
education (grade 1-9), either within the formal school system or in non-formal education. This is poverty 
targeted, as the 17% of children aged 6-14 who are currently out of the education system belong to the 
poorest groups in the country, such as children in remote, isolated rural and estate villages, children in 
conflict affected areas, and street children in cities and towns. Second, enhancing the quality, economic 
impact and social relevance of the school system by supporting initiatives to improve learning outcomes 
and orient the education system to the world of work. Third, strengthening the efficiency and equity of 
resource allocation and distribution within the school system. Fourth, improving the institutional 
capability of central and provincial education agencies to deliver high quality services. The credit 
development objectives, beneficiaries and key performance indicators are given in Table 1 below. 
 
T
ABLE 
1. C
REDIT 
D
EVELOPMENT 
O
BJECTIVES
,
B
ENEFICIARIES AND 
K
EY 
P
ERFORMANCE 
I
NDICATORS
.
Development objectives
 
Beneficiaries
 
Key Performance Indicators
 
100% of children in the age 
group 6-14 enrolled in school 
or in special education or non-
formal education programs. 
About 550,000 children aged 
6-14, mainly from the poorest 
households, who fail to 
complete basic education. 
Enrolment and completion 
rates of 6-14 year olds, 
especially children in remote, 
isolated rural and estate 
villages, children in conflict 
affected areas and street 
children in cities and towns. 
Page  2
Enhanced learning 
achievement levels and 
improved economic and social 
relevance of education. 
Approximately 4 million 
students in basic and 
secondary education. 
i.  Cognitive achievement 
scores in basic and secondary 
education. 
ii.  Survey results of civic 
values of school children
.
iii.  Labor force data on job 
search and unemployment 
rates of school completers. 
Strengthened capacity for: 
i.   Service delivery 
ii. Resource allocation and 
distribution  
iii. Budget management. 
About 210,000 principals, 
section heads, teachers, central 
and provincial education 
policy makers and 
administrators, education 
academics and around 4 
million students in basic and 
secondary education. 
i.  Stakeholder feedback on the 
quality of service delivery. 
ii. Evaluation results of 
alternative pilot models of 
school based management. 
iii. Norm-based unit cost 
resource allocation mechanism 
refined for each province. 
iv. Results of public 
expenditure tracking on equity 
of resource distribution. 
C.  Project Description  
The proposed education sector operation will support the GOSL education development framework to 
strengthen the basic and secondary education system by assisting the country to: (i) 
promote equitable 
access to basic education
 by attracting the final 17% of children aged 6-14 who currently fail to 
complete basic education either into the formal school system or into non-formal education programs; (ii) 
increase learning levels and orient the education system to the world of work 
by
upgrading the 
curriculum to focus on the development of higher-order transferable skills, reforming examinations to 
support curriculum upgrading, promoting the use of IT and technology in education, strengthening  the 
teaching and learning of English, developing the leadership skills and professional capabilities and 
competencies of principals, head masters, head mistresses and teachers, providing stronger on-site 
academic and administrative support to schools, and promoting civic values through the education 
system; (iii) 
enhance the efficiency and equity of resource allocation and distribution
 by introducing 
a
medium-term budget framework within a multi-year planning horizon and a public expenditure tracking 
system and by refining the norm-based, unit cost resource allocation mechanism used in the school 
system to reflect the different economic conditions and education needs of provinces; and (iv) 
strengthen
 
the quality of service delivery
 by implementing capacity building and institutional development 
measures for central and provincial education agencies and supporting various models of school based 
management to suit the conditions and needs of different types of schools. The credit would also 
strengthen the capacity of GOSL to undertake education research, monitoring and evaluation,
 and 
formulate policy and establish standards based on objective evidence.  
 
The flow of WB funds in the proposed credit will follow the stream of GOSL resources into the education 
sector. The latter operates through two channels: (a) funds for central government education agencies 
channeled through the Ministry of Education; and (b)  resources for provincial education agencies 
channeled through the Provincial Councils [see Annex 1]. The design of the education sector operation 
will take into account the fact that economic and education conditions vary considerably among the 
provinces, and that provincial education plans and financing need to be individually tailored to suit the 
differential needs of the provinces. 
 
Page  3
D.  Project location. 
Sri Lanka. The school system in the entire country will be covered by the project. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
The proposed SWAP will cover the basic and secondary education sector in Sri Lanka, therefore, project 
activities may take place throughout the country.  Considering the scope of the project, it is unlikely that 
there will be any significant environmental impacts as a result of project activities.  It is possible that the 
project will finance the construction of new school buildings and renovation of existing school buildings.  
It has been agreed with the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) that no land acquisition will be financed 
under the credit.  Considering that construction activities will not be permitted in environmental sensitive 
areas such as wetlands and marshes, it is anticipated that building construction will result in minor 
environmental impacts.  Therefore, the SWAP has been assigned an Environmental Category of "B".  It 
has also been agreed with GOSL that Environmental Codes of Practice will be developed which will be 
followed during construction activities that will be supported under the credit, which will be in lieu of a 
project Environmental Assessment.  The Codes of Practice will include Environmental Management 
Plans and specific guidelines of debris disposal as well as resource extraction. Considering the scattered 
nature of construction anticipated under the project, it is not expected that there will be significant 
accumulated environmental damage due to project activities.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
]
Environmental Assessment
(OP
/BP
4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(OP
/BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(OP
/BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(OP
/BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(OP
/BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.50) 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. March 10, 2005. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
D. H. C. Aturupane 
09/30/2004  
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Pramod Agrawal, Acting 
10/18/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Michelle Riboud 
10/21/2004 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
