                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                        Report No.: 112643
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             February 2, 2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Sri Lanka               Project ID:              P159995
    Project Name:                 Accelerating Higher Education Expansion and Development Operation
    Task Team Leader(s):          Harsha Aturupane
    Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 2017
    Managing Unit:                GED06
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        100.00                      Total Bank Financing:     100.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
         Financing Source                                                             Amount (US$ million)
         IBRD                                                                                         $ 67.00
         International Development Association (IDA)                                                 $ 33.00
         Total                                                                                       $ 100.00
    Environmental Category        C - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred         No
    project?
.

    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    The proposed development objective is to expand enrollment in priority disciplines, improve the quality
    of degree programs and promote research in the higher education sector.
          T

    C. Project Description
    1.     The World Bank Program support (P4R+ IPF) consists of two categories of activities: (i) Higher
    Education Development Program (PforR) component; and (ii) a Program Operations and Technical
    Support component which will follow an Investment Project Financing (IPF) modality. Hence, the
    proposed operation will use a hybrid instrument, combining PforR and IPF mechanism for financing.

    2.     The government program is presented in the Higher Education Development Strategy (HEDS)
    2017–2025. The HEDS’s objective is to develop the higher education system to produce an educated and
    knowledgeable labor force with the skills required to accelerate economic development. It is based on four

                                                      1
results areas.

3.       The first results area aims to increase enrollment in higher education programs of strategic
importance for economic development. This will be achieved through a combination of demand- and
supply-side initiatives, involving both state and non-state HEIs. The second results area targets
improvement of the quality of higher education programs. It prioritizes the modernization and
improvement of teaching-learning and assessment methods, and the promotion of programs designed to
strengthen students’ English proficiency and socio-emotional skills, which are in high demand in the labor
market. The third results area focuses on the stewardship of the higher education sector. Key areas of
reform include the rolling out of development planning, the promotion of private HEIs and public-private
partnerships (PPPs), and institutions, procedures, and practices for quality assurance and accreditation The
fourth results area focuses on the creation of a culture of research and innovation in universities. Initiatives
will be taken to promote development-oriented research, encourage innovation and the commercialization
of research products, and facilitate university-industry linkages.

4.       The scope of AHEAD will be the higher education activities under the Ministry of Higher
Education and Highways (MHEH), the UGC and the 15 universities under the University Grants
Commission (UGC), SLIATE and Advance Technological institute/s (ATIs), and non-state Higher
Education Institutions (HEIs) approved by the MHEH and UGC. The development and strengthening of
this set of higher education agencies will be supported under Accelerating Higher Education Expansion
and Development (AHEAD), except for major infrastructure projects which are already being financed by
other development agencies and overseas governments. Activities of tertiary education institutes outside
the MHEH, such as those under the Ministry of Skills Development and Vocational Training (MSDVT),
will also be outside the scope of AHEAD. The MSDVT is already funded by the World Bank through the
Skills Development Project. There are numerous small research and training agencies under a variety of
ministries, such as the Rubber and Coconut Research Institutes, which too are excluded to make the
institutional framework of the program strategic and manageable

5.      Under the IPF instrument loan the project will cover, the Program Operations Technical Support
(POTS) component. The main objective of this component is to assist the implementation of the AHEAD
PforR component through academic, technical, and operational assistance for systems strengthening and
capacity building. The POTS component will also assist the coordination of the MHEH, UGC, SLIATE,
universities, ATIs, and non-state HEIs and promote synergy between their academic, technical, and
operational activities

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project is expected to be spread nationwide. The MHEH, UGC, and SLIATE will implement
AHEAD at the national level. The universities and ATIs and non-state HEIs will implement AHEAD
activities at the institutions level. These institutions are located throughout the country in all provinces
with moderate to significant uniqueness in term of geophysical, biological socio-cultural characteristics.
However, these discrepancies have no bearing on the AHEAD program.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) has a long history of working with the Bank and is familiar with
the WB Safeguard policies and procedures. The Bank has been supporting the education and higher
sectors by a number of and ongoing projects, where the several Environmental and Social Management
Frameworks (ESMF) has been prepared and successfully implemented. In addition, borrower has
developed significant capacity in terms of safeguards implementation and compliances. Meanwhile, the

                                                     2
 ESSA also affirms that the existing country system is well defined and can be adopted for PforR
 instrument of AHEAD project. Whereas, TA will include necessary provisions to strengthen capacity of
 the implementation agencies to ensure adequate capacity to review and implementation and monitor the
 prevailing safeguard policies and laws of the country.



 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Obaidullah Hidayat (GEN06 )
 Chandrika Sepali Kottegoda (GSU03)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 No                The IPF component of the project is the
                                                       Program Operations and Technical Support
                                                       (POTS) to coordinate, monitor, and provide
                                                       academic and operational expertise for
                                                       AHEAD activities. No civil works and/ or other
                                                       related activities are planned to be financed
                                                       under this component, therefore OP/BP 4.01 is
                                                       Not Triggered
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            No             There is no civil works and /or other activities
                                                       planned that may result in any work in natural
                                                       habitats. This policy is not triggered
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                     No             This policy is not triggered, as the operation is
                                                       focused on financing coordination, academic
                                                       and operational expertise.
 Pest Management OP 4.09                No             The AHEAD operation does not support any
                                                       pest management or pest control activities.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP      No             The operation is to support technical assistance
 4.11                                                  of operational expertise therefore this policy is
                                                       not triggered.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10          No             The Project will cover the entire country and
                                                       will not include interventions targeted at
                                                       specific communities, social groups or
                                                       geographical regions.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    No             No civil works and/ or other related activities
                                                       are planned to be financed under the Project
                                                       Operations and Technical Support component
                                                       of the AHEAD and only soft support will be
                                                       provided to the borrower.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No             No impact
 Projects on International Waterways    No             No impact
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No              No impact

                                                3
.

III. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT


       A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
    Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and /or irreversible impacts:
    The planned Accelerated Higher Education Development (AHEAD) under the program are expected to
    result in substantial social and environmental benefits to improve the existing capacity of policy level
    through recommendations and technical assistance under IPF and PforR components of the project.
    Since, the project covers only soft elements under IPF stream therefore, impacts that are sensitive,
    diverse on the environment and the people are not foreseen. However, necessary steps are taken to
    ensure that the proposed interventions through AHEAD program are environmentally and socially sound
    and sustainable. Moreover, the hybrid (P4R+IPF) mechanism may pose twofold safeguards system for
    both PforR (Program for Result) and IPF (Investment Project Financing) to assure that the planned
    program is effective and address the required safeguards compliances.
    As per WB policy for P4R stream, the Bank team has carried out an assessment to evaluate the adequacy
    of the existing Sri Lankan environmental and social system at national and subnational level. The
    Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) has been prepared as part of the program
    preparation and under the light of six core principles of the policy for P4R instrument, to achieve the
    program system promotes environmental and social sustainability; avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse
    impacts on natural habitats and physical cultural resources’ protect public and worker safety; manage
    land acquisition; consider issues related to indigenous peoples and vulnerable people and vulnerable
    groups and also avoid social groups.
    Additionally, the ESSA helped to address the safeguards provisions for the program IPF stream, which
    is a Technical Assistance (TA) component in nature. The TA is designed to cover Program Operations
    and Technical Support (POTS) to coordinate, monitor, and provide academic and operational expertise
    for AHEAD project related activities. No civil work will be supported under funds allocated for TA and
    only soft support will be provided to the borrower.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project are:
    The Higher Education Development Program per se have a positive social and environmental impacts
    on the Higher Education sector, and hence the program covers soft developmental assistance to
    borrower, therefore, no potential, direct long term negative impacts are envisaged.
    3. Describe any project alternative (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
    impacts.
    Given the program nature and scope under TA stream of AHEAD, project no alternative/s are advised.

    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issue. Provide an
    assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measure described.
    The ESSA reveals that the country system is adequate to address environmental and social risks
    associated to induced impact from the implementation of the PforR stream of the project. However,
    necessary hand holding, capacity building plans are considered as well as recommendation have been
    provided in the ESSA to improve minor gaps in term of modernization of Central Environmental
    Authority (CEA), enforcement of health and safety endowment in infrastructures works etc.


      B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                      4
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                               N/A
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           N/A
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                            N/A
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
 the EA to the Executive Directors
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           N/A
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                            N/A
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            NA
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 Pest Management Plan:
 N.A.
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
 respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
 Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [ ]       No [X]
report?                                                           N/A [ ]
EMPs will be prepared for sub-projects.
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    N/A
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [ ]       No [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?                         N/A [ ]
If the project would result in significant conversion or          No
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
This project is funding community infrastructures and is not
expected to cause impact to critical and natural habitats based
on the nature of the project investments. Sub-projects will be
screened and ESMPs will be prepared.
OP 4.09 - Pest Management


                                                    5
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [ ]      No [ ]
                                                                   N/A [ X]
Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [ ]      No [X ]
                                                                   N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [ ]     No [   ]
property?                                                          N/A [X ]
ESMF includes Chance Find procedures
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [ ]     No [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected       N/A [X ]
Indigenous Peoples?
Here are no Indigenous People within the COI as per the
studies conducted.
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     N/A [ ]       No [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been                  N/A [ X]
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy
framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [ ]      No [ ]
and constraints been carried out?                                  N/A [ X ]
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [ ]      No [ ]
                                                                   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared
and arrangements been made for public awareness and
training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                     6
Have the other riparian’s been notified of the project?          Yes [ ]        No [ ]
                                                                 N/A [ X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the          Yes [ ]        No [ ]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures   N/A [ X ]
to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred
to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [ X]       No [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?                                           N/A []
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [ X ]       No [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of         N/A [ ]
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    [ Yes]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          [ Yes]
includes the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         [ Yes]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?

D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                Name                                Date
 Task Team Leader:                       D. H. C. Aturupane
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Adviser:            Maged Mahmoud Hamed                 February 3, 2017
 Comments:
 Sector Manager:                         Keiko Miwa                          February 3, 2017
 Comments:




                                                     7
8
