                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                              Report No.: 121944
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:            7-Dec-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Sudan               Project ID:                P152322
    Project Name:                Sudan - FCPF REDD Readiness Additional Finance (P152322)
    Task Team Leader(s):         Tracy Hart, Dora Nsuwa Cudjoe
    Estimated Board Date:        N/A
    Managing Unit:               GEN01
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       5.00                    Total Bank Financing:      0.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
       Financing Source                                                                       Amount
        Borrower                                                                                   0.00
        Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF)                            5.00
        Total                                                                                      5.00
    Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?
.
    B. Project Objectives
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen Sudan’s capacity to design a socially and
    environmentally sound national Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus
    (REDD+) strategy.
.
    C. Project Description
    This project paper details the proposed changes in project activities that will be supported with
    Additional Financing (AF). The structure and implementation arrangements of the AF activities will
    remain as planned under the original grant, and are accordingly budgeted into five components that
    correspond with Sudan’s Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP). The breakdown of the AF budget by
    R-PP component is summarized as follows:


                                                                                                      1
    Component 1: REDD+ Readiness Management & Institutional Arrangements (US$ 0.79M)
    The objective of this component is to continue supporting national level coordination and monitoring,
    and overall management of the REDD+ process. This support builds on structures and arrangements of
    the existing REDD+ processes involving the National REDD+ Management Unit (“REDD+ Unit”)
    within the Forest National Corporation (FNC) that assists national REDD+ coordination, supervision
    and stakeholder participation. Sudan intends to prepare its Readiness Package (R-Package) 1 for
    submission to the FCPF participants committee by March, 2019. Funding for this component will
    support the REDD+ Unit with staff and operational cost, information technology (IT) and vehicular
    connectivity with the state offices and local communities, and upgradation of office facilities This
    program will hire graduate students from Sudanese universities and support the REDD+ Unit with
    readiness tasks and assignments. This will facilitate the completion of readiness activities and also
    give students exposure to the REDD+ readiness process and institutionalize long term understanding
    and awareness of the REDD+ program for Sudan.

    Component 2: National REDD+ Strategy (US$ 1.05M)
    The objective of this component is to continue supporting the development process of the National
    REDD+ Strategy. The initial design of Sudan’s National REDD+ Strategy will be completed in
    December 2017. The National REDD+ Strategy is a living document and it is important that the
    lessons from the ongoing global, national and sub-national REDD+ processes continue to refine and
    develop the strategy.
    In support of the ongoing needs to refine and continuously enhance the REDD+ strategy, the AF will
    support the REDD+ Unit with Technical / Strategic Studies and Workshops for Critical Elements of
    the REDD+ Strategy covering (1) Forest Landscapes Restoration Assessment & National Restoration
    Strategy; (2) Mainstreaming REDD+ in National Development Policies & Legislation; (3) Gender
    Mainstreaming and consultations; (4) Private Sector Engagement in Reforestation Initiatives; (5)
    Study on Forced Deforestation; and effects of mining on the forest sector ; (6) National REDD+ Pilot
    Program Designs (for 3 jurisdictions); cross country knowledge sharing and training through
    South-South exchanges. Funds will enable the REDD+ Unit to hire specialized consultancies. These
    consultancy assignments include: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United
    Nations, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), the Sudan Environmental Conservation
    Society (SECS).

    Component 3: Support for Stakeholder Engagement (US$0.60M)
    The objective of this component is to ensure that stakeholder engagement is an integral part of the
    REDD+ process in Sudan. The AF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and
    operational costs for:
       •   R-Package Consultations: Consultations associated with preparation of the R-Package to be
           delivered to the participant’s committee of the FCPF.
       •   Operationalization of Communications Strategy & REDD+ Awareness Program: This element

1
  The Readiness Package (R-Package) is completed at the end of the readiness preparation phase, at a stage when
activities proposed in the R-PP are well-advanced or completed. The R-Package consists of a national
multi-stakeholder self-assessment by the country, using the Readiness Package Assessment Framework as
guidelines. The Readiness Package Assessment Framework was formally endorsed (resolution PC/14/2013/1) by
the FCPF Participants Committee (PC) at the 14th PC Meeting, March 19-21, 2013, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                             2
             will focus on funding the existing communications strategy and REDD+ awareness program
             that have been established as part of the readiness process.

     Stakeholder engagement and consultation support has been built into the budgeting of all other
     activities. All consultations will be well documented and available on the websites of both the client,
     as well as the World Bank.
     Component 4: Support for Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (US$2.06M)
     The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs to Strengthen
     Institutionalization of Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) Systems and the National
     Forest Monitoring System including Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHGi) & Reporting Process 2 for
     AFOLU sector.
         •   REDD+ Information Tracking System for REDD+;
         •   GHGi & Reporting process for Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector;
         •   Land Use Planning;
         •   Desertification Monitoring Equipment & Training;
         •   Fire Monitoring Equipment & Training; and
         •   Institutionalization & deployment of MRV at Regional/zonal level.

     Component 5: National Reference Scenario and Inventory of Forest Resources (US$ 0.50M)
     The objective of this component is to define the National Reference Scenario / Forest Reference
     Emissions Level (FREL), most notably by undertaking analysis to better determine forest degradation
     levels as well as establish and institutionalize the National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS) as
     approved by the national REDD+ structures. It is expected that FAO, the consultancy currently
     supporting MRV work in Sudan, will be further engaged to support the Government in the
     implementation of activities under this component, under a Technical Assistance framework
     agreement. The project will support submission of the FREL to the UNFCCC.
     The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs for:
         •   Development of FREL to ensure methodological alignment with UNFCCC;
         •   Support development of FREL based on national circumstances and in line with UNFCCC
             guidance; and
         •   Validation of the FREL.

     D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
     known)
     The physical setting is not relevant for safeguard analysis as the REDD+ Readiness AF does not
     involve any capital investment or civil works. There will be no land acquisition or restriction of access
     under the proposed AF. Project activities are limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and
     consultation process at national and state levels and setting up environmental and social safeguards
     system.

     The REDD+ readiness AF activities are country wide, and its objective is to strengthen Sudan’s
     capacity to design a socially and environmentally sound national Reducing Emissions from
     Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus (REDD+) strategy.


2
    This will support Sudan in quantifying and justifying its NDC commitments.

                                                                                                             3
    E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    Sudan has environmental policies, laws and regulations. Furthermore, there are existing legal and
    regulatory frameworks relating to forest and other sectors that provide good basis for the governance
    in relation to REDD+. The borrower’s capacity to implement World Bank environment and social
    safeguards is low. However, under the Readiness Funding safeguards support to the borrower was
    enhanced by hiring a safeguards specialist in the REDD+ Management Unit. Further, to address the
    capacity limitation, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) Working Group was
    established that will work closely with the FNC REDD+ Management Unit, the Technical Advisory
    Committee (TAC) and the SESA Consultants to mainstream social and environmental issues in the
    various activities that will be funded under REDD+ Readiness AF and lead the SESA preparation
    process. Furthermore, the World Bank Team will work closely with the SESA Working Group and the
    environmental and social specialists in the REDD+ Management Unit.
.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

    Tamene Tiruneh Matebe (GSP01)
    Samuel L. Demsash (GSU07)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT APPLY

Seven World Bank, indicated in the Table below were triggered under the original REDD+ Readiness
project. The AF will not trigger any new safeguards policies. These safeguards policies were triggered in
the context of future support for REDD + activities which may involve civil works and capital
investment.

The grant will not finance at this stage any concrete investment activities on the ground and is thus not
expected to have any direct environmental and social impact on the ground. However, grant financed
activities might have indirect impacts since the findings from analytical work carried out under the grant
may influence the design of the national REDD+ Strategy.

Safeguards considerations of the overall REDD+ Readiness as financed by the main FCPF grant
continue to be covered as part of the SESA. The FCPF is using a SESA to integrate key environmental
and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches.
The SESA ensures (i) integration of social and environmental considerations into the REDD+ Readiness
process, in particular into the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and
prioritizing key issues; (iii) assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these
priorities and recommendations; and (iv) disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s progress reports
on Readiness preparation.

The SESA process is financed with the original grant, and it will result in a SESA report, including an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Process Framework (PF), a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) which will guide the
management of environmental and social issues in the implementation of future REDD+ sub-projects.

Overall, the project will support establishment of a national environmental and social management
system with adequate resources (staffing and operation resources at all levels), preparation of (a) a SESA
and ESMF in compliance with OP 4.01, (b) a RPF and PF in compliance with OP 4.12, and (c) an IPPF

                                                                                                         4
in compliance with OP 4.10. These safeguards instruments preparation will ensure adequate
identification and coverage of the environmental and social risks and impacts. The REDD+ Readiness
safeguard instruments will be contextualized and used by the strategic pilot jurisdictional programs that
will be prepared as part of the AF.

The design and elaboration of the National REDD+ Strategy includes a wide stakeholder consultation
process (including local communities and private actors and taking into account gender considerations)
which addresses the need of the key safeguards policies triggered.


  Safeguard Policies                      Triggered       Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental    Assessment     OP/BP Yes               The Safeguard Policy for Environment
  4.01                                                    Assessment is triggered in the context of
                                                          future support for REDD + activities which
                                                          may involve civil works and capital
                                                          investment. An ESMF will be prepared to
                                                          manage potential E&S impacts of these
                                                          activities at local level. The SESA to be
                                                          prepared by the project will serve as a key
                                                          document providing guidance on addressing
                                                          E&S issues in the REDD+ Strategy, and the
                                                          preparation of the ESMF. The SESA will also
                                                          influence the final national REDD+ strategy,
                                                          by ensuring that social and environmental
                                                          risks are factored in the preparation of the
                                                          strategy.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             Yes             The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                                          that all options proposed in the National
                                                          REDD+ Strategy take into account the
                                                          conservation of biodiversity, as well as the
                                                          numerous environmental services and
                                                          products that natural habitats provide to
                                                          human society. Overall, REDD+ activities are
                                                          expected to have significant positive impacts
                                                          on natural habitats, as the country puts in
                                                          place an effective strategy to reduce loss of
                                                          natural forests. The SESA will address issues
                                                          related to natural habitats and potential
                                                          impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy,
                                                          which will later be included in the ESMF.
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                      Yes             Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                                          have significant positive impacts on forest, in
                                                          that the main goal of the program is to reduce
                                                          deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                          contributing to the well-being of
                                                          forest-dependent communities. Potential
                                                          impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on
                                                          natural forests will be assessed through the
                                                          SESA and included in the ESMF. The SESA

                                                                                                            5
                                          and associated ESMF will reflect the
                                          requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy
                                          regarding forest management, in particular as
                                          these relate to the establishment of
                                          plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes    This policy is triggered in the context of
                                          agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                          activities which could be part of future
                                          REDD+ activities. The ESMF will address
                                          critical issues related to pest management, as
                                          necessary, and the strategic issues related to
                                          pest management will be reflected in the
                                          SESA. Furthermore, the project will
                                          encourage Integrated Pest Management in
                                          future REDD+ activities.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP Yes     REDD+ activities are likely to be
4.11                                      implemented in areas containing sites deemed
                                          physical cultural resources by rural
                                          communities living there (e.g. holy/ sacred
                                          sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests,
                                          etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                          project will have negative impacts on any
                                          such sites, the SESA will address issues
                                          related to physical cultural resources and
                                          potential impacts of the National REDD+
                                          Strategy, which will later be included in the
                                          ESMF and a specific dedicated framework.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes    This policy is triggered because there may be
                                          indigenous people in the areas where future
                                          REDD+ activities will be implemented. There
                                          will be a process of free, prior, and informed
                                          consultation with the affected Indigenous
                                          People’s particularly during sub-project
                                          preparation. As part of the SESA, a standalone
                                          IPPF will be prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes   REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary
                                          Resettlement in situations involving
                                          involuntary restrictions of access to legally
                                          designated parks, protected areas, or forest
                                          management/reforestation areas. The policy
                                          aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the
                                          extent feasible, or to minimize and mitigate its
                                          adverse social and economic impacts in cases
                                          where resettlement or other involuntary
                                          restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the
                                          SESA process, any issues related to land
                                          acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be
                                          identified, and a RPF will be prepared. In
                                          terms of restriction to natural resources, a PF

                                                                                           6
                                                              will be prepared as well.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No               This policy is not triggered because Dams will
                                                              not be financed under the project which only
                                                              supports analytical work, institutional
                                                              strengthening and capacity building that are
                                                              critical for Sudan’s progress towards
                                                              Readiness.
    Projects on International Waterways No                    Not applicable
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                       This policy is not triggered because the
    7.60                                                      project will not be implemented in any
                                                              disputed areas.
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.
A.       Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
         N/A
B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
         SESA is under preparation. Several frameworks to be prepared as part of SESA will be finalized
         and reviewed by the Bank (expected mid-2018, during the AF implementation). The SESA
         preparation is financed with the original grant. The SESA process will run in parallel to the
         preparation of the REDD+ Strategy to ensure linkages between the two studies that are
         interdependent. Any social and environmental issues will be reflected in the revised REDD
         Strategy, and an ESMF, RPF, PF, and IPPF will be prepared as part of the SESA process.


IV. APPROVALS
 Signed and submitted by:                                                                         Date:
 Task Team Leader:                        Tracy Hart, Dora Nsuwa Cudjoe                        11/29/2017
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Nathalie Munzberg                                     12/6/2017

    Acting Practice Manager:              Abdelaziz Lagnaoui                                   11/29/2017

    Comments:
    Environment Safeguards                Tamene Tiruneh Matebe                                11/28/2017
    Specialist:
    Comments:
    Social Safeguards Specialist:         Samuel D. Demsash                                    11/28/2017

     1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed
    before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form
    and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.



                                                                                                               7
