                                                                                      100362
                          INTEGRATED      SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/28/2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
  Country:                     Sudan               I Project ID:             P148349
  Project Name:                Sudan Social Safety Net Project (p148349)
  Task Team Leader(s):         Andrea Vermehren
  Estimated Board Date:        October 29,2015
  Managing Unit:               GSP07
  Sector(s):                   Other social services (100%)
  Theme(s):                    Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (50%);
                               Rural non-farm income generation (20%); Conflict prevention and post-
                               conflict reconstruction (20%); Gender (10%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
  Financing (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:       3.50                     Total Bank Financing:    13.50
  Financing Gap:            0.00
       Financing Source                                                                      Amount
       BORROWERIRECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
       International Development Association (IDA)                                               3.50
       Total                                                                                     3.50
  Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred        Yes
  project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Welfare and Social
 Security (MoWSS) to transparently and effectively implement the national Cash Transfer (CT) program,
and to pilot a Productive Safety Net (PSN) approach for poor households. The project includes a total
financing ofUS$3.5 million for three years.


c. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening the implementation of the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security
(MoWSS) cash transfer program (US$3 million)

This component will provide technical assistance, capacity building opportunities and goods/equipment
to (a) improve the MoWSS institutional capacity to effectively manage, coordinate, and administer the
CT program; (b) strengthen the Poverty Reduction Coordination Center's capacity in data analysis and
IT access; (c) establish a management information system (MIS) in the Poverty Center to manage the
main components of the SIP (including fiduciary aspects); (d) improve targeting (using the poverty map
and proxy means test) and establish a common targeting database for the SIP; (e) further develop the
cash payment systems including the e-payment pilot to improve timely cash payments; (f) strengthen
monitoring and introduce evaluation to guide the scaling up of the CT program; and (g) enhance
advocacy, communication and social accountability to strengthen outreach to beneficiaries and key
stakeholders.

The component will be coordinated by the Poverty Reduction Coordination Center (PRCC) of the
MoWSS. A capacity needs assessment will be conducted during project appraisal to determine the
requisite training needed for the ministry's staff. In the interim, a financial and procurement capacity
assessment of the implementing agency was undertaken in November 2014 and will feed into the design
of the project.

Component 2: Piloting a Productive Safety Net (PSN) Approach (US$500,OOO)

This component will finance a pilot cash for work (CfW) program modeled after the productive safety
net programs established in the region, particularly Ethiopia's PSN program. The PSN pilot will
constitute an integral element for supporting resilience and opportunity in Sudan and an important aspect
of the SSN framework, allowing enhanced coordination with ongoing initiatives by providing the poorest
households of selected communities with temporary employment during the lean season. The pilot will
be implemented by the Community Development Fund (CDF) and coordinated with the MoWSS.
Beneficiaries will be chosen based on a combination of community pre-selection and application of a
proxy means test (PMT) presently developed by the Bank upon request of the MoWSS.

The PSN pilot will not only provide short term income and employment opportunities for poor
households, but will also create social and productive assets through the work provided by beneficiaries.
Possible activities may include soil and water conservation, small scale irrigation, and social and
economic infrastructure. Sub-projects will be determined locally based on a community based
participatory planning process. It is envisaged that the majority of activities will focus on the introduction
and further enhancement of improved land use management practices to create an enabling environment
for more productive livelihoods. In addition, because of new interactions between rural communities and
towns, the component will contribute to improved access to education and health services.

The Social Safety Net Project would provide financing for technical assistance, cash for work sub-
projects, training, goods and incremental operating costs for, inter alia, (i) participatory landscape
management planning, (ii) cash for work subprojects, (iii) monitoring and evaluation, and (iv)
communication and social accountability activities. The pilot is planned to be implemented in North
Kordofan, as agreed between the MoWSS and the CDF.
World Bank technical assistance is being provided during the course of project preparation to ensure a
relevant approach is developed drawing on best global practices. Lessons learned from the PSN pilot
could allow for rapid scaling up of the program and the design of exit and graduation strategies over
time.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Component 1 provides technical assistance and other support to the cash transfer program, which
operates and will be launched nationally. Component 2, for which OPIBP 4.01 and 4.12 are triggered, is
expected to be implemented in the state of North Kordofan.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
The CDF, the implementing agency for Component 2 the implementation of which will trigger the
safeguards policies, has successfully implemented the World Bank supported Community Development
Project. Based on that experience, the CDl', under the overall guidance of the MoWSS, has adequate
capacity to manage the limited safeguard issues expected under Component 2.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mr. John Bryant Collier (GENDR)
Ms. Varalakshmi Vemuru (GSURR)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

    Safeguard Policies         Triggered?                     Explanation (Optional)
                                              Component 2 will provide financing for small-scale
                                              public works at the community level, and thus OP/BP
                                              4.01 is triggered. Expected impacts are likely to be
                                              localized, temporary, and easily mitigated through
                                              sensible construction management techniques. To help
                                              strengthen the capacity of the implementing agencies
                                              and ensure that the proposed Project is implemented in a
Environmental Assessment                      socially responsible and environmentally sound manner,
                                   Yes
OPIBP 4.01                                    an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                                              and Check List will be prepared. The ESMP Check List
                                              will establish a mechanism to determine and assess the
                                              potential environmental and social impacts of
                                              productive safety net investments and set out
                                              appropriate mitigation, monitoring, and institutional
                                              measures to avoid and/or minimize the expected
                                              environmental and social impacts to an acceptable level.
Natural Habitats OP/BP                        The project will not affect natural habitats.
                                   No
4.04
Forests OPIBP 4.36                            The proposed project does not include any
                                   No
                                              activities that would require triggering OP 4.36.
Pest Management OP 4.09            No         The project does not support any activities that
                                           might involve the use of pesticides,   thus OP 4.09 is
                                           not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources                The scope of activities to be supported will be known
OPIBP 4.11                                 later and the presence of physical cultural resources
                                           (e.g. graveyards, sites of religious/ritual significance,
                                           known or unknown local structures or sites of historic or
                                  No       cultural importance) within the project area may not be
                                           known at this stage. However, the scope of activities is
                                           very sma11 and is not expected to pose risks of
                                           damaging physical cultural resources. However, chance
                                           find procedures are included in the ESMPP checklist.
Indigenous Peoples OPIBP                   There are no indigenous people expected to be
4.10                              No
                                           present in the project area.
                                           It is possible that implementation of Component 2 could
                                           require land to be acquired, some relocation, and/or
                                           restriction of access to sources of livelihoods, and thus
                                           OP/BP 4.12 is triggered. Since the exact locations and
Involuntary Resettlement                   the number of people to be impacted are not known at
                                 Yes
OPIBP 4.12                                 this time, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
                                           be prepared which will outline measures to avoid and
                                           minimize resettlement as well as procedures for
                                           voluntary land donation. The RPF will be disclosed in
                                           country and in the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams OPIBP 4.37                  The project does not involve construction or
                                  No
                                           reliance on dams
Projects on International                  The project does not impact on international
Waterways OPIBP 7.50              No
                                           waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas                 This policy is not applicable for the project area.
                                  No
OP/BP 7.60


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
   A.     Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? Yes
        • Explanation:
           OP 4.01 and OP 4.12 are triggered.
        • Ifyes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS:
           Appraisal stage ISDS is expected to be prepared in October 2015.

   B.     Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that
          may be needed.
   The in-country consultations with the stakeholders have taken place and the safeguards
   documents have been completed by the Client.
,   ,
            c.       The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the
                     appraisal-stage ISDS.
           The ESMP and the RPF reflecting extensive consultation will be publicly disclosed both in
           Sudan and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to Project appraisal in late October/early November
           and will be documented in the appraisal stage ISDs.

        IV. APPROVALS

        Task Team Leader:                   Name: Andrea Vermehren
        Approved By:
        Regional Safeguards
        Advisor:
        Practice Manager:




         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
        InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
        affected persons.
