                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 103462

Date ISDS Updated: December 2, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Sudan                                Project ID: P158066
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Sustainable livelihoods for displaced and vulnerable communities in
Eastern Sudan: Phase 2
Task Team Leader: Abderrahim Fraiji
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 5,         Estimated Board Date: March 4, 2016
2016
Managing Unit: GSURR                          Lending Instrument: State and Peace-
                                              building Fund grant
Sector: Social Development, Fragile States, Crops, Animal Production,
Theme: Social Inclusion (40%), Gender (20%), Rural Services and Infrastructure (20%),
Participation and Civic Engagement (15%), Other Social Development (5%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:

SPF: US$ 4.435m

Environmental Category: B – Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing               Simple [ X ]             Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project       Yes [ ]                 No [ X ]


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:

   The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of (local) stakeholders to
   plan and deliver services and sustainable livelihoods for displaced populations and
   vulnerable host communities.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

Component 1: Development of Local Government Structures and Capacities (US$0.66 million)
As in phase 1, the Kassala State Ministry of Finance, Economy, and Labor will be responsible
for implementing SLDP2. One grant agreement will be signed for the implementation of
components 1, 3 and 4 with the federal Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MoFEP),
which is the Bank’s counterpart in Sudan. MoFEP would then sign a Subsidiary Agreement (SA)
with the Ministry of Finance, Economy and Labor (MFEL), State of Kassala. MFEL will be the
principal responsible institution for overall project execution and coordination through an East
Sudan TSI Coordination Agency (ESTSI) which has been established and staffed during phase 1
of the project.

The composition and cost of the East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency reflects the need to
closely accompany MFEL during project implementation, ensuring the effectiveness of the
learning by the national counterparts while implementing the project, and guaranteeing the
application of management and fiduciary practices compatible with World Bank procedures. The
East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency will continue to hold regular briefings with development
partners and national government agencies to share strategies and plans, share lessons learned on
new approaches, analytical findings, capacity, and resource needs etc. Thus, the project would
contribute to overall knowledge generation and management as well as serve as a platform that
promotes and increases the project's ability to leverage other resources.

It can be said that phase 1 provided substantive, positive hands-on experience for the ESTSI and
state government in the area of livelihoods in rural communities affected by displacement. It has
also garnered the interest of the state government in adopting new approaches to service delivery
(such as the implementation of GIS systems to track basic service provision). However, there
remains critical gaps in terms of in-depth analysis of development needs and, in some cases,
basic computational skills. For this reason, emphasis in phase 2 will be placed on strengthening
the technical capacity of the ESTSI as well as local government stakeholders responsible for
development planning in Kassala.

Under this component, the East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency will also be responsible for
covering the following project costs:

      Capacity building programs
      Project Management (operations costs)
      Communications
      Project Evaluations

Component 2: Research and Design (US$0.24 million) – Bank executed
Livelihoods activities and cultural/social dynamics in Kassala state, and across Sudan, vary
widely based on local conditions. Phase 1 has successfully employed the conduction of in-depth
studies in directly informing, and laterally adjusting, design and implementation methodology of
SLDP. In recognition of the heterogeneity in the area, phase 2 will host a smaller provision
(approximately 50%) for the continuation of research studies exclusively in new areas of project
expansion. Project studies will include assessments of local market conditions, value chain
analysis, informal systems and markets, the existing skills and capacities, the formal and
informal decision-making processes, and the role of women in the communities.
In addition, Bank supervision in design and guidance of the project will be increased at key
intervals given the increased coverage and reliance on community driven planning in the phase 2
project. This approach requires sufficient oversight as communities can be easily derailed from
the project objectives without proper and timely supervision of progress.

Under this component, the World Bank will be responsible for covering the following project
costs:

      Research Studies on New Communities
      Design of 3-state project

   - Component 3: Community Small Works Support (US$0.4 million) – recipient executed
As described above, communities will first be mobilized to plan and implement a portfolio of
small works within their communities for the benefit of all in the community (displaced and
host). Examples of these works may include: forestation campaigns, maintenance of irrigation
systems, livestock route demarcation, small-scale infrastructure, soil conservation, establishing
granaries, basic services improvement, etc. It should be noted that economically productive
works that serve to increase livelihood potential or households’ income of target communities
will be given strong preference.

Exceptional performers in the community will have the opportunity to participate in a
“Community Champions” program wherein they are trained to be more involved, such as serving
as civic leaders, ambassadors, and trainers to other target communities.

Under this component, the East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency will also be responsible for
covering the following project costs,

      Support to Small Works
      Community Champions Program

Component 4: Economic Livelihoods and Benefit Trans-passing (US$3.135 million) – recipient
executed
Component 4 will seek to employ the livelihood grant mechanisms established in the first phase,
however as an ex-post economic incentive to mobilize communities towards effective
development planning and implementation of small works. Communities will be organized to
select beneficiaries, identify livelihood priorities, vet their proposals through technical experts,
and receive training in their chosen area of income generation.

Given the gains achieved in community cohesion through application of the trans-passing
system, the phase 2 project will aim to consolidate this approach. The benefit trans-passing
system will be retained from phase 1, however strengthened to ensure larger, more sustainable
investments from communities. The possibility of linking the trans-passing system with local
state structures to oversee successful functioning will also be explored.

The use of a tripartite procurement committee including a community representative, ESTSI
project member, and technical expert to purchase livelihood assets for households via pre-
established procurement criteria will also be retained. However, a key change in phase 2 will be
the move from in-kind grant delivery to cash delivery; communities will be transferred the
livelihood grant amounts in their cooperative bank account for further disbursement to
households. With the capacitation of the ESTSI over the pilot phase and establishment of the
local procurement committee mechanisms, there are now reasonable assurances in place to
ensure that communities will be able to responsibly manage cash grants. By directly managing
project funds, communities will be further empowered, and capacitated, to form trusting
relationships and act autonomously. The feasibility of this proposal (i.e. readiness amongst
communities) will be revisited during project appraisal.

Also encompassed in component 4 is a participatory M&E system which will employ
community leaders to be the first line of data collectors for the project. They will be equipped
with data collection tools and trained to collect key information within their communities for
further transmission to a local NGO or consultant. This local NGO or consultant will verify and
consolidate the information for ESTSI. ESTSI, at intervals, will also verify this information
directly within target communities to ensure data accuracy.

Under this component, the East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency will also be responsible for
covering the following project costs:

      Livelihoods Training
      Livelihoods Credits and Benefit Trans-passing
      Participatory M&E System

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The project activities will be undertaken at existing IDP settlements and host communities within
Kassala state (see table below), however appraisal mission results and consultation with local
stakeholders will ultimately determine the target location of SLDP2 intervention.

                     Sub-region in relation to               IDP camp area
                          Kassala town

                   Southeast                     Fedaieb
                                                 Adman
                                                 Goulsa

                   Southwest                     Fatoo
                                                 Fireneage
                                                 Teshotiai
                                                 Amara
                                                 Eid Gloub

                   Northeast                     Deblaweit

                   Northwest                     Hadalia
                                                 Metateib
                                                 Togly
The project is expected to be implemented in rural areas outside major cities. The activities
within the project scope that will have a physical footprint and thus may have adverse
environmental or social impacts are described under components 3 and 4. They relate to (i) small
scale civil works (e.g. irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation, construction of granaries); (ii) soil
conservation, erosion control and afforestation; (iii) various community driven small scale
projects in the agriculture and livestock sectors, and pertaining to rehabilitation and upgrading of
community assets and infrastructure.

The community-driven activities will be governed by a set of selection criteria that includes E&S
risks and benefits, as well as a negative list to exclude activities, which are too risky or not
manageable within the project’s technical capacities.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

The Grant Recipient has been exposed to the WBG’s environmental and social standards, and to
good international practice in environmental and social management, through the first phase of
this project. During the first phase the Recipient produced and implemented, to the satisfaction of
the Bank, an ESMF with respective management instruments and mechanisms.

The Ministry of Finance, Economy and Labor (MFEL) of the State Government of Kassala is the
recipient institution. In order to offset/minimize the anticipated environmental and social impacts
that may result from the proposed project, the Recipient will undertake the following actions:

   i) MFEL is responsible for the coordination of overall development planning in the State,
   including issues related to environmental sustainability and the management of natural
   resources. MFEL has no competence or capacity to directly intervene on the implementation
   or supervision of activities in these areas. This competence rests with several sectoral
   institutions responsible for aspects of sustainability, as, among others, agriculture, land uses,
   water resources management, irrigation, forestry and energy.

   ii) The MFEL/East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency will prepare an updated ESMF with
   guidelines and procedures to be used as guidance for environmental and social management
   issues during implementation period; for the actual management of impacts caused by
   subproject activities the use of a simplified, checklist-type ESMP is envisaged. This would
   be the default instrument to manage the expected low-risk, low-impact activities (such as
   small scale civil and construction works), and would be produced, and attached to the tender
   package and works contracts for every identified sub-project with potential E&S impacts.

   iii) The institutional capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards and
   implementation of EA recommendations is still limited. To implement the project in a
   socially acceptable and environmentally sound manner, it is required to further strengthen the
   implementing institutions’ capacity in the application of the EA recommendations and other
   environmental/social safeguard instrument during project implementation period. The project
   will also ensure responsibilities of implementing and monitoring the environmental and
   social safeguard aspects of the Project, provide training and technical support to the MFEL,
   East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency and other line ministries staffs and create awareness
    among communities and relevant stakeholders on sound environmental management
    practices and implementation of the ESMF recommendations.

    iv) The project will ensure relevant safeguard expertise within the implementation team
    (East Sudan TSI Coordination Agency) by recruiting a safeguard specialist for the state
    office. She/ he will be expected to prepare all E&S management plans for subprojects and
    ensure due implementation their provisions. Moreover, the E&S specialist will provide
    training and help to build the capacity of the staff in the MFEL, East Sudan TSI Coordination
    Agency and other line ministries, conduct regular supervision, prepare progress reports, and
    be the focal person on environmental and social safeguard issues.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Wolfhart Pohl

Samuel Lule Demsash, (GENDR), Social Development Specialist

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                          Yes           No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
The main focus of the project lies on studies, capacity building, and livelihood support initiatives in IDP
settlements and host communities in Kassala State. These activities have been addressed by the ESMF
prepared in phase 1 of the project. While phase 2 is largely similar, there is more emphasis on
community-driven small works initiatives. While the exact nature of the small works will be determined
via community consultations, it is expected that these works may include construction or renovation of
water supply and irrigation systems, community farming initiatives, construction or renovation of multi-
purpose development centers, renovation of schools, and other minor civil works activities.
Considering the above described activities the team recognized OP4.01 as triggered, and proposes the
E&S safeguards category B for the project. The Project will thus prepare an updated Environmental
Management Framework (ESMF) with guidance and procedures for environmental and social
management issues during implementation period. For the management of impacts caused by subproject
activities, the use of a simplified, checklist-type ESMP is envisaged. This would be the default instrument
to manage the expected low-risk, low-impact activities (such as small scale civil and construction works),
and would be produced, and attached to the tender package and works contracts for every identified sub-
project with potential E&S impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                             X
The project will not involve significant conversion, or degradation, of critical or non-critical natural
habitats, or protected areas, as it will take place within existing communities and established land use
patterns.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                      X
While some small scale afforestation activities may be included into project financing, they are not
expected to affect existing natural forest, or have impacts on the health and quality of forests; or affect the
rights and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests. Afforestation is
not expected to take place on commercial scale; the main purpose of afforestation activities will be
erosion control and combatting land degradation. Afforestation activities will be governed by the E&S
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                               Yes             No            TBD
principles laid out in the ESMF.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                        X
While some agricultural livelihood activities may be supported by the project, pesticides will not be
financed or their use supported. Phase 1 experience supports this, as the communities do not traditionally
use chemicals in their farming activities. Improved seed varieties and tolerant crop varieties may be
explored, without the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
The project is not expected to adversely affect physical cultural resources in target communities.
Possible civil works encompassed in the project are not of a significant scale. Deep excavation
and large-scale movement of earth will not be undertaken. Still so, mitigation measures shall be
identified through the ESMF on a cautionary basis to be prepared for ‘chance finds’ of physical
cultural resources. These measures would not contravene either the borrower’s national legislation, or
its obligations under relevant international environmental treaties and agreements.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                  X
No stakeholders qualifying as indigenous peoples under this policy are present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             X
Project activities are not envisioned to result in involuntary resettlement. The project addresses
involuntary resettlement insofar as the target beneficiaries have been previously affected by involuntary
resettlement due to previous conflicts, whether the beneficiary is an IDP or host community member.
These populations are by and large in protracted displacement situations extending from the 2006 Peace
Agreement signed with the Eastern Front and beforehand. The project seeks to support durable solutions
to these protracted displacement situations in order to alleviate socioeconomic stresses and mitigate
possible reversion into conflict. .
The proposed SLDP project as designed might not undertake involuntary displacement of people. But, small scale
civil works activities requires land for construction or renovation of water supply and irrigation systems, community
farming initiatives, construction or renovation of multi-purpose development centers, renovation of schools, and
other minor civil works construction of community centers might result in economic and or physical displacement.
While the specific location for the sub projects are not known, it is not possible to determine the nature of ownership
of land at this stage (whether private and/or public). Therefore, as a precautionary measure to preclude the risks of
land acquisition the policy will be triggered and a resettlement policy framework will be prepared to identify and
address potential land acquisition or restriction to access and use of natural resources.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                      X
While the rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure may be financed by the project, no dams will be built,
rehabilitated, or otherwise affected over the course of this project. No physical components of the project
will depend on the functioning of existing large dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                 X
The project will not affect any international waterways or groundwater bodies.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                          X
The project is not located in a disputed area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:
   N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:
February 6, 2016

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The project’s key E&S instrument, an ESMF, is currently under preparation and will be finalized
in [February 2016]. The specific subproject-ESMPs and their timing will be determined during
implementation. A resettlement policy framework will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed to ensure that appropriate measures are in place to address any issues which might
arise from potential land acquisition and or restriction to access and use of natural resources.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Name: Abderrahim Fraiji                            Date:
                                                                                    November 6,
                                                                                       2015
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Hanneke Van Tilburg                          Date
 Hanneke Van Tilburg                                                                February 14,
                                                                                       2016
   Comments:
 Practice Manager:                  Name: Robin Mearns                                   Date
   Comments:




                                                                   (Template Version November 2007)
