Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC670 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 2, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P084035 
Project Name: FERGHANA VALLEY WATER 
RESOURCES MANAGEME 
Task Team Leader: Usaid I. El-Hanbali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (80%);General 
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Other rural 
development (S);Participation and civic engagement 
(S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 5 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
15 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project’s main objectives are: (a) to increase productivity of irrigated agriculture and income of about 250,000 
people in FV by improving land and water management, and (b) to improve regulation  and dam safety of the 
Kayrakum reservoir contributing to enhanced efficiency of water management at the basin level.  
 
The project would also build on the experience learned from the on-going operations in agriculture sector especially 
the Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project and the Farm Privatization Support Project, and would have a strong 
link with the planned operations including Community Agriculture and Watershed Management (FY04) and the 
Farm Privatization 2 (FY05) projects in order to build a comprehensive approach to land and water management and 
agriculture and rural development. 
 
The key performance indicators that would enable measurement of the project impact would be: (a) increased 
employment and income of farmers in the Ferghana Valley; (b) cropped area and crop yield; and (c) increased 
irrigation water in summer, reduction in waterlogging and increased environmental flows in Syr Darya. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The project component, as envisaged at this stage, would focus at improving and rehabilitating the critical and 
essential irrigation and drainage infrastructures in about 30,000 ha in Tajikistan’s FV, improving water resources 
management and improved regional cooperation in water resources and increased agriculture productivity. The main 
components would be as follows: 
 
Component 1.  Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Systems, and Groundwater Development (Base cost 
US$15.0 million) 
The rehabilitation works would include reconstruction of off-farm and on-farm irrigation and 
drainage systems over an area of about 30,000 ha mostly located on the left bank of the 
Page  2
 
 
Kayrakum reservoir benefiting about 250,000 people.  The investment would also include works 
to ensure reliable water supplies including groundwater development. 
 
Component 2.  Community Development and Support  (Base cost US$2.5 million) 
The component would include development of community based WUAs for operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and water management, and  promotion of improved irrigation and 
agricultural practices.  Necessary technical assistance would be provided for development of 
WUAs, training and equipment.       
 
Component 3.  Improving the Operation and Safety of Kayrakum Dam (Base Cost US$1.5 million) 
The operation and safety of Kayrakum’s dam would be improved through re-regulation, minor repair works and 
improvement in monitoring. 
 
Component 4. Agricultural Development Support (Base cost US$0.5 million) 
The activities would include: training communities and WUA on improved water management, extension and 
agricultural information services; and demonstration of improved and modern technologies to increase production 
and improve water use  
 
Component 5. Project Management, Technical Assistance and Training (Base cost US$1.5 
million) 
This component would support the Government in implementing the project. It would include: support for the 
operation of the Project Management Unit (PMU), a modest institutional strengthening program including training 
and study tours. 
 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Melioration and Water Resources Management (MM&WRM), 
while the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS) will assist in the regional aspects of the project 
(Improvement of Operation of Kayrakum Dam).  A PMU will be established under the MM&WRM to implement 
the project with effective community participation in all phases of project implementation process.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project area will be in Tajikistan portion of the Ferghana Valley and would be located on the Southern shore of 
the Kayrakum reservoir in Kani Badam and Bobojon Gafuro of the northern Soghd Oblast.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguards is weak and needs strengthening.  This would be done during 
project preparation and implementation.  However, the borrower has a good knowledge of the safeguards as the 
Bank has funded several projects there and each addressed the safeguard issues.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
An Environmental Assessment will be prepared as a part of  project preparation.  
A PHRD Grant has been requested for project preparation which would include 
preparation of the EA. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[TBD ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Preparatory studies will be carried out to assess whether the project activities (as a result of the 
establishment of bore-wells and the changing land-use of grazing and agricultural lands) will 
trigger the involuntary resettlement policy or will involve land acquisition. 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ x] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
A dam safety assessment has bee carried out during Phase I of  the Aral Sea Program.  The issues 
identified in that assessment will be evaluated and the project would include measures to address 
those safety issues 
[x] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
Although no impacts on cultural property are expected, the possibility of chance finds during 
construction can not be ruled out. Necessary mechanisms, such as provision on the EMP and civil 
works contracts will be put in place to deal with this possibility. 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[x] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
The project involves an international river – Syr Darya. However, since the 
investments expected under the project are strictly rehabilitation of existing 
schemes, they will not change the volume of extraction of water or volume of 
discharge. The team will consult with Legal to see whether a waiver to notification 
is  appropriate.  
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): Most of the works will be done on existing irrigation schemes or water management structures.  
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
November 15, 2004. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS .Environmental Assessment to be made 
available by March 2005. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Usaid I. El-Hanbali 
03/16/2004 
Approved by: 
  
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  4
 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer 
03/16/2004 
Comments 
 
Sector Manager: 
Joseph Goldberg 
03/16/2004 
Comments 
 
