Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1976 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/23/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P096861 
Project Name: RAPID RESPONSE TA 
Task Team Leader: Antonius Verheijen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (80%);Other social services (10%);General 
education sector (10%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring 
and privatization (S);Public expenditure, financial management and procurement 
(S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is (i) to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
public administration both at central and local levels, (ii) increase efficiency and effectiveness of 
public expenditure systems, (iii) improve the public-private sector interface by strengthening the 
enabling conditions for private sector development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The main focus of the proposed project is to help build capacity for the implementation of three 
key Government strategies, as referred to above. The substantive focus of the project would be as 
follows :  
 
Page  2
a) 
Implementation support to administrative and civil service reform, including support for 
streamlining organizational structures and service delivery management systems of core 
ministries, civil service professionalization, and improving incentive systems (1.7 million US$)  
 
b)
Capacity building for effectively linking policies to budgets including strengthening 
macroeconomic forecasting systems, prioritization in public investment planning and medium 
term budget planning, as well as expenditure planning in key social sectors (1.4 million US$),  
 
c) 
  Developing the public-private sector interface, including support for improving 
regulatory quality and service delivery of inspection agencies, capacity building for the State 
Privatization Committee in managing enterprise restructuring processes and support to the design 
and implementation of the Private Sector Development Strategy (1.3 million US$)  
 
d)
Supporting project management and tracking reform implementation (0.65US$).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Dushanbe, Tajikistan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NA   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/02/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project will not finance any civil or rehabilitation works, it focuses purely on technical 
assistance. The project does not deal with land acquisition.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Antonius Verheijen 
11/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/22/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards and transferred to the Task Team and Sector Manager for next 
step review and clearance. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
11/23/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at this stage. At the moment there do not appear to be any direct 
safeguard issues, but the team will follow up as part of project preparation. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
