Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC765 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 7, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P079027 
Project Name: Tajikistan Municipal 
Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Jonathan S. 
Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management 
(30%);Sewerage (30%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Water 
supply (20%) 
Theme: Other urban development 
(P);Access to urban services for the poor 
(S);Municipal finance (S);Municipal 
governance and institution building (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 15 million 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The development objective of the project is to assist the Government of Tajikistan and local 
governments to improve the access, quality and delivery of basic infrastructure and affordable 
municipal services.  To this effect the project will assist the Tajik Commune Service and a 
selected number of local governments in  (a) responding more effectively to local demands for 
service improvement by identifying and implementing required priority investments and (b) 
improving the technical and financial management of utility operations at the municipal level.   
The project will also support the devolution of service delivery to local government, in line with 
the Government’s on-going but only nascent decentralization efforts. 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The proposed components of the project are: 
 
(1) 
Infrastructure and Municipal Services Rehabilitation:
 This component will finance the 
rehabilitation and or repair of infrastructure (urban roads, storm water drainage, etc.), 
local utility services (water supply, sewerage, waste water treatment, sanitation, etc.) and 
facilities supporting local economic development (municipal markets, etc.) which will be 
selected on the basis of local demand and a demonstrated municipal commitment. 
(2) Institutional 
Capacity 
Building:
 The component will provide technical assistance to the 
Government and participating municipalities to develop their capacity to manage 
infrastructure and utility service operations and identify to that effect: (a) priority 
investment projects through a participatory planning process; and (b) measures to 
improve management and performance monitoring systems. 
(3) 
Project Management and Supervision:
 The component will support project 
implementation by financing: (a) incremental costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), 
and (b) consulting services to provide technical expertise required for project management, 
especially in regard to preparation of feasibility studies, engineering designs, portfolio 
management, fiduciary aspects, safeguards policies and monitoring outcomes. 
Project preparation will be based on a rapid assessment of infrastructure and municipal services, 
which will be conducted, with the support of local authorities in selected cities that are likely to 
qualify for participation in the project. The survey will assess   the current state and rehabilitation 
needs of local roads, storm water drainage, water supply, sewerage, and waste water treatment 
systems, as well as of facilities supporting local economic development (markets, etc.).  Further 
coordination is currently underway with the TLSS  and Poverty Assessment (underway) to 
supply specific information about subjective poverty, access to utilities, income and assets of 
households in all cities with population more than 35,000
1
. 
Concurrently, an assessment will be made to review the institutional setting and the technical 
capacity of the Tajik Commune Services, municipalities and utilities in selected cities. The 
assessment will aim at clarifying the functions and relationships between the central and local 
government agencies responsible for infrastructure and service delivery. Special focus will be on 
the delineation of ownership, rights of use of utility assets, financial obligations, investment, 
operational and maintenance responsibilities.  Proposals for reforms will be made and considered 
in the project design to ensure sustainable impact of proposed investments.  
The list of cities that could participate in the project will be shared with all other donors currently 
active in the area of municipal infrastructure rehabilitation in Tajikistan in order to ensure 
complementarities and avoid possible overlaps or conflicts. 
 
                                                
 
1
 These are (Khudjand, 149,000; Quliab, 78,000; Kurgan-Tiube, 60,000; Ura-Tiube, 51,000; Kanibadam, 45,000; 
Kofarnikhan, 44,000; Tursun-Zade, 39,000 and Isfara, 37,000). 
Page  3
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will support the rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and services in selected 
cities across Tajikistan, based on selection criteria to be developed and agreed between the 
Government and the Bank.  Participating cities will be identified during project preparation. 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Project management capacity in Tajikistan is considered to be weak, particularly in procurement 
and financial management.  The project intends to address this risk through intensive technical 
support both during project preparation and implementation. 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project will support the rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and services 
in selected cities across Tajikistan. 
[N] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[N ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Proposed rehabilitation of urban roads, sewerage systems and waste water 
treatment plants will not entail land acquisition, and that such sub-projects will 
not be considered. However, renovation may mean that the livelihood of some 
people may be temporarily affected (kiosks in markets or near roads to be 
renovated).  If this is established during preparation, OP4.12 will be triggered and  
a policy framework will be prepared and disclosed in country in local language 
and in Infoshop before appraisal. 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ N 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[N] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
In terms of cultural property, although it is unlikely, there will be a clause in the 
OM to deal with the possibility of chance findings 
 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
It is envisioned that the first year activities will be know by the time of appraisal and so the 
project is rated as environmental category “B”. It is acknowledged that if more detailed 
information about the Project investments are not available at time of appraisal, the category 
might be changed to an FI.  The EA rating will be confirmed after the preparation missions 
(certainly by the QER). 
 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. (November/early December, before appraisal) 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS (October 2004) 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The identified sub-projects will have an EMP prepared, regarding actions following the first 
year, an environmental section in the Operations Manual (OM) will be prepared, the chapter will 
include screening criteria for sub-projects describing the procedures and institutional 
arrangements for the subproject EA work.  In establishing the procedures, the consultant will 
review both the Tajikistan national environmental laws and regulations, and institutional 
capacity. Given the small size of the grants and the scope of likely investments, subprojects in 
environmental category A are not expected. 
 
The environment section of the OM will be attached with the EMP as an annex.  and will be 
disclosed in country in local language and in infoshop prior to appraisal.   At least one public 
consultation with the stakeholders and local NGO will take place before appraisal and minutes 
will be attached to the EMP. 
 
                                                
 
2
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  5
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Date 5/3/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name:  Ron Hoffer 
Date 5/3/2004 
Comments: 
Given the above uncertainties, project review and clearance for safeguards will 
be retained in ECSSD and not yet delegated to the Task Team and Sector Manager.  This 
can be reviewed at any time; most certainly before QER.
 
Sector Manager: 
Name: Lee Travers 
Date 
Comments 
 
 
WB19534 
P:\TAJIKIST\INFRA\MunicipalWater\1LENP\Tajikistan - Municipal Infrastructure Development ISDS.doc 
May 3, 2004 1:54 PM
 
