Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/09/2005 
Report No.:  AC1574
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P089244 
Project Name:  ENERGY LOSS REDUCTION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (100%) 
Theme:  Analysis of economic growth (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
18.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
SWITZERLAND: SWISS AGENCY FOR DEV. & COOP. (SDC)8.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
8.00
22.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the proposed Project are to assist in reducing the commercial losses in 
the electricity and gas systems, and lay the foundation for the improvement of the 
financial viability of the electricity and gas utilities, in a socially responsible manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would provide for: (a) supply and installation of electricity and gas 
meters; (b) supply and installation of laboratories for electricity and gas meter calibration, 
testing and quality control laboratories; (c) the design and installation of computerized 
billing systems in the electricity and gas utilities; (d) project related and capacity building 
technical assistance to the utilities including: (i) Project Engineering, Management and 
Supervision (PEMS); and (ii) design and implementation of a Financial Management 
Improvement Program; and (e) technical assistance to the Government for: (i) 
implementation of the Medium Term Energy Tariff Policy; (ii) implementation of the 
social protection policy ; and (iii) addressing governance issues within the energy sector, 
and between the energy sector and the consumers.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Rural and Urban Tajikistan   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None Applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
NA   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NA   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  3
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
05/05/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:  This  is a 'delegated project' hence no approval by Regional Safeguards Coordinator is 
needed 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
05/09/2005 
Comments:   
