Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/24/2005 
Report No.:  34006
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P079027 
Project Name:  Municipal Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 21, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (30%);Sewerage (30%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);Water supply (20%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(S);Municipal finance (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to improve the availability, quality and 
efficiency of basic municipal services for the population of the eight towns participating 
in the project.  This objective will be achieved by: (a) financing the rehabilitation and/or 
repair of infrastructure installations and equipment belonging to KMK’s local 
subsidiary utility enterprises, and (b) assisting KMK and its local subsidiary utility 
enterprises, and where appropriate, local government authorities in increasing the 
effectiveness of the management of basic municipal services.  Improved access to basic 
infrastructure and services will be an important factor in supporting local economic 
growth and poverty reduction.   
 
3. Project Description 
This objective will be achieved by (a) financing the rehabilitation and/or repair of basic 
infrastructure and utility service installations and equipment, and (b) assisting local utility 
enterprises in increasing the effectiveness of the management of local infrastructure 
services.  
Page  2
The proposed Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (MIDP) will consist of the 
following three components: (a) Municipal Infrastructure Rehabilitation; (b) Technical 
and Institutional Support; and, (c) Implementation Support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will be implemented in 8 towns: Dangara, Istaravshan, Kanibadam, Kulyab, 
Kurgan-Tyube, Rasht, Vahdat, and Vose.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Inesis Kiskis (ECSSD) 
Mr Shahridan Faiez (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts and is 
classified as Environmental category B. Short term impacts will be minimized by proper 
planning and application of preventative measures and mitigated by curative actions after 
construction is completed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no indirect or long term measures anticipated due to future activities in the 
project area.  The project may support activities that take place near trans-boundary 
waterways.  However, the project was granted an exception from notifying the riparians, 
since the proposed activities will not modify nor increase the volume of water abstraction 
from the surface or ground water reservoirs, nor affect the rights of other users.   
 
Page  3
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no alternative project options.  The project will involve rehabilitation of 
existing infrastructure assets only.  The project will not entail  land acquisition or 
temporary or permanent relocation, or adverse impacts on livelihoods. Adverse impacts 
on livelihoods will be avoided by providing alternative access routes if necessary, and 
phasing construction to minimize disruption.    
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will prepare an Environmental Management Plan for each investment, 
detailing likely impacts (including the social ones) and the mitigation measures. 
Provisions for Environmental screening will be included in the Operational Manual and 
the subproject specific EMPs.  Investments will also need to obtain clearances as per 
Tajikistan national legislation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Key stakeholders are KMK, a central government utility agency, local 
municipalities, and the beneficiaries.  As part of the social assessment consultations are 
being carried out with consumers to determine their needs and ensure that they are taken 
into account in project design.  Periodic consultations will continue during project 
implementation and after project completion to determine the level of beneficiary 
satisfaction with the project and its impact. The project-wide EMP was discussed at 
public consultation meeting.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/12/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  4
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
10/18/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Inesis Kiskis 
10/18/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Shahridan Faiez 
10/18/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/18/2005 
Comments:  We have reviewed the draft EMP which can be disclosed, but expect an improved and 
final version to be available and disclosed shortly; well before negotiations. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
 
Comments:   
Page  5
