                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 123416
Date prepared/updated: December 10, 2017

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Tanzania                                Project ID: P163439
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Secondary Education Quality Improvement Program
Task Team Leader: Samer Al-Samarrai and Cornelia Jesse
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 2018       Estimated Board Date: March 22, 2018
Managing Unit: GED01                             Lending Instruments: PforR and IPF
Sector: Education
Theme: Secondary Education
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 300 (10 is allocated to the TA component)
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [ ]                   No [X ]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [ ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes [ ]       No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
Program Development Objective: To enhance equitable access to and improve teaching and learning
environments in government secondary schools with a focus on mathematics and sciences.1

3. Project Description:
The proposed operation consists of two components: (i) a secondary education Program for
Results (PforR) component to support the Education Sector Development Plan (ESDP) 2018/19-
2022/23, focusing on the lower and upper secondary education components of the ESDP (not
already covered by the ongoing Education PforR program; and (ii) a Technical Assistance (TA)
component to provide implementation support and build the capacity of MoEST, PO-RALG and
National Examination Council of Tanzaniato manage the expansion of the sector.

The proposed program will support the lower and upper secondary education components of the
ESDP for a five-year period to June 2023. It will only support aspects of the government’s
program that are not already covered by the ongoing Education Program for Results program.


1
    Science refers to biology, chemistry and physics.
The ISDS pertains to the TA component of the proposed Program which will be supported
through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument.

The scope of the operation will include a capacity building IPF component of US$ 10 million. This
component is designed to identify critical trade-offs in secondary school expansion, conduct needs
assessments in LGAs, analyze the cost-effectiveness and sustainability of proposed approaches in
responding to the challenges emerging in the secondary education sector. TA support provided by DFID
for the EPforR created an implementation feedback loop encouraging adaptive learning and timely course
correction that has proved critical in keeping implementation on track. The Fee-Free Basic Education
Policy (FBEP) and the expected increase in lower and upper secondary enrolments creates TA needs
beyond current EPforR activities, which will be supported through the operation.

The purpose of the IPF component is to provide implementation support and build the capacity of
MoEST and PO-RALG to manage sector expansion. In particular, it will provide support to build
sustainable capacity for effective policymaking, planning, implementation and monitoring and evaluation .
Specific capacity building will focus on MoEST and PO-RALG departments and units that are involved
in the planning and management of the secondary education sector. This will include but will not be
limited to secondary education departments and will include units responsible for policy and planning and
Education Management and Information Systems. It will also include semi-autonomous institutions under
MoEST including the National Examinations Council of Tanzania (NECTA) and the Tanzania Institute of
Education (TIE). The IPF component will provide resources for the government to develop the strategies
and costed plans that are included in the SEQUIP. Support will take the form of consultancy services to
support implementation, additional human resources and equipment as well as needs specific training for
relevant staff. Attention will be given to the capacity building of staff specifically responsible for the
implementation of PforR activities.

Support will also include capacity building at the central and local implementation levels – region,
district, local government authorities, and wards – through the capacity building IPF component.
This will help provide capacity building aimed at: (i) implementation-level stakeholder mapping and
identification of implementation bottlenecks; (ii) familiarizing implementation-level actors with Program
results, operational manual, and monitoring systems; and (iii) designing mechanisms at the local level to
enhance the effectiveness of training of trainers’ model, use of data for planning, and effective utilization
of capitation grants. This TA will be provided in the first two years of Program implementation.

A detailed capacity needs assessment will be conducted within 3 months of Program effectiveness to
identify specific capacity building needs of MoEST, PO-RALG and associated agencies. The needs
assessment will include a costed action plan. Activities that the IPF component will support include:

       Leadership training of MoEST, PO-RALG and LGA staff. This support will build capacity for
        government officials to negotiate, monitor and focus on key results. It is expected that this
        training will be implemented by a partnership between local and international institutions.
       Training and support to MoEST and PO-RALG to develop technical expertise to develop
        strategies and costed action plans. Units and agencies responsible for specific strategies and
        action plans will be supported in their preparation with local and international technical
        assistance. This assistance will not prepare the strategy or action plan but develop the tools and
        frameworks for preparing strategies and action plans, training concerned agency staff, and
        working with them to prepare the strategy and action plans. Key strategies and action plans
        include:
               Strategy development. The IPF component will support the development of a national
                secondary school teacher deployment strategy and an ICT strategy for teacher
                professional development. These strategies will require a situational analysis, evaluation
                of existing policies and initiatives as well as reviews of best practice from other
                countries. It is expected that implementation plans for these strategies will also be
                supported under the IPF component.
            Action plans. The IPF component will also support the development of costed action
                plans to implement existing strategies. For example, the component will support an
                infrastructure needs assessment in each LGA and develop costed LGA plans aligned with
                the new school construction strategy. It will also support elements of the inclusive
                education strategy through the development of an action plan to improve girls’ secondary
                school education outcomes.
      Training and support to MoEST and PO-RALG to design and implement:
            National Form 4 assessment.
            Professional development modules. The Program will support the development of a series
                of in-service training modules (e.g. mathematics, science, ICT, identifying and
                supporting at-risk students). The IPF component will support the production of these in-
                service training modules and associated monitoring and evaluation tools.
            Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
      Program monitoring. Further development of the EMIS system to improve information for
       education planning in secondary schooling with a focus on improving information on teachers
       (e.g. subjects taught, trainings needed and received)
      Training and support for Safeguards Focal Points.
      Training at the LGA level to address weaknesses in areas of procurement and contract
       management.
      Training in basic financial management at for school heads and school boards.
      Piloting and evaluation of gender and ICT initiatives. The IPF component will also support
       appropriate evaluation of existing and new initiatives in key Program areas. For example, it will
       evaluate existing and future ICT initiatives to support teaching and teacher professional
       development as well as initiatives to support girls’ education.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The operation is expected to be spread nationwide. The TA component primarily consists of
consultancy services (for analytic work) and capacity building activities. Therefore, no
significant, long term adverse environmental and social impacts are anticipated from the TA
activities.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01), Environmental Safeguard Country Coordinator
Mary C. K. Bitekerezo (GSU07), Social Safeguard Country Coordinator
Qing Wang (GEN03), Sr. Environmental Specialist
Nneka Okereke (OPSPF), Operations Officer/Social Specialist
Naima Besta, Social Development Specialist, (GSU07)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)   Yes   No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                          X

As the TA activities are the nature of building client capacity and carrying
out analytic work related to secondary education, these activities usually
do not have potential adverse environmental and social implications or
risks. Therefore, this policy is not considered triggered and this operation
is categorized as C for the TA component. No further environmental and
social actions are needed during program implementation for these TA
activities.

However, some environmental and social issues should be integrated
directly into the TA activities in a manner that commensurate to the level
and type of the TA activities. For example, during development of the ICT
strategy, action plans for its implementation and piloting ICT initiatives,
appropriate measures to support environmentally friendly ICT should be
considered and integrated into these activities, including green purchasing,
energy efficient operation of ICTs, regular maintenance/ventilation, and
avoidance of potential pollution from poorly disposing of ICT equipment.
The assessment of school construction needs and LGA’s action plans
should include environmental and social management requirements for
infrastructure, including compliance with the national school construction
guidelines, especially the School Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
guidelines, avoidance of hazardous building materials, proper selection of
school locations, water and electricity availability, and accessibility for
disables.

Furthermore, the National Environmental Policy (NEP,1997) requires
environmental education and awareness-raising programs to be undertaken
in order to promote informed opinion. It encourages environmental
education to be introduced into primary and secondary school curricula to
inculcate values that support responsible environmental care, and
discourage attitudes that are incompatible with sustainable ways of life.
These NEP requirements should be considered during the policymaking
and planning process in the education sector.

Teacher trainings if any under the TA component should include training
contents on environmental and social management knowledge, including
(but not limited to) sanitation and hygiene education, environmental
protection practices (waste recycling and management, water harvesting,
energy saving, etc.), avoidance of exposure to toxics, diversity and
inclusion, communication and coordination skills with parents and school
boards/committees, and emergency response arrangements.

This operation also includes a PforR component, an Environmental and
Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) has been prepared for the PforR
component and it concluded that the overall environmental and social risk
rating of the PforR component is considered moderate. The ESSA also
proposed environmental and social management actions during
implementation of the Program.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

These TA activities are not expected to have potential adverse environmental and social
implications or risks.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

The TA activities will cover the entire country, whereby the national and local government
agencies and schools will be able to benefit from their implementation. Any indirect and/or long
term negative impacts from future activities in project areas are not expected.

However, implementation of these TA activities does provide significant opportunities to
integrate environmental and social management objectives/requirements as an integral part of the
TA planning process, and build counterpart capacity for integrating environmental and social
concerns into their work as described under Section I. 6.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

N/A.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

As mentioned earlier, the environmental and social safeguard requirements if applicable will be
integrated directly into the TA activities in a manner that commensurate to the level and type of
the TA activities. The MoEST and PO-RALG will be responsible for implementation of these
TA activities. MoEST has been involved in implementation of the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (related to school construction) for the Secondary Education
Development Program II (closed) and the ongoing EPforR, therefore, has some knowledge on
the World Bank safeguard policies. However, MoEST, PO-RALG and other stakeholders’
capacity to integrate environmental and social sustainability into the education sectoral planning
and decision-making process need to be further strengthened through implementation of the
project. The Bank team will continue to assist in building such capacity as appropriate during
project implementation. The National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) will also be
coordinated with by MoEST to receive any required technical assistance.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders for the TA activities are MoEST, PO-RALG, NECTA, LGAs, secondary
schools, teachers, and NEMC as needed. The TORs for the TA activities and capacity building
training contents and plans will be consulted by MoEST with relevant stakeholders. This ISDS
will be publicly disclosed in the Bank InfoShop.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:                        N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:                            N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:                                  N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                                        N/A
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [ X ]     N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ X ]     N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ X ]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?                                   The ISDS was sent to InfoShop on
                                                             September 28, 2017
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       N/A
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]     No [ ]      N/A [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                           Name                        Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Samer Al-Samarrai and Cornelia Jesse   Dec. 10, 2017
 Environmental Specialist:           Qing Wang                              Dec. 10, 2017
 Social Development Specialist       Nneka Okereke                          Dec. 10, 2017
 Additional Environmental and/or     Jane A. N. Kibbassa
 Social Development Specialist(s):   Mary C. K. Bitekerezo
                                     Naima Besta

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Nathalie S. Munzberg                   Dec. 19, 2017
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Sajitha Bashir                         Jan, 9, 2018
   Comments:
