Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1082 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 13, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P055120 
Project Name: Transport Sector Support 
Program 
Task Team Leader: Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);Ports, 
waterways and shipping (5%);Aviation 
(5%);Railways (5%);General transportation 
sector (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Nina Chee 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 530 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
-Borrower 1500 
-
Other Donors 
970 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall goal of the program is to assist the country to achieve the MDG. The  development 
objectives for the various components of the APL are the following:  
(i) main roads:
 
to have all 
the main roads (28,500 km trunk and regional roads) in good and fair condition by 2015, up from 
the current 50% with an intermediate achievement of 70% by 2009; 
(ii) rural roads:
 
to improve 
the stock of rural roads in good and fair condition from the current 5,000 km to 12,000 km by 
2015.  This (and the improvement of the main roads) would provide an estimated 95% of the 
rural population with reliable access, up from the current 70%, by 2015; 
(iv)urban transport:
 the 
project aims at enhancing affordable and environmentally friendly public transport in Dar es 
Salaam; 
(v) port, rail and aviation sector rehabilitation:
 the program would assist to enhance 
safety and security and to increase efficiency in the sectors through public-private partnership 
arrangements, aiming at increasing private investments and increased service standards.  
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Transport Sector Support Program APL is proposed to consist of up to six individual 
components (some of which could be combined into one phase of the APL) whose launch would 
be tied to the achievement of key reform steps, as follows:   
 
(A)
 
trunk and regional road upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance component, phase one 
(FY06-10) and two (FY10-15), total cost $1300m each, IDA credit $175m each:
 
Two 
consecutive phases would focus on upgrading, rehabilitation and maintenance of trunk and 
regional roads. Respective bidding documents for phase one are currently being prepared under 
the Central Transport Corridor Project (CTCP). The financing would include performance based 
maintenance contracts jointly financed with the Road Fund, as well as both public and private 
sector capacity building. 
Executing Agency:
 TANROADS. 
Triggers: 
(i) conversion of 
TANROADS into a Road Authority; (ii) adoption of a sector-wide approach, jointly with the 
other donors; and (iii) adoption of a conducive road safety policy and strategy.  The selection of 
the investments is based on the Ten-Year-Road-Development program which will be annually 
reviewed and adjusted jointly with TANROADS and the participating donors. Bidding 
documents for phase two would be prepared during phase one.  
 
(B) rural transport component:  
It is estimated that if the stock of all-season rural roads in the 
country can be increased by 5,000 km from the current 7,000 km to 12,000 km the percentage of 
the rural population provided with reliable access to a main road can be increased from 70% to 
95%.  This is absolutely essential for the reduction of rural poverty and the achievement of the 
MDG. To achieve this, total investment funding of about  $200m is required over the next ten 
years, including about $50m from IDA. The rest would be contributed by GOT and participating 
development partners. The RTP is planned to be delivered as a a SWAP, through the creation of 
a
rural road rehabilitation fund, jointly provisioned by GOT and the donors. The RTP would 
focus, besides the rehabilitation of rural roads, on capacity building, community involvement, 
improved transport services, and on the use of appropriate technology.
 Executing Agency:
 
PORALG (President’s Office, Regional Administration and Local Government).  
Trigger:
 The 
key trigger for this phase would be the adoption of a conducive rural transport policy and 
strategy (RTPS), and subsequent reflection of the policy in the Roads Act which is under 
preparation.  The RTPS needs to focus on clear allocation of responsibilities (particularly 
between LGAs and communities) and the funding mechanisms both for maintenance and 
rehabilitation of rural roads.  Preparation of such RTPS is currently on-going.  A Local 
Government Road Inventory and Condition Survey financed under the CTCP will assist to set 
the investment priorities, and will reduce the current controversy over the extent and condition of 
the rural road network.  
 
(C) Dar es Salaam bus rapid transit (DSM-BRT) component, total estimated cost $70m, IDA 
support $30m: 
The DSM-BRT project plans to improve public transport in DSM through the 
introduction of bus rapid transit, which means the introduction of large, clean, comfortable buses 
operated and financed by private operators on separate bus ways along the main urban transport 
corridors.
 
BRT has been successfully introduced in many South American and Asian cities, and 
is a much cheaper alternative to subways. A study financed under the CTCP is currently being 
procured which will assist the DSM City Council (DCC) define the BRT concept, the 
Page  3
development of necessary institutional framework, determine the commercial viability of BRT, 
and will prepare engineering designs and bidding documents for phase one BRT (10 km of bus 
ways along Morogoro road). The project will have a strong poverty focus by providing 
affordable, efficient and reliable transport to the urban poor. It will also ensure improved 
pedestrian access and safety, and will provide a network of bicycle ways. It will furthermore help 
reduce green house gas emission. 
Executing Agency:
 Dar es Salaam City Council. 
Trigger:
 
establishment of an effective urban transport regulatory framework/authority. 
 
(D) port, rail and aviation sector rehabilitation component, total estimated cost $120m, of which 
IDA $70m: 
 This project will focus on (i) achievements of international safety and security 
requirements in these sub-sectors; (ii) identifying and resolving intermodal transport issues; (iii) 
private sector involvement; and (iv) public sector capacity building
.
Executing Agencies:
 MOT 
and its 
executing
 agencies.
 
Triggers:
 
Key triggers for this project are progress in respect of 
regulatory capacity building (such as the actual creation of SUMATRA) and on private sector 
involvement
 
in the operations of transport infrastructure, including the concessioning of DSM, 
and other commercially viable airports, DSM port (other than container terminal), TAZARA, etc.  
Further sector reforms that will be sought and will possibly be tied in with this project will be: (i) 
traffic safety related measures such as vehicle control (if possible through private sector 
garages), streamlining of driver training and licensing, etc.; (ii) introduction of lead free petrol; 
(iii) establishment of transport sector monitoring capacity, etc. 
 
(E) Zanzibar component, estimated total cost $70m, of which IDA $30m:  
The component  would 
include: (i) upgrading of main roads; (ii) rehabilitation of rural roads; (iii) rehabilitation of urban 
roads in conjunction with sewerage and drainage improvements; and (iv) safety and security 
related investments in ports and airports
.
Executing Agency: 
MOCT Zanzibar
.
Triggers:
 
The 
key trigger will be the commencement of sector reform in  Zanzibar  that should include the 
creation of a small and effective road agency, a road fund (to an extent already existing), an 
airport/port regulatory authority and the concessioning of airports and ports to private operators.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Main Roads: along the main road corridors in Tanzania mainland and Zanzibar 
 
Rural roads: everywhere in rural Tanzania and Zanzibar 
 
Railways, ports, and airports:  location of potential investments is not known yet. An important 
part of the investments will be related to safety and security. 
 
Urban transport: the first bus way will consist of two additional lanes along about 10km of the 
Morogoro road in Dar es Salaam.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  4
An EMU was established in TANROADS and the Ministry. The capacity is adequate and will be 
strengthened  through the project. A sector Environmental Assessment is being prepared. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
All works may impact on soil, water, air quality, flora and fauna 
[X ] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
Land acquisition will likely result from the construction of bus ways in Dar es 
Salaam,  improvement of main roads (though no widening or new alignment is 
foreseen), and the establishment of borrow pits.  Likely impacts might involve 
displacing vendors and road stalls from road sides and ROW in the urban areas 
and along main roads,  loss of crops, etc. 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared : September 2005 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The studies envisaged are:  
a. 
Transport Sector Environmental Assessment; 
b.  Environmental and social assessments for phase one main roads upgrading; 
c. 
Environmental and social assessment for Dar es Salaam Rapid Bus Transit project 
d. 
A Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared for Dar es Salaam Bus Rapid Transit 
component, and the first year roads program based on the EA findings 
 
Terms of reference for the above studies have been prepared and procurement of services in 
under way.  Studies will be carried out between November 2004 and September 2005. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Dieter E. Schelling 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
