Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC703 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 10, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P085786 
Project Name: Second Social Action Fund 
(TASAF II) 
Task Team Leader: Nginya Mungai 
Lenneiye 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: November 23, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (60%); 
General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (10%); Ports, waterways and 
shipping (10%); Micro- and SME finance 
(10%); General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (10%) 
Theme: Other social development (P); 
Participation and civic engagement (P); 
Social risk coping (S); Gender (S); Social 
analysis and monitoring (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Amadou Konare 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 150 
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower    15 ($m);  Communities 27 ($m) 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
TASAF II development objective would thus be “to empower individuals, households, 
communities, and their partners in development (i.e., CBOs/NGOs, etc) in the implementation of 
measures which can assist them in better managing risks associated with health, education, 
sanitation, water, transportation, energy and food insecurity, and to provide support to the 
critically vulnerable through a variety of sustainable interventions.” 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The project will support activities aimed at achieving the following:- 
A. Closing service gaps.
  In poor and remote communities without access to health, 
education, and water and sanitation services, the project will make available resources for 
these communities to improve access to social services (with a stipulated minimum 
community contributions). 
B.  Strengthening safety nets
. In those communities with severe and often seasonal food 
insecurity, the project will support public works projects that not only transfer cash using 
Page  2
 
 
a self-targeting wage, but will also support the improved use of the resulting asset so that 
it can contribute to increased incomes for poor households in that community. 
C.  Supporting the vulnerable
.  In a number of communities with high levels of orphans, the 
disabled, the aged, the chronically ill, and others living in poor households, the project 
will make resources available for such foster households to work with NGOs and CBOs 
in implementing activities that can lead to increased incomes that benefit the vulnerable 
within the households. 
D.  Fostering a savings culture
.  Many households who will have participated in TASAF II 
funded activities will receive extra capacity building assistance so that they can mobilize 
their own savings as insurance against falling back into extreme poverty in the event of 
future shocks (such as weather, illness, etc.). 
E.  Enhancing capacities for transparency
.  There will be resources set aside to assist the 
improved workings of central government and District Councils in support of community 
efforts to get out of poverty.   
 
Extensive consultations with development partners in Tanzania are planned to explore 
possibilities for co-financing by those partners with an interest in devolved methods of service 
delivery where communities have a strong voice in the way resources are managed.  
Consultations will also explore if there is interest among partners in an idea put forward by 
Government during the MTR of TASAF I that TASAF II could be turned into a District-
managed Community Fund that flexibly responds to broad community demands for services and 
improved incomes. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be community demand driven, and national in coverage. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
As part of the preparation for the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) which had an 
environmental category of F (Financial Intermediary Assessment), an Environmental Analysis 
was undertaken in February 2000.  The scope of work indicated that the analysis shall comply 
with the national environmental standards and World Bank Environmental Procedures (OD 
4.01), and, where necessary, ensure that the safeguard policies of the World Bank apply.  The 
Project Appraisal Document indicates that TASAF will be proactive in educating and informing 
communities about the cost-benefit aspects of environmental conservation through its 
information, education and communication campaigns.  It expected that all sub-projects would 
identify potential environmental impacts during the sub-project initiation, and environmental 
assessment and measures to avoid or minimize impacts will be incorporated into the 
Environmental Management Plan.  Specific guidelines will be developed for appraisal of sub-
projects, wherein the guidelines will analyze the environmental impact of individual sub-
projects, include procedures for documenting the analysis and list mitigating steps where there is 
an adverse impact.  In June of 2003, an Environmental Impact Assessment of TASAF supported 
sub-projects was commissioned and contains recommendations for improving the environmental 
aspects of sub-projects, as well as other non-environment related proposals.  The 
Page  3
 
 
recommendations include the need for improved education, training and awareness to all 
stakeholders of TASAF supported projects, acquisition of baseline data on the environment at 
sub-project sites should be made compulsory, training in environment impact assessments should 
be given to experts at the district level (who should carry out the assessment at the sub-project 
sites), and the sub-project plans should include environmental mitigation measures and the cost 
included in the budget for both community development initiatives, and public works programs.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01)  Each sub-project will be evaluated 
to ascertain whether there will be any environmental impact, and mitigating 
measures will be included in the sub-project design and costed. 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12)  Since one of the project’s objectives 
is the provision of infrastructure to improve access to social services, some 
sub-projects may require land acquisition. 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory):   
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   
 
QER is currently proposed to be held in July 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be prepared.  It is expected that these studies will require between four to 
six weeks to complete, and will commence in May 2004.  The ESMF and RPF will be disclosed 
at the InfoShop and in-country prior to Appraisal, which is scheduled for September 2004. 
 
At the recommendation of ASPEN,  it has been agreed and confirmed to transfer safeguard 
responsibility for the project to the Sector Manager, AFTH1. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Nginya Mungai Lenneiye 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Dzingai Mutumbuka 
Date 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
