                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                                       Report No.: 124515
    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-March-2018

    I. Basic Project Data
    Country:                            Tanzania                Project ID:         P163732
    Project Name:                       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program
    Task Team Leader(s):                Iain Menzies and Kristoffer Welsien
    Estimated Board Date:               31-May-2018
    Estimated Appraisal Date:           21-March-2018
    Lending Instrument                  Program for Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing (IPF)
    Managing Unit:                      Water Global Practice
    Sector(s):                          Water
    Theme(s):                           Rural Water and Sanitation
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                 No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Project Financing Data (in US$ Million)
    Total Project Cost:        690.00    Total Bank Financing:                       300.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                325.00
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                0.00
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                       300.00
      Others (DfID)                                                                                       65.00
      Total Project Cost                                                                                690.00
    Environmental Category:             C
    Is this a Repeater project?         No
    Is this a Transferred project?      No

    II. Project Development Objective

    1.    The PDO is to increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating districts
    and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.




                                                                                                              1
III. Project Description
2.        The Program will support the Government in implementing the Water Supply Development
Program II (WSDP II) and will support the targets under the program. The proposed PforR operation
supports a subset of the WSDP II, consisting of rural water supply and sanitation services in 17 out of
Tanzania’s 26 regions. The 17 regions have been selected against the criteria of low access to water and
sanitation as well as high poverty and high stunting rates. Kigoma region has been added to support the
host community affected by the ongoing refugee situation. The Program will be implemented through
the World Bank’s Program-for-Result (PforR) instrument (US$280 million) and include technical
assistance support (US$20 million), implemented through the Investment Project Financing (IPF)
instrument.
3.         The Program seeks to improve the sustainability of rural water supply through the following
approach: i) incentivize Local Government Authorities (LGAs) to rehabilitate dilapidated water schemes
and systematize the monitoring of service quality and functionality; ii) implement cost reflective tariffs,
financing mechanisms and auditable Community Owned Water Supply Organization (COWSO) level
banks accounts; iii), form contractual relationships with eligible local technical support mechanisms for
maintenance and repair to fill village and LGA level capacity gaps; iv) establish a bi-annual district-level
community of practice meeting for coordination, learning and knowledge sharing; and v) refine existing
national guidelines and operational manuals to further promote sustainability and equity. These
institutional activities will precede the rehabilitation works to a large degree.
4.         The approach on sanitation and hygiene will focus on demand creation using the community
led total sanitation (CLTS) approach to work towards universal coverage through the achievement of
Community Wide Sanitation (CWS) villages. This will be supported by a national Behavior Change
Communication (BCC) campaign coupled with significant investments in supply-side strengthening to
move households up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation, including a large-scale commitment
from a major international toilet manufacturer that is starting to produce low-cost plastic sanitation
products in Tanzania.
5.        A key focus of the Program is to increase access to services, thus the Program will invest in
rehabilitation, extension and new infrastructure for rural water supply, and in the development of
sanitation and hygiene facilities in rural health centers and public schools.

6.        Climate Change Co-Benefits: The Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening assessment
indicates a potential increase in extreme temperatures, severe storms and floods, as well as recurrent
droughts in the future. The Program will contribute to global goods such as mitigation through CO2
emissions reductions achieved by replacing diesel pumping with solar water pumping. Climate change
adaptation measures will include improved watershed management and switching rural villages from
seasonal to permanent water sources.

Result Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water supply in rural areas (US$75 million)
7.         This result area will be implemented by the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI) and
President's Office ‒ Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG) and support
improvements in sustainable access to water supply services in the participating districts by:
       •    Increasing coverage of well designed, properly constructed and well-managed rural water
            supply services that meet community needs in the selected districts. This includes a
            restructuring of MoWI’s quality assurance and quality control mechanisms.



                                                                                                          2
       •    Rehabilitating and repairing non-functional water points. The Program will highly
            incentivize rehabilitation and it is envisaged that the districts will at the onset prioritize the
            rehabilitation of dilapidated water infrastructure.
       •    Sustaining existing water points to ensure that they remain functional and provide
            appropriate service levels in terms of access distance and quantity of water provided. This
            result area will ensure that new sustainability measures, including female participation, are
            institutionalized at the design, construction and commencement stages for new water
            infrastructure and result area three will ensure that the same standards are applied to the
            existing functioning water schemes.
Result Area 2: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas (US$75 million).
8.         Under this result area the Program will address the rural sanitation challenges using an
integrated approach that incentivizes the achievement and sustaining of CWS villages which maximize
the Program’s health and stunting outcomes. In the villages targeted for CWS, open defecation is planned
to be addressed through a combination of CLTS activities and the national BCC campaign - alongside
supply-side, private sector strengthening activities. These efforts are also envisaged to move rural
households up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation and hygiene. In parallel, the Program will
incentivize improvements in household hygiene practices and increase access to sanitation and hygiene
in public schools including menstrual hygiene. This results area will be implemented by the Ministry of
Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC), PO-RALG and The
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MoEST).
9.        As under WSDP-1 the LGAs will implement the National Sanitation Campaign (NSC) and the
Program’s technical support will encourage, support and strengthen the implementation of the planned
CLTS and supply-side strengthening activities through capacity development for key activities including
sanitation demand creation, progress monitoring and regular follow-ups. The Program will support and
encourage local private sector suppliers and service providers in the marketing and installation of local
products including plastic pans, user-friendly hand-washing stations and other appropriate products and
services for low-cost upgrading of sanitation and hygiene facilities. Collaboration will be encouraged
with local financial institutions to increase the affordability of sanitation and hygiene products to rural
communities.
Result Area 3: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural
areas (US$130 million).
10.        This result area will be implemented by MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG and Vice-
President’s Office – Division of Environment (VPO-DoE). At the system level, Program activities will
be strategically designed to enhance the capacity of the national, regional and local government to
monitor, ensure quality, and improve and sustain water service delivery, and to strengthen environmental
management supervision and mitigation of impacts.

11.         The National Water Sector Development Strategy (2006) directed the responsibilities for the
O&M of rural water schemes to be transferred to COWSOs, which are supposed to be established for
each rural water scheme. However, as of September 2016, only around 20 percent of villages (2,880 out
of approximately 16,000) have COWSOs. A first step to enhance the delivery models for rural water
supply is promote the broader creation of COWSOs and to support their professionalization so that they
can operate and maintain the services more efficiently, as well as delegate the O&M functions to a
professional third party (a NGO, local private operator, etc.) under their oversight. A range of O&M
models can be considered to improve service sustainability, including clustering and contracting out
O&M services to private sector service providers or forming a water trust that can subsequently provide
technical and managerial support to each COWSO.

                                                                                                            3
12.         LGAs will be incentivized to improve the operation and maintenance (O&M) of water supply
by registering COWSOs for existing schemes, improving the financial sustainability of rural water
supply, implementing simple water treatment systems and establishing backstopping support for
COWSOs. The Program will prepare the sector to leverage private sector participation and investments
that improve service levels and drive efficiency by among other things increasing the creditworthiness
of rural water schemes. The accuracy and completeness of M&E data will be enhanced for both water
and sanitation in order to enable the sector to track performance and inform planning.
13.         The Program will support the establishment and operationalization of the GoT’s new delivery
model for the rural water sector, the Rural Water Agency (RUWA). In the districts supported by the
Program, the RUWA will be incentivized to work with LGAs and COWSOs to facilitate establishment
of a support mechanism for management, operation and maintenance of rural water supply schemes. The
Program aims to influence the establishment and early operations of RUWA, embedding a core focus on
service sustainability.

14.         The Program will significantly boost VPO-DoE’s capacity to implement the Environmental
Management Act (EMA, 2004). Existing capacity to implement the EMA, especially the main legal
framework for enforcement of environmental management in Tanzania, is limited. There are significant
gaps in the specific regulations and other secondary legislation required for its full implementation, low
institutional capacity with few properly trained and equipped environmental inspectors, and lack of
availability, monitoring and dissemination of environmental indicators and data. The Program will
address these gaps by: preparing and gazetting new regulations and by-laws; training of new
environmental inspectors; and designing and implementing a Centralized Environmental Database
Management System for easier data access, decision making, coordination, monitoring and
implementation of the EMA across government at the central and local government levels. The System
will enable public participation, facilitate citizen engagement and increase accountability.

15.        Rationale for use of Investment Project Finance (IPF) for Technical and Program
Management Support. A key lesson that has emerged from global and national PforR experience is that
the result-based approach is more effective and can be implemented more efficiently when
complemented by substantial technical assistance to support client governments through the change
process and strengthen systems, capabilities and procedures. Under the first phase of WSDP, GoT’s
procurement of technical assistance was often underfinanced, delayed and the scope curtailed and
diluted. The Program will address the capacity constraints through an IPF instrument whereby Bank
funds are used to pay for ‘specific expenditures’ to fund a set of selected, discrete assistance and capacity
building activities which are complementary to those undertaken directly by the Government under the
Program, and which will support the achievement of the Program’s objectives. The IPF instrument allows
GoT the flexibility and predictable financing to address existing capacity gaps and risks that may
otherwise undermine the achievement of Program results. This is similar to the approach taken for the
Tanzania Education Program for Results (P147486).

Strategic Technical Support (Investment Project Financing, US$ 20 million, part of result area 3)
16.      The Program will support a coordinated, coherent, and evidence-based approach to the critical
activities needed to successfully implement the WSDP-2. Specifically, the operation will fund: (a)
Program implementation support, including strengthening the institutional capacities of the WSDP
Program Coordination Unit (PCU) - mainly through the recruitment of a Strategic Program Support
Consultant (SPSC); (b) the verification of the program results, (c) the Water Institute, and; (d) other
smaller support activities.



                                                                                                           4
    IV. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    17.      The Program will be rolled out in 17 out of Tanzania’s 26 regions. The 17 regions1 have been
    selected against the criteria of low access to water and sanitation as well as high poverty and high stunting
    rates. Kigoma region has been added to support the host communities affected by the ongoing refugee
    situation. The IPF component will fund coordinating, supervision and capacity building activities at the
    national level and in the 17 regions and their respective local government authorities. The East Africa
    region is challenged by climate change, Tanzania has a complex landscape with high spatial climate
    variability. The climatic conditions are predicted to continue worsening, with increasing temperature by
    1-3°C in the next 50 years. The economy is increasingly affected by prolonged droughts, severe storms
    and floods, and rising temperature. The economic impact of recent extreme weather events totaled more
    than 1 percent of GDP.

    Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguards Policies
    18.     The Environmental and Social Management System Assessment (ESSA) for the
    Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program in Tanzania has been undertaken by the
    Bank to ensure consistency with the six core principles outlined in the World Bank’s Operational Policy
    9.00 - Program-for-Results Financing. The ESSA concluded that Tanzania, in general, has established a
    comprehensive set of environmental and social management systems to address the environment, health
    and safety, as well as social concerns related to the Program. The National Environmental Policy (1997)
    and the Environmental Management Act (2004), and their associated instruments and laws support
    environment and social management and the environmental and social impact assessment processes in
    Tanzania. Those are supplemented by a number of sectoral policies that consider the environmental and
    social impact assessment as one of the planning tools for facilitating and promoting sustainable
    development. These systems are well-aligned with the core principles and key planning elements as
    defined in the World Bank PforR Policy. However, the ESSA identified certain inadequacies and gaps
    pertaining to the actual implementation of these systems. The umbrella environmental law,
    Environmental Management Act (EMA) of 2004, still lacks important regulations to make it fully
    operational. Currently only 26 out of the recommended 90 regulations are in place, and the institutional
    capacity to enforce the existing regulations related to protection and management of the environment
    remains weak.

    19. The assessed weaknesses are related to lack of enforcement and compliance with existing laws,
    regulations and guidelines governing environmental and social management. Although EMA
    provides for environmental management officers and environmental inspectors at district level, the
    required technical skills are still low. Efforts to hire or designate environmental inspectors have been
    launched recently by the Vice President’s Office – Division of Environment, and so far about 520 staff
    out of the required 3,000 staff are in place. Since the Program will be implemented at LGA level, it is
    imperative to address these gaps to enhance the achievement of the Program objectives. In addition, there
    are inadequate attention to environmental, health and safety concerns, inadequate land voluntary
    donation procedures and weak land acquisition management and resettlement practices, weak provisions
    for gender and vulnerable groups inclusion, lack of environmental and social management data system,
    and weak coordination among the relevant agencies. The Program has made arrangements that addresses
    these shortcomings.

    20. A gender assessment has been conducted with the purpose of exploring the opportunities for
    promoting gender mainstreaming and to promote gender equality in context of water utilization across

1
  Tabora, Katavi, Rukwa, Lindi, Geita, Shinyanga, Singida, Kagera, Mwanza, Manyara, Mtwara, Simiyu, Songwe,
Iringa, Mara, Ruvuma and Kigoma.

                                                                                                               5
the beneficiary community. There are significant gaps between women and men in labor force
participation, employment, and unemployment rates. Despite a history of promoting gender equality,
women are less likely to participate in the labor force than men and those who do participate experience
higher unemployment rates than men. The Tanzania Demographic Health Survey (DHS) for 2010 shows
that 19.1 percent of women aged 20-24 had no education at all, compared with 10.5 percent for men, and
unemployment rate of females is higher (12.3 percent) compared to that of males (8.2 percent)To
strengthen gender mainstreaming, the Program will work towards institutionalizing gender and creating
an enabling environment for gender in management and in operations under the Program by the
preparation and adoption of a Gender Action Plan.

21.     The ESSA found that overall the national regulatory framework and technical guidelines
for environmental and social due diligence with respect to the Program are adequate . However,
some improvements are required, particularly to address the observed operational short-comings
including the screening process, which needs to ensure that all types of investment projects are properly
screened and that appropriate mitigation measures are put in place. Although the Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) regulation requires full assessment of projects in water sector, the anticipated negative
environmental and social effects of the Program are expected to be low. Proposed infrastructure under
the Program will include: (i) construction and rehabilitation of rural schemes – drilling boreholes,
shallow wells, gravity and hand pumped schemes; (ii) construction and rehabilitation of non-functional
water points; (iii) installation of water distribution system; (iv) construction and upgrading sanitation and
hygiene facilities in public schools and clinics and (v) installation of local product including plastic pans,
and user-friendly hand washing stations. In view of the above, it would be necessary to develop
guidelines to enhance the environmental and social screening process during the foundation year to
appropriately mitigate likely impacts from the Program investments.

22. Land acquisition and allocation for the Program. The Program will not finance rural water
supply infrastructure projects requiring large land take or resulting in resettlement. The need for land for
construction of water supply infrastructure may be met by minor land acquisition, allocations by local
governments and voluntary land donations. To guide this and fill the gaps identified in the existing laws,
the Program will develop procedures for Voluntary Land Donations (VLD) and formats of agreements
(between the program and land donors).

23. Disadvantaged and vulnerable communities. Due to the Program wide coverage of 17 regions,
disadvantaged and/or vulnerable communities will likely be included in the Program. The needs and
concerns of these communities will be met through the Program design, which will provide the means
for inclusion and consultation with the communities. These measures will also ensure that they receive
culturally compatible benefits and compensation through their informed participation.

V. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Jane Kibbassa (Senior Environmental Specialist), Mary Bitekerezo (Senior Social Development
Specialist) and Vasantt Jogoo (Senior Consultant).

Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment                No        The IPF/TA will only finance consultancy services
OP/BP 4.01                                        and office equipment and will not trigger OP/BP 4.01.




                                                                                                            6
  Natural Habitats OP/BP                No        Program investments will neither impact nor convert
  4.04                                            critical natural habitats. This Core Principle will not be
                                                  applicable to the Program and the PforR as activities
                                                  will be limited in scope and their ecological footprints
                                                  will be minimal.
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No        There are no planned investments in forests.
  Pest Management OP 4.09               No        The Program will not involve the use, production,
                                                  procurement, storage, handling or transportation of
                                                  any pesticide.
  Physical Cultural Resources           No        It is not expected that the Program will necessitate
  OP/BP 4.11                                      relocation of physical cultural resources such as
                                                  churches, mosques, religious and cultural sites.
  Indigenous Peoples                    No        The IPF/TA will only finance consultancy services
  OP/BP 4.10                                      and office equipment and will not trigger OP/BP 4.10.
  Involuntary Resettlement              No        No involuntary resettlement is expected as a result of
  OP/BP 4.12                                      the Program investments.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No        The Program will not affect or is dependent on the
                                                  safety of any existing dam.
  Projects on International            Yes        OP 7.50 is triggered for the PforR. The Program
  Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            qualifies for the exception from the riparian
                                                  notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of OP
                                                  7.50.
  Projects in Disputed Areas            No        The Program is not implemented in disputed areas.
  OP/BP 7.60

VI. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
 and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The IPF TA component will only fund consultancy services and the acquisition of computers,
 laboratory equipment, and classroom furniture at the Water Institute. As such, no safeguards
 instruments are expected to be triggered under the IPF component, based on activities it will support.
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities
 in the project area:
 No safeguards instruments are expected to be triggered under the IPF component, consequently, no
 potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities are anticipated.
 3. Describe any Program alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
 adverse impacts:
 No alternative options have been considered, because no safeguards policies are expected to be
 triggered under the IPF component.




                                                                                                               7
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
 N/A
 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
 on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
 N/A.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the     Not applicable
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure                                                        Not applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure:                                                       Not applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure: Not applicable
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]    No []     NA [X ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [ ]   No []     NA [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?


                                                                                                 8
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [X]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to     Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparian’s been notified of the project?             Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification Yes [X]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                             Yes [X]    No [ ]   NA [ ]



The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
World Bank's InfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes []     No [ ]   NA [X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes []     No [ ]   NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in    Yes []     No [ ]   NA [X]
the project cost?



                                                                                                 9
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include   Yes []      No [ ]      NA [X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes []          No [ ]      NA [X]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


    APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader(s): Name: Iain Menzies (Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist and TTL)
                         and Kristoffer Welsien (Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist and Co-TTL)
    Cleared By:
    Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg, Regional              Date: February 16, 2018
                          Safeguards Adviser, OPSES
    Approved By:
    Practice Manager      Name: Catherine Tovey, GWA01                      Date: March 21, 2018




                                                                                                      10
