                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
.
Report No.: 123669
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Feb-2018

    I. Basic Project Data
    Country:                            Tanzania                Project ID:    P163732
    Project Name:                       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program
    Task Team Leader(s):                Iain Menzies and Kristoffer Welsien
    Estimated Board Date:               31-May-2018
    Estimated Appraisal Date:           29-March-2018
    Lending Instrument                  Program for Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing (IPF)
    Managing Unit:                      Water Global Practice
    Sector(s):                          Water
    Theme(s):                           Rural Water and Sanitation
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        800.00   Total Bank Financing:                  300.00
    Co-financing               390.00   Financing Gap:                         0.00
      Financing Source                                                                            Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            325.00
      Others (DfID)                                                                                  65.00
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                   300.00
      Total Project Cost                                                                            690.00
    Environmental Category:             C
    Is this a Repeater project?         No
    Is this a Transferred project?      No

    II. Project Development Objective

    1. The PDO is to increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating regions
    and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.

    III. Project Description

    2. The Program will support the Government in implementing the Water Supply Development Program
    II (WSDP II) and will support the targets under the program. The proposed PforR operation supports a
    subset of the WSDP II, consisting of rural water supply and sanitation services in 17 out of Tanzania’s


                                                                                                         1
26 regions. The 17 regions have been selected against the criteria of low access to water and sanitation
as well as high poverty and high stunting rates. Kigoma region has been added to support the host
community affected by the ongoing refugee situation.
3. The Program seeks to improve the sustainability of rural water supply through the following approach:
i) incentivize Local Government Authorities (LGAs) to rehabilitate dilapidated water schemes and
systematize the monitoring of service quality and functionality; ii) implement cost reflective tariffs,
financing mechanisms and auditable Community Owned Water Supply Organization (COWSO) level
banks accounts; iii), form contractual relationships with eligible local technical support mechanisms for
maintenance and repair to fill village and LGA level capacity gaps; iv) establish a bi-annual district-level
community of practice meeting for coordination, learning and knowledge sharing; and v) refine existing
national guidelines and operational manuals to further promote sustainability and equity. These
institutional activities will precede the rehabilitation works to a large degree.
4. The approach on sanitation and hygiene will focus on demand creation using the community led total
sanitation (CLTS) approach to work towards universal coverage through the achievement of Open
Defecation Free (ODF) villages. This will be supported by a national Behavior Change Communication
(BCC) campaign coupled with significant investments in supply-side strengthening to move households
up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation, including a large-scale commitment from a major
international toilet manufacturer that is starting to produce low-cost plastic sanitation products in
Tanzania.
5. A key focus of the Program is to increase access to services, thus the Program will invest in
rehabilitation, extension and new infrastructure for rural water supply, and in the development of
sanitation and hygiene facilities in rural health centers and public schools.

6. Climate Change Co-Benefits: The Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening assessment indicates
a potential increase in extreme temperatures, severe storms and floods, as well as recurrent droughts in
the future. The Program will contribute to global goods such as mitigation through CO2 emissions
reductions achieved by replacing diesel pumping with solar water pumping. Climate change adaptation
measures will include improved watershed management and switching rural villages from seasonal to
permanent water sources.
Results Areas
Results area 1: Increased access to improved water services in rural areas (Bank financing: US$
75 million)
7. This RA will be implemented by the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI) and the President's
Office ‒ Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG) and will support improvements
in sustainable access to water supply services in the participating districts by:

    •   Increasing coverage of water supply services by financing investments identified in district
        WASH plans with a focus on low-coverage communities
    •   Rehabilitating and repairing non-functional and partly functional water points
    •   Sustaining existing water points to ensure that they remain functional and provide minimum
        service levels in terms of quality and quantity of water provided.

Results area 2: Increased access to safely managed sanitation services in rural areas (US$ 75
million)
8. This RA will be implemented by the MoHCDGEC and PO-RALG, and will support the second phase
of the National Sanitation Campaign (NSC) and the rollout of the Behavior Change Communication
(BCC) campaign. As under WSDP I, the LGAs will implement the NSC and the Program’s TA will

                                                                                                          2
encourage, support and strengthen the implementation of the planned CLTS and supply-side
strengthening activities through capacity development for key activities including sanitation demand
creation, progress monitoring and regular follow-ups. The RA activities will also implement supply-side
interventions at sub-district and community levels, notably the support and encouragement of local
private sector suppliers and service providers in the marketing and installation of local products including
plastic pans, user-friendly hand-washing stations and other appropriate products and services for low-
cost upgrading and improvement of sanitation and hygiene facilities. Collaboration will be encouraged
with local financial institutions to increase the affordability of sanitation and hygiene products and
services to rural communities. The RA will also fund investments in sanitation and hygiene facilities in
public schools and health facilities. The RA will specifically address sustainability of sanitation services
by incentivizing maintaining ODF status in villages.

Results area 3: Strengthened institutional capacity for water and sanitation service delivery in
rural areas (US$ 130 million)
9. This component will be implemented by both MoWI and MoHCDGEC. Activities related to rural
water supply will be implemented by MoWI and TA activities pertaining to sanitation and hygiene will
be implemented by MoHCDGEC. At the system level, program activities will be strategically designed
to enhance the capacity of the government to monitor, ensure quality, and improve and sustain WASH
service delivery. This component will support the high-level coordination and cooperation between
Ministries and different levels of government that will be required for successful implementation of the
Program. This RA will support the GoT to prepare the sector to leverage private sector participation and
investments that improve service levels and drive efficiency. Specific incentives for improving the
sustainability of rural water supply include:

    •   Improving operational and maintenance (O&M) capacity for water supply services;
    •   Ensuring local delivery mechanisms are strengthened and professionalized;
    •   Establishing long-term sustainability support mechanisms to ensure that maintenance schedules
        and technical assessments for rehabilitation and repair needs are implemented;
    •   Institutionalizing appropriate and affordable tariffs; and
    •   Developing district-level WASH networks to regularly connect all COWSOs and LGA-level
        stakeholders for coordination, learning and knowledge-sharing purposes.
    •   Establish the Rural Water Agency.

Results area 4: Strategic Technical Assistance for Program Management Support and Improving
Operational Efficiency and Monitoring and Evaluation (Investment Project Financing) (US$ 20
million – part of result area 3)
10. The Program will provide TA to support a coordinated, coherent, and evidence-based approach to
the critical activities needed to successfully implement the WSDP II. Specifically, the Operation will
fund: (a) the program implementation support, including strengthening the institutional capacities of the
Program Coordination Unit (PCU) mainly through the recruitment of a Strategic Program Support
Consultant (SPSC); (b) the development of integrated reporting and management information systems;
(c) the BCC campaign for the National Sanitation Campaign; (d) the verification of the Program results,
(e) support to the Water Development Management Institute, and (f) other smaller technical assistance
activities.




                                                                                                          3
    IV. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    11. The Program will be rolled out in 17 out of Tanzania’s 26 regions. The 17 regions1 have been selected
    against the criteria of low access to water and sanitation as well as high poverty and high stunting rates.
    Kigoma region has been added to support the host communities affected by the ongoing refugee situation.
    The IPF component will fund coordinating, supervision and capacity building activities at the national
    level and in the 17 regions and their respective local government authorities. The East Africa region is
    challenged by climate change, Tanzania has a complex landscape with high spatial climate variability.
    The climatic conditions are predicted to continue worsening, with increasing temperature by 1-3°C in
    the next 50 years. The economy is increasingly affected by prolonged droughts, severe storms and floods,
    and rising temperature. The economic impact of recent extreme weather events totaled more than 1
    percent of GDP.
    12. Disadvantaged socio-economic groups are disproportionally affected by climatic conditions and
    resort to various adaptation practices and coping strategies, including diversification of their production
    and livelihoods. Efforts to address vulnerability of the poor and to improve adaptive capacity require a
    greater role for local institutions in both planning and implementation of development interventions to
    support resilience as well as in facilitating and governing access to resources
    13. Gender: There are significant gaps between women and men in labor force participation,
    employment, and unemployment rates. Despite a history of promoting gender equality, women are less
    likely to participate in the labor force than men and those who do participate experience higher
    unemployment rates than men. The Tanzania Demographic Health Survey (DHS) for 2010 shows that
    19.1 percent of women aged 20-24 had no education at all, compared with 10.5 percent for men, and
    unemployment rate of females is higher (12.3 percent) compared to that of males (8.2 percent)
    Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguards Policies
    14. The ESSA found that overall the national regulatory framework and technical guidelines for
    environmental and social due diligence with respect to the Program are adequate and the existence of
    environmental practices and procedures under existing World Bank funded water and health/sanitation
    programs help to close any existing gaps. In fact, a number of policies, instruments and laws support
    environment and social management and the environmental and social impact assessment processes in
    Tanzania. These are supplemented by a number of sectoral policies that consider Environment Impact
    Assessment as one of the planning tools for facilitating and promoting sustainable development.
    However, while the legal and regulatory framework is deemed adequate, the ESSA found that capacity,
    whether technical or financial, are lacking at the local level. Involvement in the environmental and social
    assessment process is not systematic and typically mainstreamed in the project cycle.
    15. With regards to the IPF component, the borrower’s capacity to adhere to the various safeguards
    policies is guided by the ongoing implementation of the measures defined in the existing Environmental
    and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Bank’s funded Second WSSP (P150361).
    In addition, guidelines have been produced by MoWI (Guidelines of Good Environmental and Social
    Practices for the Water and Sewerage Sector, PMO-RALG’s Environmental and Social Management
    Manual - ESMM) in order to assure the implementation of environmental and social measures in the
    design, construction and operation of the water and sewerage projects. to guide the environmental and
    social impact assessment process of all investments. Lastly, to ensure the effective implementation of
    sustainable activities, the ESSA has proposed capacity building and training actions into the Program’s
    capacity building plan.

1
  Tabora, Katavi, Rukwa, Lindi, Geita, Shinyanga, Singida, Kagera, Mwanza, Manyara, Mtwara, Simiyu, Songwe,
Iringa, Mara, Ruvuma and Kigoma.

                                                                                                              4
  V. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
  Jane Kibbassa (Senior Environmental Specialist), Mary Bitekerezo (Senior Social Development
  Specialist) and Vasantt Jogoo (Senior Consultant).

  Safeguard Policies               Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)

  Environmental Assessment              No        The planned consultancy services and minor
  OP/BP 4.01                                      investments in office equipment will not trigger
                                                  OP/BP 4.01.

  Natural Habitats OP/BP                No        Program investments will neither impact nor convert
  4.04                                            critical natural habitats. This Core Principle will not be
                                                  applicable to the Program and the PforR as activities
                                                  will be limited in scope and their ecological footprints
                                                  will be minimal.
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No        There are no planned investments in forests.
  Pest Management OP 4.09               No        The Program will not involve the use, production,
                                                  procurement, storage, handling or transportation of
                                                  any pesticide.
  Physical Cultural Resources           No        It is not expected that the Program will necessitate
  OP/BP 4.11                                      relocation of physical cultural resources such as
                                                  churches, mosques, religious and cultural sites.
  Indigenous Peoples                    No        OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered.
  OP/BP 4.10
  Involuntary Resettlement              No        No involuntary resettlement is expected as a result of
  OP/BP 4.12                                      the Program investments.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No        The Program will not affect or is dependent on the
                                                  safety of any existing dam.
  Projects on International            Yes        OP 7.50 is triggered for the PforR. The Program
  Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            qualifies for the exception from the riparian
                                                  notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of OP
                                                  7.50.
  Projects in Disputed Areas            No        The Program is not implemented in disputed areas.
  OP/BP 7.60

VI. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
 and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The IPF TA component will only fund consultancy services and the acquisition of computers,
 laboratory equipment, and classroom furniture at the Water Institute. As such, no safeguards
 instruments are expected to be triggered under the IPF component, based on activities it will support.

                                                                                                               5
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities
 in the project area:
 No safeguards instruments are expected to be triggered under the IPF component, consequently, no
 potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities are anticipated.
 3. Describe any Program alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
 adverse impacts:
 No alternative options have been considered, because no safeguards policies are expected to be
 triggered under the IPF component.
 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
 N/A
 5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
 on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
 N/A.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the     Not applicable
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure                                                        Not applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure:                                                       Not applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure: Not applicable
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable




                                                                                                     6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]      No []    NA [X]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or           Yes [ ]    No []    NA [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NA [X]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to     Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?              Yes [ ]    No [X]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification Yes [X]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                             Yes [X]    No [ ]   NA [ ]



The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [ ]    No [ ]   NA [X]
World Bank's InfoShop?




                                                                                                 7
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes []      No [ ]      NA [X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes []      No [ ]      NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in    Yes []      No [ ]      NA [X]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include    Yes []      No [ ]      NA [X]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes []           No [ ]      NA [X]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?

    APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader(s): Name: Iain Menzies (Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist and TTL)
                         and Kristoffer Welsien (Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist and Co-TTL)
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg, Regional               Date: February 16, 2018
                          Safeguards Adviser, OPSES
    Practice Manager:     Name: Xiaokai Li, Acting Practice Manager,         Date: February 20, 2018
                          GWA01




                                                                                                       8
