Page  1
 
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC580 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: Feb. 17, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P082492 
Project Name: Marine and Coastal 
Environmental Management (MACEMP) 
Task Team Leader: Indumathie V. 
Hewawasam 
GEF Focal Area: biodiversity;  
international waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P084213 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other human 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  55 
IDA: 30 
Other financing amounts by source:  
10($m) 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) 
10($m) 
Government of Tanzania 
5($m) 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project seeks to improve the regulatory and institutional framework for management of 
coastal and marine resources, to enhance the contribution of these resources to economic growth 
and reduction of poverty, and to develop the scientific understanding of the status of the 
resources and major threats to them. Project activities will be designed to assist the Government 
in implementation of the national coastal environmental management strategy, the National 
Fisheries Master Plan, and the Fisheries Act.  In that regard, the project will pursue specific 
development objectives as follows: a) establish and/or strengthen institutions charged with 
management of marine resources in the near- and off-shore and Exclusive Economic Zone 
(EEZ), both in Zanzibar and in the mainland, and assure their performance according to 
designated standards; b) support activities appropriately undertaken by the public sector to 
stimulate increased private investment into marine and coastal areas; and c) identify and support 
scientific and technical research that contributes to improved regulation, management, 
development, and protection of marine and coastal resources. 
 
 
Beneficiaries will include Tanzanians and residents of the wider region both now and in the 
future who will realize a stream of enhanced benefits and reduced costs associated with 
Page  2
 
2
improved management of marine and coastal resources. Specific immediate beneficiaries include 
relevant national and local level agencies responsible for the management of marine resources, 
coastal communities of mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar and the broader society who will 
benefit through increased revenues from improved management of marine and coastal resources. 
Key expected outcomes include: a) increased incomes through improved management of marine 
resources, increased productivity and added value from improved post-harvest processing and 
market access; b) reduced vulnerability to external shocks through diversification of local 
production systems; diminished market risks through mutually beneficial private sector and 
community partnerships; and stabilization, and where possible, reversal of current trends in 
marine resources degradation and productivity; c) increased Government revenues from 
improved management of off-shore fisheries; and d) improved ecosystem services and 
conservation of globally significant marine and coastal biodiversity. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project will aim to achieve these objective through: a) a strategic framework for addressing 
resource management issues in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ); b) Policy and institutional 
support for relevant departments in mainland Tanzania and in Zanzibar for strengthening the 
enabling environment for effective marine resources management initiatives in the near-shore 
and EEZ; c) targeted research activities that generate scientific and technical knowledge for 
effective management and profitable use of marine and coastal resources on a local, national and 
regional basis ; and d) support for local investment strategies and leveraging private sector 
investments into marine and coastal areas.
  
 
Component 1. Sound Management of EEZ Resources
. 
The objective of this component is to 
establish integrated management systems that would create a framework for profitable and 
sustainable use (both commercial and non-commercial) of marine resources. The project would 
support establishment and strengthening of relevant institutional capacities which are critical for 
developing economic potential of marine resources on a sustainable basis. It will also facilitate 
dialog with neighboring countries to address regional ocean issues and provide support for 
establishment of joint monitoring, surveillance and implementation for marine management and 
for meeting national obligations arising through global and regional agreements to which 
Tanzania is a party. The project will seek to enhance the contribution of existing policies and 
acts on the implementation of Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). Activities would include: 
(a) establishment of the National Deep Sea Fishing Authority responsible for off-shore fishery 
management, formulation of a marine resources management strategy to be implemented by the 
new agency, and establishment of a mechanism of revenue collection for this new agency to be 
financially sustainable; (b) support for the Government of Tanzania (GoT) in implementing the 
Fisheries Act, National Fisheries Master Plan, National Coastal Zone Management Strategy, and 
capacity building for local marine and coastal management agencies; (c) facilitation of 
international dialogue on regional ocean cooperation. 
 
This component will be financed by IDA, GoT, GEF and other co-financers. The GEF (under the 
International Waters Focal Area, OP#8) will finance incremental costs associated with: 
(a) technical assistance for mainstreaming of marine management goals into relevant sectoral 
Page  3
 
3
policies; (b) clarification of roles and responsibilities of sectoral agencies for the implementation 
of international and regional environmental obligations and the conservation of biodiversity.  
 
Component 2. Marine Protected Area (MPA) Network
. 
The objective of this component is to 
establish integrated management systems through a marine protected area network of nationally 
and locally important areas.  
 
This component will be financed with IDA, GoT and GEF funds. GEF (under the Biodiversity 
Focal Area, OP#2) will finance incremental costs associated with: (a) planning and development 
of MPAs; and (b)  establishing a national system of MPAs including community and private 
sector-owned and managed MPAs. GEF will also finance incremental costs associated with 
community management of sanctuaries and implementation of community-based management 
plans in biodiversity-rich areas to promote biodiversity conservation and improved provision of 
ecosystem goods and services. A dialogue will be held with the neighboring nations of Kenya 
and Mozambique on trans-boundary issues, in particular on trans-boundary MPAs.  
 
Component 3: Coastal District Planning and Co-management Capacity Building
. 
This 
component aims to improve the planning environment at the district level. Tanzania already has 
appropriate policies and legislation in place which would provide a basis for community based 
sustainable management of coastal and marine resources (e.g. implementation of collaborative 
fisheries management approaches). Lack of sufficient capacity and awareness, especially at 
district levels currently erodes their value and their potential contribution to economic 
development. The project would support establishment and strengthening of relevant institutional 
capacities which are critical for developing economic potential of marine and coastal resources 
on a sustainable basis. 
This component will be financed with IDA, GoT and GEF funds. GEF (under the Biodiversity 
Focal Area, OP#2) will finance incremental costs associated with implementation and 
demonstration of environmentally benign nearshore coastal resource management techniques and 
investments which are acceptable to coastal communities. It will also promote behavioral change 
in local communities towards natural resource protection. 
 
Where communities can participate in deep-sea (or intermediate zone) fishery activities, GEF 
(under the International Waters Focal Area, OP#8) will finance incremental costs associated with 
implementation and demonstration of environmentally benign marine management techniques 
and investments which are acceptable to coastal communities.  
 
The entire component will also be coordinated closely with other World Bank operations in 
Tanzania, notably Participatory Agricultural Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP) 
 and Tanzania Social Action Fund Project (TASAF), which use the Community Driven 
Development (CDD) model to finance community-based investments. Planning for the 
investments will occur under MACEMP, as will a number of demonstration activities, but the 
planning will primarily be used to mobilize funds from PADEP and TASAF to meet community 
needs for poverty alleviation. 
 
Page  4
 
4
Component 4: Private Sector Capacity Building
. 
This component aims to improve the 
business environment and provide business development services to promote private sector 
investment. Activities to improve the business environment will include: (a) support for 
assessments of key policies and regulations, such as tax, licensing and registration, 
administrative fees, and property rights to improve the efficiency of governance and cut cost to 
enterprises; (b) 
establishment of a public-private forum to facilitate dialogue between 
stakeholders and to identify needed public services and/or investments that would facilitate 
improved performance of the private sector; and (c) provision of information on markets, 
standards, technologies, policy changes, performance of local enterprises, etc. Cost sharing will
 
be available for local businesses, NGOs and community groups to procure managerial services, 
training, and technical assistance. 
 
This component will be financed with IDA, GoT and GEF OP#8 and OP#2 funds. In principle all 
GEF resources will be used to finance incremental costs associated with institutional capacity 
building, training and related technical assistance (preparation of training modules and awareness 
building to support the above global environment-oriented activities). GEF OP#8 funding will 
focus on the assessment of tax and other private sector policy instruments that relate to offshore 
resource management in the EEZ, while also providing consultative mechanisms for private-
public sector dialogue that contributes to the ongoing review of and awareness of such policies. 
OP#2 provides similar funding targets but will focus on policy and regulatory instruments that 
affect private sector management of nearshore resources, especially those relating to protected 
areas or other regions of important biodiversity. 
 
Component 5. Science for Planning and Management
. 
This component will establish the 
scientific foundation to support policy making in marine and coastal resource management, and 
an Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system to track changes in marine and coastal resources 
and to evaluate the impact of this project. Activities will include: (a) support for a scientific 
baseline study, information collection and recording; support for research on biological 
constraints for fishery activities, such as maximum sustainable yield; study of potential 
extractable natural resources in the marine areas, such as petroleum and natural gas; 
(b) provision of funding for the identification, development, and transfer of environmentally-
sound technologies on near- and off- shore fisheries and on fishery product processing; 
(c) development and use of an M&E system to monitor the changes in quantity, quality and 
variety of natural resources and the impact of the project activities.  
 
This component will be financed with IDA, GoT and GEF OP#8 and OP#2 funds. GEF OP#8 
funding will finance incremental costs associated with establishment of marine resource 
management information and monitoring processes at the national and local levels and applied 
science for improved management through collaborative resource management arrangements. 
This will be coordinated with a view to feeding into other GEF-supported regional initiatives 
(e.g., SWIO). GEF OP#2 funding will provide modest resources to assist in the identification of 
appropriate technologies for nearshore community-based resource management in areas of 
critical biodiversity. 
 
Component 6. Project Management Unit
. This component aims to provide the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Tourism with the additional increased operational ability to manage and 
Page  5
 
5
supervise MACEMP activities. The component focuses on delivering the necessary support 
(technical, financial, and coordination) for the project stakeholders, in particular the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Tourism, to achieve the project’s respective objectives and deliverables. 
This component will be financed with IDA, GoT, and GEF funds. 
 
D.  Project location 
 
MACEMP targets Tanzania’s coastal districts along a 1,424 km coastline, including Zanzibar, 
which have been identified during sector work as having among the country’s highest levels of 
poverty and the highest vulnerability in terms of risks to environmental change (from persistent 
environmental degradation or sudden shocks). Analyses in Lindi district, for example, showed 
that 53% of the population lived below the Basic needs Poverty Line (compared to 36% for 
Tanzania as a whole.) The project area also encompasses the entire near-shore and off-shore 
areas within the EEZ of 243,442 km
2
, (of which 50,339 km
2
 include continental shelf.) This area 
includes all of the marine protected areas (defined, proposed, or those of high conservation 
potential) within the country. Regional scientific assessments to be conducted under the project 
will also consider the potential interactions with the EEZs of neighbouring Kenya and 
Mozambique. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
GoT’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be strengthened by the Tanzania Poverty 
Reduction Support Credit II Project ( PRSC II).  PRSC II supports the government’s efforts in 
strengthening institutional capacity to design and implement appropriate environmental 
assessment (EA) procedures for specific activities as well as broad sectoral strategies or policies. 
The basis of EA, the Institutional and Legal Framework for Environmental Management 
(ILFEMP), was approved by the cabinet in 2002. ILFEMP also supports cross-sectoral 
coordination  and integration of environment management into local government planning 
process. 
 
Environmental assessment in Tanzania is facilitated by the Vice President’s Office (VPO) with 
review and monitoring of mitigation measures by National Environment Management Council. 
The VPO will disclose the necessary documents according to the government’s existing 
procedures. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy
 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The primary potential detrimental impacts will arise from efforts to improve incomes in coastal 
communities. These efforts, through income generating projects, may either have direct 
environmental impacts (from small-scale activities) or indirect impacts through increased incomes 
that permit investment in non-sustainable harvesting. Such impacts, where they arise, are likely to 
be localized but may require mitigative programmes to put in place as part of the project 
implementation. Community investments will be identified through an integrated planning 
framework which will mainstream environmental and social impacts. It should be noted that 
mention that a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) will be prepared for the coastal region 
Page  6
 
6
under other government-implemented initiatives; this will reduce the burden on community/local 
authorities for carrying out project specific EA.
 
 
[X] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
The project does not propose investments within natural habitats (designated, proposed, or 
potential), but it may involve changed tenure arrangements by promoting a change in management 
regimes. The actual extent of the habitat risk will be assessed during early stages of project 
preparation, to determine if any activities will in fact trigger this safeguard. 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Because the project proposes to improve economic efficiency and environmental effectiveness of 
resource management by moving away from what is currently an open access regime in the off-
shore waters, the changes in access provide some prospect for reduced availability of resources to 
some individuals in some coastal communities. The scale of such impacts is expected to be 
relatively small, but it may result in localized exclusion of some coastal communities. Sector work 
relating to socio-economic conditions currently underway will be used to determine if such 
impacts are in fact a factor and, if so, this safeguard will be triggered in the early stages of project 
preparation. If required, a resettlement framework will be prepared as part of the EA to address 
potential social impacts due to limitation of access.
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60) 
 
 
[X] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
While no direct impacts on riparian systems expected, the project does involve management 
changes in some bays and straits that are close to bordering Kenya and Mozambique. The nature 
of these impacts will not involve pollution or other significant environmental impacts, hence the 
safeguard is not triggered. The project does, however, involve significant monitoring and 
enforcement investments that may also be of benefit to the neighbouring countries under regional 
initiatives to better manage the resource; while this does not trigger the safeguard, it is 
conventional under such circumstances to notify neighbouring countries that such activities may 
be conducted.
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
MACEMP is primarily an institutional support project that strengthens existing and new 
institutions in their mandate to provide better management of coastal and marine resources. 
MACEMP will promote institutional coordination (for fisheries, marine parks, tourism, and 
forests) towards an improved regime for sustainable development of the marine environment. 
 
The beneficiaries of improved management include coastal populations (to the extent that they 
depend directly on such resources) and the country as a whole (to the extent that proper 
Page  7
 
7
exploitation and management of marine resources generates improved economic returns.) The 
project also intends to harness the private sector in co-management efforts. 
 
The following environmental issues are flagged at this stage to be addressed in the preparation: 
a) Investments targeted to coastal communities must ensure that they do not themselves create 
perverse incentives for non-sustainable activities that might lead, for example, to non-sustainable 
harvesting of mangroves, reefs, or near-shore fishery resources. b) The current tenure situation 
for most off-shore resources is best described as
 
open access. The project will directly address 
the externalities associated with such access conditions, through supporting appropriate 
institutional, policy, and other reforms. Such reforms, and in particular any incentives provided 
for private sector management, must not create distortions that lead to non-sustainable resource 
use through over-capitalization, which is a chronic problem in off-shore fishery and resource 
management. Rent- and revenue-sharing regimes must permit optimal economic exploitation of 
both renewable and non-renewable resources, while respecting ecosystem limits, environmental 
standards, and the social and cultural needs of coastal populations. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 June 2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 May 2004 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 June 2004 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
             late June 2004 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
                         May 2004 [if required] 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 June 2004 [if required] 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
             late June 2004 [if required] 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Indumathie V. Hewawasam 
Date: 02/16/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
02/19/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Karen Brooks 
02/19/2004 
Comments 
Page  8
 
8
 
