Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC536 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/01/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P085752 
Project Name: Tanzania Agricultural Sector Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Robert Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);Irrigation and drainage (20%);General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00 
 
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
50.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. If the Government of Tanzania's Agricultural Sector Development Program (ASDP) is 
successful, what will be its principal outcome? Sustained 5% annual growth of agricultural GDP 
(averaged over a rolling three year period) through improved productivity and profitability of the 
sector.  
 
2. If this ASDP support program is successful, what will be its principal outcome? : Higher 
farm productivity, profitability and incomes through improved access to and use of relevant 
agricultural knowledge and technology by farmers, increased district level investment, and 
improved market development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
3. APL proposal: An agreed strategy for the sector is now in place with many on-going donor 
supported programs each having varying durations and coverage of the ASDP components. 
Increased donor co-ordination in the sector through a basket funded support program would 
Page  2
allow more coherence to external assistance with reduced transaction costs for Government. The 
support is proposed to be phased covering three of the five pillars of the ASDP (the other two 
(policy and cross-cutting) are being covered under budget support. Initial focus will be on areas 
where there are financing gaps and technical support needs. Given the multi-phased, long term 
technical and financial requirements of the program an APL is proposed. A three phased APL 
would allow over a 9-10 year period support by development partners to the Government's 
efforts to (i) improve the responsiveness of agricultural services to farmer needs; (ii) implement 
district agricultural development plans; and (ii) market development (local, regional and 
international). Over the three phases the program would progressively increase both its sectoral 
and geographic coverage. The sequencing and main thrust of the three phases would be:  
 
*
Phase I (three years): focus on empowering farmers/clients to make better informed decisions 
on technology choice; introducing a more contestable and decentralized system of agricultural 
services and extension to improve its relevance and encourage pluralism in service provision 
with a greater role for the private sector; clarifying the strategy for technical services and 
training; strengthening capacity for implementation of the district agricultural development 
plans, including irrigation; and identification of models for local, regional and international 
market development.  
 
*
Phase II (three years): continued roll-out of the competitive grant schemes for research and 
extension together with empowerment activities; support for technical services and training; 
implementation of the district agricultural development plans through investment and capacity 
building; and implementation of market development models.  
 
*
Phase III (three years): continued expansion of the competitive grant scheme for research and 
extension and support for the implementation of the district agricultural development plans; 
implementation of market development. Dependant on implementation progress, IDA funding 
could be integrated into direct budget support (PRSC) in this phase, although the basket and 
support the ongoing activities would continue to be financed by development partners.  
 
4. The first phase of the long-term program will have three components (i) agricultural services; 
(ii) district investments; and (iii) market development. The first component will be the largest, 
with component (ii) and (iii) increasing in size in subsequent phases.  
 
5. Component 1: Agricultural Services: This component will have three sub-components: (a) 
strengthening demand through farmer/client empowerment which will include activities focused 
on strengthening (i) farmer/client knowledge and organizational empowerment and; (ii) 
institutional and financial empowerment; (b) strengthening supply of services which will include 
activities focused on (i) institutional reform; (ii) capacity building; and (iii) service provision; 
and (c) co-ordination and quality control: which will include activities on (i) co-ordination and 
partnership; (ii) monitoring and evaluation; and (iii) quality control of service delivery.  
 
6. Component 2: District Investment: This component will have two sub-components: (a) 
technical support to the ongoing design of this pillar of the ASDP, including irrigation aspects, 
with capacity building to support improvements in the planning, technical and financial capacity 
of districts; and (b) piloting activities to refine design considerations.  
 
Page  3
7. Component 3: Market Development: This component will have two sub-components: (a) 
technical support: to the ongoing design of this pillar of the ASDP; (b) piloting activities to 
refine design.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
8. 
The spatial coverage of the program will be determined during program preparation, but 
is likely to focus initially on: (i) districts where key reforms to service provision have been 
initiated and; (ii) districts where poverty levels are high and service capacity low. Other 
considerations will be given to agricultural potential, infrastructure, and ongoing donor support. 
The program will initially provide a minimum base flow of resource across the local, zonal, and 
national level, while providing intensive support for districts and services which qualify for early 
reform. During implementation, the level of support to government-based agricultural services 
would be scaled down commensurate with the need to retain certain services in the public 
domain, while increasing the role of private sector agencies in domains where they can attain 
commercial viability.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
9. Tanzania has developed some institutional capacity for relevant safeguard policies with the 
satisfactory implementation of the environmental and pest management action plan for the 
Tanzania Agricultural Research Project (which is closing on June 30, 2004) and the pest 
management plan for the National Agricultural Extension Project (which closed on December 
31, 2003). More recently an environmental and social framework and resettlement policy 
framework were prepared for the Participatory Agricultural Development and Empowerment 
Project (PADEP), the Secondary Education Development Program (SEDP) and most recently for 
the Energizing Rural Transformation Project (ERTP). The National Environment Management 
Council (NEMC) and some of the implementation districts were engaged during the preparation 
of these framework documents and participated in their review and approval. The NEMC is 
sufficiently knowledgeable on the Bank?s safeguards policies, and its staff have recently 
benefited from training on the Bank?s safeguards policies. Also, the GoT has recently 
strengthened environmental management in Tanzania by approving a new law, the 
Environmental Management Act (EMA) 2004.  
 
In addition, the Government has taken several steps (policy and institutional development) 
under the Poverty Reduction Support Credit towards greater mainstreaming of environmental 
issues and building capacity for environmental assessment both at the national and district level.  
 
Proportionately also, Tanzania has a much bigger land surface area devoted to resource 
conservation (29%) than most other countries.  The hierarchical protected-area system consists 
of national parks (12), game reserves (28), the Ngorongoro Conservation Area, and game 
controlled areas (38), comprising a total of 240,000 km2. In addition to the wildlife-protected 
areas, there are 540 forest reserves covering 132,000 km2, equivalent to 15% of the total 
woodland and forest area in Tanzania. There is also the Mafia Island Marine Park.  
 
Thus, Tanzania has a substantial institutional capacity for safeguards management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 applies because the ASDP through its investment components may fund potentially 
larger scale irrigation, water harvesting and other on-farm type smaller scale infrastructure, 
through the District Agricultural Development Plans. However, the Districts that would qualify 
for these investments will become known only during implementation of the program. Therefore, 
the GoT is preparing an Environmental and Social Management Framework to ensure the 
environmental issues associated with this program are adequately analyzed and understood, and 
that all associated adverse impacts are captured through screening, effectively mitigated and 
monitored and that the institutional capacity to ensure this happens is maintained and supported 
financially through the program. The ESMF will be sent to the Bank for review and clearance 
before it is disclosed publicly in Tanzania.  
 
Past experience in Tanzania with irrigation development shows that a total of 6,000-7,000 
ha annually is developed. This is taken as a low case scenario for this program. In a high case 
scenario, about 10,000 ha (about US$16m) throughout Tanzania annually could be developed, 
but this would require significant support to strengthen capacities at the District and Zonal level.  
 
Taking these into consideration, the Task Team is recommending that an EA category B is 
the appropriate EA category. Notwithstanding, the TOR's for the preparation of the ESMF 
includes substantial requirement for establishing required baselines, environmental analysis of 
the impacts on these baselines, preparation of tangible mitigation measures, and requirement for 
an EMP for each irrigation investment that is approved for funding.  
 
Furthermore, the Task Team is proposing that the National Irrigation Master Plan, which 
forms the basis for irrigation financing in this program be subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA), by mid-term of phase 1 of this APL.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The overall program objective of increasing agricultural productivity could lead to an 
increase in agricultural input use, including the use of pesticides, even though the program will 
not finance the purchase of these chemicals. But, the GoT has prepared an Integrated Pest 
Management Plan (IPMP), to ensure the desired management of the use of these inputs is 
achieved.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
During preparation or implementation of this program, involuntary resettlement cannot be 
ruled out. Where it may occur, it is expected to be small, if design of the investment works 
cannot rule it out altogether. Therefore, for the few cases that may trigger the policy (likely to be 
within communities for specific land uses), the GoT is required to prepare a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF), to ensure that the needs of those who may be affected by the land 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
allocation/acquisition needs of the program activities, loss of assets and/or access to their 
individual or community, economic, social or cultural resources, are addressed in such a manner 
that ensures their pre-program status is at least restored if not improved upon. The RPF will also 
address how those affected in this way will be consulted to ensure their meaningful and effective 
participation. The RPF once finalized, will also be sent to the Bank for clearance and approval 
before it is disclosed publicly in Tanzania.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
This policy may be triggered by the use of small dams and dykes as part of the overall 
irrigation and water harvesting networks. The ESMF will review the capacity of the local 
institutions for safe operations of these small dams/dykes and propose measures to ensure their 
safe operations.  
 
Also, whereas this program will not finance the construction, rehabilitation or repair of 
large dams, it cannot be ruled out that water from existing dams may not be used for irrigation. 
To this end therefore, the ESMF will prepare guidelines to satisfy this policy, should financed 
irrigation under this project depend on use of existing dams.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Tanzania has many international waterways, and the use of water from these will most 
certainly be required under this program. The task team is working with the GoT to send the 
required notification letters to the riparian countries through the required channels, once more 
project details become available. This would certainly be done by appraisal of this program.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/22/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert Townsend 
07/18/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
07/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
07/27/2005 
Comments:  I accept the transfer and the related responsibilities 
