                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC17460
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          21-Oct-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data
  Country:                     Timor-Leste           Project ID:              P155202
  Project Name:                Tibar Bay Port Project (P155202)
  Task Team Leader(s):         Pierre Graftieaux
  Estimated Board Date:        31-August-2017
  Managing Unit:               GTI02
  Sector(s):                   Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
  Theme(s):                    Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Other trade
                               and integration (20%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
  Financing (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:       300.00                   Total Bank Financing:       70.00
  Financing Gap:            0.00
    Financing Source                                                                           Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         60.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                   10.00
    Asian Development Bank                                                                        59.00
    Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                            171.00
    Total                                                                                        300.00
  Environmental Category       A - Full Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred        No
  project?


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The proposed development objective is to improve Timor Leste’s port opera tions and efficiency through
increased port capacity and enhanced private sector participation.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:
The Government of Timor-Leste has identified Tibar Bay, 14 km west of Dili, for the site of a
greenfield port handling only cargo operations. The new port will take all of Dili port’s cargo
operations and have a 350,000 TEU capacity. This will relieve congestion currently experienced
at the Dili port.

The project consists of the construction and operation of a new port at Tibar Bay, under a PPP
scheme, whereby public participation in the investment will be partially funded by the World
Bank and ADB, and partially by the Petroleum Fund. The Tibar Bay Port is expected to be
operational by end 2019 and replace Dili Port as Timor Leste’s principal port for cargo and
container operations. As Tibar Bay becomes operational, Dili Port will only provide ferry and
passenger vessels and space currently occupied by cargo and container will be redeveloped as a
public marina. The Tibar Bay concession will be regulated by a dedicated Project Management
Unit (PMU) to be established for that purpose. The PMU will report jointly to the Ministries of
Finance and Public Works and will be managed through two Steering Committees (operational
and political), the latter one to be composed of the two Ministers.

The Government of Timor-Leste, with support from the IFC, has awarded a Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) for the Tibar Bay port to Bolloré Logistics, a French investment and industrial
holding and a major player in transport and logistic operations. The concession contract, for a
period of 30 years was signed on June 3, 2016, with the possibility to extend for an additional
period of 10 years. Four bidders had expressed potential interest in the greenfield and two
submitted proposals.

The financial bid consisted of a single variable, the Viability Gap Financing (VGF) to be
contributed to the PPP by the GoTL through a combination of their own resources, and
credits/loans from the World Bank and the ADB. The Bolloré offer established the VGF amount
at US$129.45 million, significantly lower than IFC’s base case scenario. The VGF is to be paid
to the successful bidder in tranches, the first of which will be disbursed upon engineering design
and mobilization (expected to happen in early 2017). During negotiations, the future
concessionaire, worried about the risk posed by the fact that the WB and ADB loans are not yet
approved, made the GoTL agree to escrow the full VGF amount, using resources from the
Petroleum Fund. As a result, the installments due to the concessionaire will be paid out of this
escrow account, and the proposed World Bank operation will disburse as these installments are
being paid, for a total amount of up to USD 70 million, along with the Asian Development Bank
(whose expected contribution amounts to USD 59 million).

The World Bank’s proposed involvement would have one component:

Infrastructure Development, approximately US$300 million, out of which US$70 million would
be funded from IDA and possibly from IBRD: providing a loan to fund part of the GoTL’s
Viability Gap Financing for PPP for the Tibar Bay port. Money will be disbursed based on
attainment of specific construction milestones, certified by the Independent Engineer.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):
Tibar Bay, running approximately 1.6 km east-west and 1 km north-south, was selected by GoTL
as the most appropriate site for the new Port based on a range of considerations. Seven
alternative port site layouts were then considered within the Bay based on operational,
engineering, environmental, social and cost factors. The site was selected as the preferred site
based on its operational suitability, lower environmental and social impacts, and cost
effectiveness. Port facilities are likely to consist of a 26.9 ha container terminal, 2.7 ha general
cargo area and 11.6 ha for offices and workshops.

The direct, cumulative and induced potential social and environmental impacts of the project are
expected to be significant. The port will require the creation of a 200 m wide approach channel
through the western side of the reef across the mouth of the bay, establishing a 600 m diameter
turning circle within the bay, construction of a wharf, land reclamation and some landside
developments. The site will require the removal of around 20 ha of marine habitat, most notably
consisting of approximately 18 ha of seagrass bed, up to 1 ha of live coral and between 1-3 ha of
mangrove, depending upon the final design. Potential social impacts will include land acquisition
and resettlement (although this is expected to be largely public land with only moderate direct
impacts on private land), business and employment impacts (at the site and in the existing Dili
port), livelihood impacts on fisherpeople, cultural heritage sites, restriced access to the water,
shoreline and marine area, safety and visual impacts. Subsantial indirect and induced impacts on
adjoining and nearby land uses and environments are also likely if not managed effectively.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The project is a public-private partnership between the private concessionaire and the Ministry of
Transport and Communications (MTC). The concession will be regulated by a dedicated Project
Management Unit (PMU) established for that purpose. The PMU will report jointly to the
Ministries of Finance and Public Works and will be managed through two Steering Committees
(operational and political), the latter one to be composed of the two Ministers. National
Directorate of Pollution Control and Environmental Impact (NDPCEI) will be the responsible
approval authority for environment and social safeguards.

The project will be delivered by a private sector entity. Accordingly, the Bank’s Performance
Standards will be applied via the triggering of OP 4.03 rather than the Bank’s safeguards
Operational Policies. No project of this type or scale has been supported by either the World
Bank or the IFC in Timor Leste. The Government’s PMU which will be responsible for project
delivery has appointed one International and one National Safeguards specialist to add capacity
to better manage safeguards. In addition to this, a separate PPIAF Grant is being processed to
support GoTL to set up and operationalize the PMU and build its capacity for the management of
the first PPP concession contract in Timor-Leste. This support is envisaged to encompass
capacity building and transfer knowledge from international experts to local staff for long-term
contract management. .
The Concessionaire, Bollore, is generally recognized as having the capacity to identify, assess
and manage E&S risks. The company’s Timor Leste operations are certified under ISO 9001
(Quality Management Systems), 14001 (Environmental Management) and 18001 (Occupational
Health and Safety Standard). For the preparation of the ESIA, Bollore has appointed a major
international consulting firm with a very strong track-record in undertaking large and complex
assessments such as required for this project.

During project preparation, the legal and institutional framework of relevant stakeholders
(particularly National Directorate of Pollution Control and Environmental Impact, Ministry of
Lands, Ministry of Finance (the Loan and PPP Unit) will be assessed, along with their capacity,
and if needed, a program to strengthen the safeguards implementation arrangements will be
designed. Special attention will be paid to identifying an implementation structure and process to
effectively interact with the social and environmental consultants appointed by the
concessionaire for the preparation of the safeguard documents and for project supervision and
monitoring.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Ross Butler – Senior Social Development Specialist: GPSURR
Nicholas Valentine – Senior Environmental Safeguards Specialist: GENDR


II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards/OP (please explain why)          Yes      No                TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of                      X
Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
A concept design of the Port was developed by Hamburg Port Consulting (HPC), building on
earlier work undertaken by Soros Associates (2012). A Rapid Environmental Assessment (REA)
was conducted for the Port in September 2012 to provide a preliminary identification of
environmental and social issues associated with the development. An environmental and social
Scoping Study (2013) was prepared to provide a more detailed identification of issues and assist
GoTL in selecting the preferred site within Tibar Bay.

An ecological study undertaken in 2014 found that the identified site for the construction of the
Tibar Bay port is considered critical habitat for Hawksbill Turtles (critically endangered) and for
Green and Loggerhead Turtles (both endangered), and also contains a highly threatened
ecosystem: mangroves. Timor-Leste has lost 80% of its mangrove forests since 1940, and the
mangroves of Tibar Bay comprise 2.5% of the remaining extent. Addressing this issue and
designing the appropriate mitigation measures (such as replanting offset) will be a complex task,
which may impact the implementation schedule of the project and will require close coordination
between the donors, the Government and the concessionaire. The latter will be in charge of
developing the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and will be given 8 months
to prepare the ESIA and 11 months to obtain the required permits, including the environmental
and development approvals.
Performance Standards/OP (please explain why)           Yes       No              TBD
The ESIA will be prepared in accordance with a Terms of Reference which the ADB and World
Bank provided consolidated comments to. This includes meeting requirements of ADB, World
Bank and IFC, including general guidelines such as the EHS Guidelines and Industry Guidelines
for Ports, Harbors and Terminals. The World Bank safeguards team will be closely involved in
supervising this work to ensure the requirements of the Bank are met during ESIA preparation.

The ESIA will address direct and indirect impacts and also assess both cumulative and induced
impacts to ensure the overall impact of the project is properly assessed. Impacts to be assessed
includes (among other things which will be identified during the assessment process): alteration
of bay/coast hydrodynamics; sea/land degradation; seawater quality deterioration; catchment
drainage and bay sedimentation; land use; habitat destruction/degradation and biodiversity loss;
ecosystem services; pests and invasive species; water use; solid waste; wastewater and
stormwater; dredging and dredge material disposal; air quality; underwater noise; noise;
greenhouse gas emissions, climate change impacts and adaptation; land acquisition and physical
displacement; economic displacement / loss of livelihoods; population change; loss of facilities
and amenities; loss of cultural heritage sites; safety; traffic; reduced visual amenity. The ESIA
will also cover ancillary facilities such as disposal sites from the dredged materials, waste
disposal, and materials sourcing areas etc. The project area of influence will be defined at the
early stages of ESIA preparation and agreed by the Bank.

During preparation, the donors will carry out due diligence based on a review and update of the
already available set of studies. The selected Concessionaire will prepare a Draft ESIA in
compliance with the approved ToR, incorporating an Environmental Management Plan (EMP),
and submit this to National Directorate of Pollution Control and Environmental Impact
(NDPCEI) for assessment. NDPCEI establishes an Evaluation Committee consisting of
representatives of relevant agencies and institutions to review the Draft ESIA, and the report will
be made available for public review.

The Final ESIA will be prepared by the proponent taking into account the comments received
from the Evaluation Committee’s technical review and public consultation, then submitted to
NDPCEI for approval. The ESIA will include specific management plans (in addition to the
EMP) including dredging management plans, marine spill contingency plan and biodiversity
action plan

If the project is approved, an Environmental Permit will be issued and may contain conditions of
consent, including the requirement to implement the mitigation and monitoring measures set out
in the ESIA, EMP and other Project management plans.

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                       X
The project will have the potential to affect employment opportunities the existing Dili port. The
socio-economic work being undertaken as a part of the ESIA to be prepared by the
concessionaire will examine these potential impacts; and include an appropriate mitigation plan.
Mitigation plans will be informed by, and comply with, WGB Environmental Health and Safety
(EHS) Guidelines and other best practice guidelines.
Performance Standards/OP (please explain why)         Yes         No                TBD
For example, if the Project only involves economic displacement (no physical displacement), a
Livelihood Restoration Plan is required to meet Bank PS requirements, setting out compensation
for affected persons and/or communities and other assistance measures. The Plan will establish
the entitlements of affected persons and/or communities and will ensure that these are provided
in a transparent, consistent, and equitable manner.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution                X
Prevention
In addition to pollution and waste issues common to construction activities, significant dredging
(volume 4.4 million m3) and reclamation works are needed. Improper management of such
activities poses pollution risks.

E&S Scoping Study identifies risks and provides an initial assessment of them, with
recommendations for a Dredging Management Plan in line with PS3 and WBG EHS Guidelines
for Ports, Harbors, and Terminals.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security             X
Community health, safety and security will have the potential to be significantly impacted if the
construction and operational phases of the project are not undertaken in a manner which meets
best practice. Impacts will have the potential to be far-reaching and include health and other
impacts on workers, traffic safety, personal security, workplace safety and others. All potential
impacts will be identified during the ESIA period and appropriate mitigation measures adopted
in accordance with the WGB EHS Guidelines and other best practice guidelines.

PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary                     X
Resettlement
Limited physical displacement is anticipated as a result of the development. The 2014 Scoping
Study did identify 3-4 houses which may be affected. Economic displacement is likely to be an
issue however as a result of the loss of mangroves and seagrasses as well as impacts on fishing
grounds and terrestrial livelihood systems. A Livelihood Restoration Plan / Resettlement Action
Plan / Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan will be prepared by the concessionaire and
responsibility for the implementation of the plans will rest with the project PMU.

This plan will meet relevant national requirements as well as those of PS5. If physical
displacement is required, livelihood restoration measures shall be incorporated into the
Resettlement Action Plan.

PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and                     X
Sustainable Management of Living Natural
Resources

The conservation significance of biological communities and individual species found in the Bay
is summarized below sourced from preparatory work completed for IFC (Scoping Report and
Rapid Environmental Assessment).

      Mangroves – the three mangrove species identified in the Bay (Sonneratia alba,
       Avicennia marina and Rhizophora stylosa) are each listed as Least Concern on the IUCN
Performance Standards/OP (please explain why)              Yes       No             TBD
      Red List. Despite this low level of individual species significance, there is only an
      estimated 1,000 ha of mangrove remaining in East Timor, with cover having decline by
      around 80% since 1940 and set to continue to decline unless action is taken. Tibar Bay
      contains around 2.5% of the remaining mangrove area and the project will impact about a
      10th of this, i.e. a quarter of a percent of the remaining mangrove in Timor Leste.
    Seagrasses – the Bay contains around 24 ha of seagrass beds out of an estimated 2,200 ha
      of seagrass beds and 1,266 ha of mixed coral-seagrass along the northern coastline of
      Timor-Leste. Each of the four species of seagrass identified are listed as Least Concern
      on the IUCN Red List;
    Coral reefs – a high cover of live coral is generally found along the edge of reefs, at
      depths off between 2-5 m, but as deep as 15+ m. Coral diversity is good, with most corals
      being slow growing species.
    Dugong (Dugong dugon) - listed as Vulnerable to extinction (IUCN Red List). This
      species is known to occur off the beach immediately east of the Bay (within 800 m of the
      eastern headland of the Bay). Dugong use of the Bay is not known, but it is thought that
      the Bay is not of any particular significance to this species (IFC Scoping Report) as
      sightings within the Bay were not reported and only small and isolated patches of H.
      ovalis seagrass, the species preferred food, have been identified within the Bay.
    Marine turtles – six species of marine turtle use the waters around Timor-Leste as habitat
      (Green turtle - Chelonia mydas, Hawkesbill turtle - Eretmochelys imbricata, Loggerhead
      turtle - Caretta caretta, Flatback turtle - Natator depressus, Olive Ridley turtle
      (Lepidochelys olivacea) and Leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), with two of
      these species listed as Critically Endangered and three Endangered. The use of the Bay
      by turtles is unknown. Accordingly, additional work will be required during the ESIA
      preparation phase to confirm the extent and nature of impacts.
    Saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus) –This species’ presence in the area was
      reported in the Rapid Environmental Assessment (REA) prepared for IFC. It is listed as
      of Least Concern More verification work will be undertaken to address this issue during
      ESIA preparation.

In addition to assessing the impact of the project, the ESIA being prepared by the concessionaire
will be required to include a stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan which comprises a
detailed assessment on biodiversity and identifies means to ensure biodiversity risks and impacts
on critical habitats are designed to result in a “net gain”.

PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                     X
    The social assessment and community engagement activities to be carried out during draft
ESIA preparation will assess aspects related to indigenous peoples in the project areas as relevant
and recommend appropriate approach.
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                      X
Two cultural heritage sites (a canoe launching site and freshwater well) have been identified on
the southern end of the preferred port site. The ESIA will assess the impact of the Port on these
sites (including if it can be avoided or if the sites can be relocated) and on any other sites. Local
communities will be consulted when defining mitigation and management procedures.
Performance Standards/OP (please explain why)        Yes       No                TBD
OP 7.50: Projects on international waterways                    X
For privately funded projects where OP 4.03 applies, the Bank ensures that the notification
requirements under OP/BP 7.50, Projects on International Waterways, related to the activity are
met.

OP7.50 would not be triggered for the proposed project as the activity is wholly within Timor
Leste’s sovereign area. The port is located within an enclosed bay and necessary construction
and impact mitigation activities will extend less than 1km offshore.
OP 7.60: Projects in disputed areas                                  X
The project is not located within any disputed areas. This OP would therefore not be triggered.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: March 2017

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

The Concession Agreement was signed on June 3, 2016. Once the contract becomes effective,
the concessionaire will be given 8 months to draft the ESIA and 11 months to obtain the required
permits, including the environmental one. Being a category A project, the ESIA will have to be
disclosed at least 120 days before Board approval.



IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                             Name: Pierre Graftieaux                                       31 August 2016
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:              Name: Peter Leonard                                           5 October 2016
      Comments:
    Practice Manager:                             Name: Almud Weitz                                            22 October 2016
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
