                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                          Report No.: 136007

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 28, 2019

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

   Country:            Togo                            Project ID:       P149942
   Project Name:       REDD+ Readiness preparation - Togo (P149942)
   Task Team           Mirko Serkovic
   Leader(s):
   Estimated           N/A
   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:      GEN07

   Sector(s):          Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%),
                       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
   Theme(s):           Climate change (70%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Other
                       rural development (10%)
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      2.93                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
   Financing Gap:           0.00

      Financing Source                                                           Amount
      Borrower                                                                       0.00
      Carbon Fund                                                                    0.00
      Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                       2.93
      Total                                                                          2.93
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a     No
   Repeater
   project?

   B. Project Objectives
  The project objective is to reinforce the Republic of Togo’s capacity to design a socially and
  environmentally sound national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.
    C. Project Description
    The proposed additional grant would enable Togo to complete the REDD+ Readiness process at
    national-level as defined in its Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) submitted to the Forest
    Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF).


    Specifically, the AF will: (i) ensure the operation and reinforce the capacities of the national REDD+
    management bodies1 to provide political and technical guidance to the development of the REDD+
    Strategy; (ii) reinforce the capacities and organization of the main stakeholders2 for a more effective
    participation in the development and implementation of the REDD+ Strategy; (iii) finalize the
    REDD+ Strategy with a detailed action plan and budget for implementation; (iv) enhance the efforts
    to consult, validate and disseminate the REDD+ strategy at local levels; (v) develop a Measurement,
    Reporting and Verification (MRV) system for REDD+; (vi) ensure the integration of REDD+ into
    sectoral strategies and measures; (vii) prepare the Government of Togo to access available funding
    from REDD+ mechanisms.


    The additional grant support will continue to be organized along two components that correspond
    with Togo’s R-PP:


    Component 1. Support to the national readiness management arrangements (US$ 651,000):
    The objective of this component is to support national and regional coordination and monitoring of
    the REDD+ process, including the project management costs, as well as the consultation and
    participation processes. The AF will specifically support: (i) the operational costs of the National
    REDD+ Coordination; (ii) the functioning and capacity strengthening of the REDD+ National
    Committee, the REDD+ National Working Group, and the CPDDs; (iii) the strengthening of civil
    society platforms to contribute to the REDD+ process and carry out activities at the grassroot level;
    and (iv) various communication activities aimed at enhancing the consultation and participation
    around the development of the REDD+ strategy. The AF will also fund the operationalization of the
    FGRM, ensuring that stakeholders are properly informed about its function.


    Component 2. Support to REDD+ Strategy Preparation (US$ 331,000):
    The objective of this component is to finalize the National REDD+ Strategy, including the
    associated background studies and the safeguards instruments (SESA, ESMF, RPF, PMP). The AF
    will specifically support: (i) the integration of additional aspects into the REDD+ strategy (natural
    protected areas, dynamics of degradation and options for restoration, as well as gender
    considerations); (ii) support the work of the ministries’ sectoral thematic groups in defining the
    REDD+ interventions; and (iii) and the development of judicial and regulatory texts to integrate
    REDD+ in relevant sectors. With regards to the SESA, the AF will specifically strengthen the
    capacity of the National Environmental Management Agency (Agence Nationale de Gestion de
    l'Environnement, ANGE) to guide and participate in the SESA process. The AF will also support
    efforts to consult, validate and disseminate the REDD+ strategy widely, including at local level.


1
  The REDD+ National Committee, the REDD+ National Working Group and the REDD+ regional focal points in
the country’s five regions.
2
  The National Council of Civil Society Organizations for Sustainable Development (CNODD); the producer
organizations represented by the Togolese Coordination of Producer Organizations (CTOP); the youth represented
by the National Youth Council (CNJ); and the women represented by the Togo REDD+ Women's Consortium (CF-
REDD+ Togo).
The AF will also support the following two additional components relative to the original project,
in line with Togo’s R-PP:


Component 3. Support to the establishment of a Forest Reference Emissions Level – FREL
(US$ 1.618 M):
The objective of this component is to establish a FREL, which would enable the monitoring of
deforestation and forest degradation over time against a set baseline. The FREL will also be submitted
to the UNFCCC to enable Togo to access future funding from international REDD+ mechanisms. This
component will build on the work supported by ProREDD/GIZ, namely the completion of the
country’s first National Forest Inventory (NFI) and a historical analysis and quantification of past
deforestation. The AF will specifically support the second NFI, the development of baselines for the
different REDD+ strategic options, as well as various technical and capacity strengthening activities
necessary to develop the FREL.



Component 4. Support to the development of monitoring systems for forests and safeguards (US$
330,000):

The objective of this component is to develop a Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV)
system for REDD+, along with a National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS) and an Information
System for Safeguards, Governance and Multiple Benefits. The AF will specifically support various
analytical tasks leading to the development of these systems.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is of a national scope and will take place throughout the country. The project does not
entail physical investments on the ground. Rather, it is focused on providing technical assistance for
the development of technical and institutional capacities for the implementation of the REDD+
strategy.


E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The country has an acceptable legal and regulatory environmental and social framework. The Ministry
of Environment and Forestry Resources (MERF) oversees environmental issues. The National Agency
for Environment Management (Agence Nationale de Gestion de l'Environnement, ANGE) is one of
these Ministry’s entities, which oversees the approvals of environmental studies, the monitoring and
evaluation of such studies, and implementation at the national level. The national body has acceptable
technical capacity even though it is under-staffed in terms of numbers of qualified staff, lack of vehicles
for field visits, and funding shortage to oversee the implementation of the Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMP).

The institutional arrangements for the implementation of the additional grant will continue relative to
the ongoing project. The Recipient has several years of experience in applying safeguards policies and
implementing World Bank funded projects. However, the capacity of the REDD+ National
Coordination (NC) should be strengthened by the recruitment of a social development and gender
specialist. In addition, sustained training and support needs to be provided to the NC to become
sufficiently proficient in managing key safeguard issues.
  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Fatoumata Diallo (GSU01)
  Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07); Joselyne Lisbeth Sena Godonou (OPSES)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

  Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental     Assessment Yes          A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
  OP/BP 4.01                                (SESA) is being carried out to influence the final
                                            national REDD+ strategy, by ensuring that social and
                                            environmental risks are factored in the preparation of
                                            the strategy.

                                            The future investments and carbon finance
                                            transactions will require specific environmental and
                                            social risk management instruments. Therefore, the
                                            ToRs for the preparation of the Environmental and
                                            Social Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy
                                            Framework (RPF) and Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                            will finalized and disclosed prior the approval of this
                                            additional financing.

                                            These framework instruments (ESMF, RPF) will
                                            include specific procedures, along with appropriate
                                            institutional arrangements for the preparation of
                                            project-specific instruments (ESIA, RAP, Process
                                            Framework) to prevent adverse impacts, as well as
                                            cumulative impacts.
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes         The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
                                            options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
                                            take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
                                            well as the numerous environmental services and
                                            products that natural habitats provide to human
                                            society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                            have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                            as the country puts in place an effective strategy to
                                            reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA, the ESMF
                                            and any project-specific instrument (ESIA, PF) will
                                            address issues related to natural habitats and potential
                                            impacts of the implementation of the National REDD+
                                            Strategy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes    Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                     significant positive impacts on forests, in that the main
                                     goal of the program is to reduce deforestation and
                                     forest degradation, while contributing to the well-
                                     being of forest-dependent communities. Potential
                                     impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on natural
                                     forests will be assessed through the SESA and
                                     included in the ESMF. The SESA, the ESMF and any
                                     project-specific instrument (ESIA, PF) will comply
                                     with the Bank’s requirements regarding forest
                                     management.

Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes    Agricultural     intensification    and     reforestation
                                     activities, among others are anticipated REDD+
                                     activities that could require pest management during
                                     the implementation of the strategy. A ToR for the
                                     preparation of the PMP will be finalized and disclosed
                                     prior to the approval of the additional financing.


Physical Cultural    Resources Yes   REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented in
OP/BP 4.11                           areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
                                     resources by rural communities living there (e.g.
                                     holy/sacred sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests,
                                     etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the project will
                                     have negative impacts on any such sites, the SESA and
                                     the ESMF include appropriate requirements, guidance
                                     and mechanism for addressing the management of
                                     physical cultural resources, including chance-find,
                                     during the implementation of the strategy’s
                                     subsequent projects.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No     There are no indigenous peoples as defined by the
4.10                                 policy in the project areas.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/ Yes     This policy is triggered to address any further situation
BP 4.12                              that requires land acquisition or physical and
                                     economic displacement during the implementation of
                                     the REDD+ strategy/program. In addition to the
                                     guidance, requirements and provisions to include in
                                     the SESA, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                     will be prepared to guide the preparation of specific
                                     RAP and PF whenever required. The ToRs for the
                                     preparation of the RPF will be finalized and disclosed
                                     prior the approval of the additional financing.




Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No     The project will not finance activities related to either
                                     existing or new dam.
        Projects  on   International No                                                         The project will not support activities related to
        Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                    international waterways.

        Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                       The project will not support activities in disputed
        BP 7.60                                                                                 areas.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
      A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: N/A
      B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
             The work was launched in July 2017 and is expected to be completed by June 2019.


IV. APPROVALS

        Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mirko Serkovic

        Approved By:
        Regional Safeguards                              Name: Maman-Sani Issa (RSA)                                                                       Date: December 12,
        Coordinator:                                                                                                                                       2018
        Practice Manager:                                Name: Maria Sarraf                                                                                Date: January 22,
                                                                                                                                                           2019




1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locat ions and in a

form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
