                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                          Report No.: 105128

Date ISDS PreparediUpdated:             21-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION·
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                        Togo                  1   Project ID:               Ip122326
 Project Name:                   Togo - Private Sector Development Support Project (PI22326)
 Task Team Leader(s):            Magueye Dia
 Estimated Board Date:           05-Apr-2011
 Managing Unit:                  GTC07
 Sector(s):                      Public administration- Industry and trade (60%), General industry and
                                 trade sector (40%)
 Theme(s):                       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Other Private
                                 Sector Development (39%), Regulation and competition policy (12%), P
                                 ersonal and property rights (9%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                      No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:         13.00                         Total Bank Financing:     113.00
 Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                             13.00
     Total                                                                                                 13.00
 Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The original and current project development objective (PDO) is "to contribute to an improved
 investment climate in Togo, including in a New Free Zone, and to an improved performance of
 targeted micro and small businesses."
 Proposed New PD~ (from Restructuring Paper)
 No change.

 3. Project Description
 The project consists of:

 Component 1: Support to investment climate reforms (original: US$3 million, revised: US$1.5
 million)

This component aims at supporting the creation of an enabling environment for private sector
development in the Recipient's territory). New activities introduced under the proposed restructuring
will be the provision of a server for the Togolese Commercial and Credit Registry, and the provision
of technical assistance and goods to support the Togolese authorities with the introduction of a single
window for the issuance of construction permits. Goods procured for this activity will be limited to
office furniture, including computer equipment and related.

The initial sub-component (iii) to support the establishment of the Land Registry will be dropped.

Component 2: Support to the development of entrepreneurial capacities (original: US$4 million;
revised: US$l.l million)                            /

This component will be canceled.

Component 3: Support to the development of a new Free Zone (original: US$3 million; revised:
US$O.8 million)

Provision of technical assistance to support the development of a New Free Zone, specifically, a three-
phased feasibility study covering qualitative and quantitative assessments (see below) which is in
progress.

Activities under this component will be confined to phase 1 (preparatory phase) and phase 2
(formulation and validation) of the new Free Zone foreseen under the original design. Phase 3, TA for
the implementation of the Strategy of the new Free Zone, will be skipped.

Project Implementation, Monitoring, and Evaluation (original: US$ 1.5 million; revised: US$ 1.3
million):

This is to maintain the PCU and strengthen its institutional capacity of for management, coordination,
monitoring and evaluation of the Project, including: (i) fiduciary (i.e., fmancial and procurement
management); (ii) environmental and social assessments; (iii) preparation of Project reports; (iv)
processing of contracts and tender evaluation; (v) monitoring and evaluation of Project activities; and
(vi) related activities on Project management and implementation, all through the provision of
technical advisory services and Training, Operating Costs and the acquisition of goods.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented in Lome, its surrounding areas and main urban centers.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSUOI )
 Yacouba Konate (GSUOI )

 6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OPIBP 4.01        Yes           The ongoing operation is a technical
                                                          assistance (T A) project without
                                                          physical interventions. Studies under
                                                          component 3 aim to support/explore
                                                          feasibility of a new free zone which
                                                          may induce potential adverse
                                                          impacts. The TORs for the feasibility
                                                          study were publicly disclosed, and
                                                          include the preparation of a strategic
                                                          environmental and social impact
                                                          assessment.
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04                No             The project is not expected to impact
                                                          on any natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No             The project does not involve
                                                          afforestation nor is expected to
                                                          impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No             No pest management is foreseen
                                                          under the project.
Physical Cultural Resources OPIBP 4.11     No             No large excavations or movement of
                                                          earth is foreseen under the project,
                                                          and the project not expected to
                                                          impact on physical cultural property.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No             There are no indigenous peoples in
                                                          the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OPIBP 4.12        No             No land acquisition is expected to be
                                                          needed for the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No             The project does not involve
                                                          construction or reliance on dams.
Projects on International Waterways OPIBP No              The project does not affect
7.50                                                      international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OPIBP 7.60      No             The project is not located in a
                                                          disputed area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
 The restructuring will include the following changes:
 (i) change in loan closing date for an early closing by 06/30/2016 (from initially 12/31/16);
 (ii) cancellation of the amount ofUS$7 million (equivalent to XDR 5,0l3,069.79);
 (iii) re-allocation of all remaining funds into Cat 1;
 (iv) Change in disbursement estimates;
 (v) change in components and costs, specifically,
     (a) Inclusion of a new activity into component 1 "Support to investment Climate Reforms", sub-
      component 1.1, i.e., the procurement of a server for the Togolese Commercial and Credit Registry
      (Registre du Commerce et du Credit Mobilier, RCCM);
      (b) Drop of initial sub-component 1.2. "Support to the Land Registry", to be replaced by support
      related to another Doing Business indicator "Dealing with Construction Permits", aiming at
      introducing a single window for the issuance of construction permits, including the revision of
      existing regulations, a workshop to validate the recommendations of that revision, and TA and
      goods support to put the single window in place;
      (c) Drop of Component 2 "Support to the Development of Entrepreneurial Capacities";
      (d) Limitation of activities for Component 3 "Support to the Development of Free Zone" to the
      completion of the feasibility study, for which only the first step has been completed so far. The
      TORs for the feasibility study were publicly disclosed, and include the preparation of a strategic
      environmental and social impact assessment. A quantitative study to complement the qualitative
      study already completed is work in progress. The elaboration of recommendations on the
      operationalization of the Free Zone (business model, institutional set-up, and action plan), building
      on the two foregoing reports, is still outstanding. TA for the implementation of the Strategy of the
      new Free Zone (for which an RPF and ESMF were prepared under the original project), will be
      dropped.


1.       Safeguard issues related to the Togolese Free Zone (Component 3):

1. 1. Background on the Existing Togolese Free Zone

The current design of the existing Togolese Free Zone (TFZ) is unusual, as the zone is organized more
in the form of an organizational umbrella than a geographically defined location: The TFZ covers
around 60 businesses at various locations, mainly in Lome. In addition, the TFZ currently owns two
plots of land (72 hectares and 35 hectares) in the Lome port zone, to which the Togolese Government
recently also added plots of land of around 140 hectares (undeveloped) at a location 20 km North of
Lome, and maintains a 30 ha plot near Kara in the North of the country as part of the Free Zone.

Building on the analyses undertaken for the 2010 Country Economic Memorandum and during project
preparation, there is a consensus on the need to develop a new Free Zone model, as the current Free
Zone model is unsustainable. However, in the present situation, it is not possible to make any concrete
propositions on what and where will be the future strategic positioning of the new Free Zone, as there
is first a need to undertake a number of feasibility studies including qualitative and quantitative
diagnostics on aspects like strategic planning, infrastructure and environmental management needs
assessment, financial and economic models.

This preliminary analysis would therefore allow the Government to determine the strategic focus of
the new Free Zone (or Special Economic Zone), including identifying its most appropriate
geographical location, which is not yet known.

The project will finance technical assistance to develop a feasibility study on options to establish a
 new Free Zone including Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment work. Under the original
 project the output of this technical assistance at the end of the project would be a development plan for
 a new Free Zone, validated by the Government of Togo, which would be presented to private
 investors, and an RPF was prepared to help guide management of potential resettlement. However as
 now to be restructured, the TA will be limited to a feasibility study, and OP 4.12 is not triggered.


 1.2. Togolese Free Zone: potential environmental     issues

The existing Togolese Free Zone counts around 60 businesses operating in various sectors, notably:
agribusiness, wood and construction materials, textiles, medicines and cosmetics, services, plastic and
wrapping and metal works. The operations of these businesses can have negative environmental and
social impacts.

An environmental audit has been conducted on the current Zone, concluding that the existing legal,
regulatory and institutional framework is satisfactory. In addition, the audit notes that, overall, Free
Zone enterprises are operating in an adequate environmental situation. In particular, these enterprises
have implemented relatively sound waste management and have applied environmental good
practices. The audit also highlighted a number of areas where there is limited compliance (on the side
of Free Zone enterprises) with environmental good practices (such as the necessity to check the quality
of wastewater once a month, the necessity to have wastewater treatment systems or the necessity to
clearly identify recipients which contain used oils). The audit also provided detailed recommendations
to improve compliance with environmental good practices. Finally, the audit recommends the
development of an environmental management system as well as capacity strengthening in
environmental good practices for key stakeholders.

As indicated earlier, the Terms of reference for the feasibility study include a strategic environmental
and social assessment, which should help the Togolese Government in its future decision making
process.

2. Other potential environment issues

The project has funded the rehabilitation (very minor rehabilitation: painting, small electrical works
and partitioning) of a building housing the one-stop shop for enterprise creation (Centre de Formation
d'Entreprises, CFE). The Project Coordination Unit has ensured that the firm handling the
rehabilitation works had as an annex to its contract the environmental and social management clauses
for construction works.

There are no environmental or social issues of concern to be expected from the newly added activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project will provide technical assistance to the Government of Togo and the Free Zone to study
the feasibility of a new Free Zone I Special Economic Zone. This technical assistance will include
guidance on and consideration of social and environment issues (see following section).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
w   \




        assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
        The Terms of Reference for the Feasibility Study includes the preparation of a strategic environmental
        and social assessment.
        5. Identify the key 'stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
        saf~uard policies, with an emphasis 00 potentially affected people.



        8. Disclosure Requirements
                                                                 --   -----     ---_._--              ------
        IT the project triggers tbe Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
        respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
        Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
        If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
        N/A

        C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate. Level
        The World Bank Poliey 00 Disclosure of Information
                                          -                                                             NA [
        Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World      Yes [Xl     No [   ]            1
        Bank's Infoshop?
        Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public          Yes [Xl     No [   1     NA[    1
        place ill a form and language that are understandable and accessible
        to project-affected. groups and local NOOs?
        An Safeguard Policies
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [Xl     No [   ]     NA (   J
        responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
        related to safeguard policies?
                                                                 -
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [Xl     No [   1     NA [   1
        the project cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Ycs   rx:   No [   ]     NA (   1
        the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
        safeguard policies?
        Have satlsfactory implementation arrangements' been. agreed with       Yes [Xl     No [   ]     NA [   1
        the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
        legal documents?


        In. APPROVALS

         ask Team Lcader(s):
        Approved By:
        Safeguards Advisor:                                                                Y/ztY      20/,5
        Practice Manager/Manager:
