                                                                                            102155

                          ffiTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                    RESTRUCTLrnrrNGSTAGE




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          12-Dec-2015
I. BASIC ffiFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Tonga                I Project ID:             Ip131250
 Project Name:                 Tonga Energy Road Map Institutional and Regulatory Framework
                               Strengthening Project
 Task Team Leader(s):          Roberto Gabriel Aiello
 Estimated Board Date:         25-Jun-2012
 Managing Unit:                GEE02
  Sector(s):                   General energy sector (100%)
 Theme(s):                     Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:       4.00                      Total Bank Financing:    12.90

 Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                         Amount
      Borrower                                                                                      1.10
      Asia Sustainable and Alternative Energy Program                                               0.40
      Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                                             2.50
      Total                                                                                         4.00
  Environmental Category:      B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred        No
  project?



  2. Project Development Objective(s)
  The original project development objective (PDO) was to support the strengthening of the institutional
  and regulatory framework of the Tonga Energy Roadmap (TERM).

  The proposed new PD~ is to support the strengthening of the institutional and regulatory framework
of the Tonga Energy Roadmap (TERM) and facilitate the implementation of future renewable energy
projects. The new PD~ reflects the change in the scope of original activities under Component 2 and
the indicators are being adjusted accordingly.


3. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening the Energy Sector Framework and Structure (AusAIDIPRIF
US$0.70 million; ASTAE US$0.30; GOT US$ US$ 1.00 million). This component will be
implemented by TERM IU and will focus on strengthening the functioning of the Unit, and on
technical assistance support including in the areas of energy sector policy; environmental and social
safeguards frameworks; petroleum price risk management strategy; a detailed survey of electricity-use;
and developing a Communications Plan for TERM to rally key stake-holders around the TERM·'s
long-term goals and activities being implemented and, thus, mitigate risks/misinformation that may
arise. The latter will include awareness raising and dissemination material in local language.

Component 2: Preparing TPL for Renewable Energy Supply.              This component is implemented
by TPL: (i) system modeling to determine the most cost effective way to diversify energy generation,
with a focus on achieving a high.long-term renewable energy penetration; (ii) design and specification
of upgrades to control and protection systems to ensure reliable operation of the system with high
levels of renewable energy generation and the implementation of some of those systems; (iii) the
development of regulations and procedures that encourage further investment in the generation sector;
and (iv) the development of a generation system implementation plan for the period of five years
(2012 through 2017), focusing on specific renewable energy technology projects such as solar, wind,
biomass and biofuel, but also covering energy storage options and demand side management.


The current closing date of the PRIF grant (TF12699) and the ASTAE grant (TF-12318) is December
31,2015.     This Level-1 restructuring seeks approval to extend the closing dates of the Asia
Sustainable and Alternative Energy (ASTAE) Program Multi-Donor Trust Fund Grant (TF-12318) and
the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) Grant (TF-12699) to allow adequate time for the
TERM-IU to finalize the petroleum study, the energy policy work, and the environmental and social
guidelines under Component 1 of the Project, and for Tonga Power Limited (TPL) to finance network
upgrades under Component 2 to enable the installation of future renewable generation in Tongatapu.
This is the second restructuring of the Project. The previous. restructuring was also a Level-2
restructuring, approved by the Country Director on December 18, 2014.

This is the second restructuring of the project, the previous one was a Level-2 restructuring approved
by the Country Director on December 18, 2014 to extend the closing date of the ASTAE grant from
December 31, 2014 to the present closing date of December 31, 2015 consistent with the PRIF grant.
The task team seeks to extend these closing dates by additional twelve months i.e., to December 31,
2016. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is required to cover safeguards for network
upgrade investments as proposed new activities under Component 2. The Environmental Assessment
(EA) Category has been changed from C to B and a new Policy has been triggered: OP4.01
Environmental Assessment.



TPL plans to use the funds available under Component 2 for "the procurement and installation of
system upgrade equipment" in order to invest in priority investments that will enable up to 20 percent
renewable energy generation penetration. This is an outcome of system modelling under Component
2, and involves the installation of up to 8 kilometers (km) of new l l-kilovolt (kv) distribution lines
(either installed underground or overhead on poles) to create a complete network "ring" on the grid.
This will provide greater stability to accommodate fluctuations of intermittent renewable energy
generation output and (relatively common) line faults.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics    relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project location for the network upgrades is in suburban Nuku'alofa, Tongatapu Island, Tonga.
Along the Skm route are residential and semi-rural properties, with some commercial activity. The
entire works are expected to be conducted within the road reserve (under Government of Tonga
control), although there is a small possibility that trees on private (non-road reserve) land may require
trimming or removal. There are no natural habitats or forests in the area of influence.

The project location for the environmental and social guidelines prepared under Component 1 is the
entire Kingdom of Tonga.

It is noted that there will be many network upgrades in the next decade, to enable an even greater
percentage of renewable energy generation on the Tongatapu grid, and to further improve the
reliability and resilience of the network. The system modelling proposes a number of works to be
completed by TPL, including automation, changing the way the Popua power station is operated and
replacing and upgrading assets (including the sub-marine cable across the lagoon). Safeguards
screening of these other activities, particularly on the sub-marine cable, has concluded that there are no
'linked' projects with the proposal funded by this project. The sub-marine cable upgrade and this
proposal can be completed independently to achieve different outcomes for the network, and one
project does not rely <?n the other.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)


6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              Screening has identified low risk of
                                                                environmental and social impact, from
                                                                the installation and operation of power
                                                                lines installed to improve the
                                                                performance and resilience of the
                                                                Tongatapu energy grid (Component 2) ...
                                                                The benefits include the ability for
                                                                Tonga to invest in a larger proportion of
                                                                renewable energy generation to offset
                                                                diesel generation.
                                                                The EMP provides mitigation measures
                                                                that will be implemented and managed
                                                                by Tonga Power Limited, the
                                                                implementing agency for the
                                                                Component.
                                                                Component 1 includes the preparation of
                                                                the Framework, or guidelines for
                                                          environmental and social management in
                                                          the energy sector. The TOR includes
                                                          the requirement for the outputs to be
                                                          consistent with all safeguard policies.
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04                No             There are no natural habitats in the area
                                                          of influence.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No             There are no forests in the area of
                                                          influence.
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No             There is no pest management under this
                                                          project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     No             The footprint of the power line
                                                          equipment required for Component 2 is
                                                          very small and in highly modified
                                                          environments along road reserves.
                                                          There is very low likelihood of
                                                          discovering physical cultural resources
                                                          in the area of influence.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No             There are no groups of indigenous
                                                         peoples present in, or have collective
                                                         attachment to, the project area that meet
                                                         the criteria of this policy.
Involuntary Resettlement OPIBP 4.12       No             There will be no involuntary
                                                         resettlement of people, businesses or
                                                         structures. Under power line
                                                         construction Component 2 there may be
                                                         a requirement to trim or remove trees
                                                         and other vegetation in order to install
                                                         and maintain overhead or underground
                                                         equipment ... These social impacts will be
                                                         managed in the EMP in accordance with
                                                         OP4.01.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No             This project does not involve the
                                                         construction of dams or rely on the
                                                         performance of an existing dam or a dam
                                                         under construction.
Projects on International Waterways OPIBP No             No studies or activities are proposed
7.50                                                     international waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No             No studies or activities are proposed in
                                                         disputed areas.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no potential impacts that are large scale, significant and   lor irreversible. The EMP
identifies the key issues requiring mitigation are the identification of road reserve to ensure that no
private I non-Government land is occupied, small scale earthworks, health and safety or workers and
bystanders (because of electrocution risks), and the trimming of trees that would interfere with the
alignment. The EMP has industry-standard mitigation measures to address all of these issues.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The upgrade will enable the ongoing investment in renewable energy generation for the Tongatapu
grid (up to 20%), providing environmental, social and economic benefits from the reduction in diesel
electricity generation.
Ongoing maintenance of overhanging trees will be required to protect the assets. The greenhouse gas
sulphur hexachoride used in switchgears will be avoided in the procurement of equipment, and
managed in existing assets to avoid discharges to the atmosphere.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Technical consultants for TPL have modeled a number of scenarios to improve penetration of
renewable energy generation in the Nuku'alofa grid. A technical report has been produced: Tonga
Energy Roadmap Institutional and Regulatory Framework Strengthening. Upgrade of Grids and
Preparing the Utility for Operations with Renewable Energy Plants-Stage 2-Modeling of Renewable
Energy Penetration Scenarios. The proposed network upgrade has been prioritised due to the impact
on the renewable energy penetration on the grid. The screening of safeguards showed that the impact
of this alternative was considered low, and provided a large benefit to enable Tonga to improve the
amount of renewable energy generation on the grid.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures- described.
TPL will be responsible for the implementation of the EMP. TPL has an internal Environmental
Health and Safety (EHS) system, and has undertaken recent energy projects funded by New Zealand
Foreign Affairs and Trade, and Asian Development Bank. The company therefore has good
experience with their own processes and systems, and the safeguards policies of other donors. Staff
undertake training in EHS, and there is capacity to supervise and undertake the mitigation measures in
the EMP, as part of business as usual.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the five town offices in the project area and the land owners and occupiers
who live or work along the proposed power line route. Town offices have been notified of the project
and the EMP. The EMP has been disclosed on TPL' s website with the opportunity for any member
of the public to comment. Before TPL will undertake the work, they will notify the land owners and
occupiers. Consultation will be free, open and without coercion. People will be informed about the
work and the EMP, and how they can provide feedback, ask questions or make a complaint.


B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Management Plan
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      o I-Sep-20 15
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   1 S-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tonga                                                                        24-Sep-20 15
Comments:
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NA
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure


Comments: Incorporated in the EMP
Indigenous Peoples Development PlanlFramework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NA
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure


Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/ Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]         No [      NA [     ]
OPIBP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [    ]    No [    ] NA [X]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [    ]    No [    ] NA [X]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OPIBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [    ]    No []     NA[X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [      ]    No []     NA [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
