                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 120423


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 10, 2017

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Tunisia                            Project ID: P164625
                                            Additional Project ID (ifany):
Project Name: Tunisia-Italy Power Interconnector - Project Preparation TA
Task Team Leader: Moez Cherif
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 23,       Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2017
2017.
Managing Unit: GEE05                        Lending Instrument: IPF
Sector: Energy
Theme:




Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing                  Simple []                 Repeater []
Is this a transferred project          Yes []                    No [X]


B. Project Objectives:

The PDQ is to support the Government of Tunisia in evaluating the feasibility of the proposed Tunisia-
Italy lnterconnector.

C. Project Description:

The proposed Project (preliminary estimated cost: US$ 12.80 million) will comprise the following
components:

    a) Component 1: Preparation Studies (preliminary estimated cost: US$ 9.65 million): this
        component would consist of the following three studies:
•   Terrestrial and Marine Survey Study. The purpose of the terrestrial and marine feasibility
    study is to determine the optimal site locations for: (i) the area converter station; (ii) the DC
    cable route from the landing point of the marine cable on the coast to the converter station
    on land; (iii) and the AC cable route from the converter station to the grid node. The study
    will
         identify the territorial and environmental characteristics of the line's passageway and
         area to prepare for the subsequent permitting process;
         look at any archeological, landscape, hydro, geological, and environmental implications;
         and
         complete sea-bed route, geotechnical, archeological, and environmental surveys and
         reports.
    Based on the public consultation, marine survey, and technical analysis, potential
    routes and landing points of the Elmed interconnector will be determined. The
    Terrestrial and Marine Survey Study needs to be carried out in close collaboration
    with the ESIA Consultants. Both studies need to be prepared by independent
    consultants, but in close collaboration and in parallel. The ESIA study will start two
    months after the start of the Survey Study. The ESIA Consultants will have an
    important say in the selection of all the project sites. The environmental and social
    impacts on the project sites, the archeology, landscape, terrestrial route and the sea-
    bed are the responsibility of the ESIA Consultants.

•   Network Study. The study will be performed based on ENTSO-E Guidelines and will
    determine the electrical project scheme (monopolar/bipolar grid node connection and
    networks reinforcements), the feasible technology and rated power of the link; the
    performance required to the DC system; social economic welfare and other indicators; the
    implications of the project on the transmission capacity and congestion at the Northern
    Italian border; the maximum amount of renewable energy to be integrated into the Tunisian
    network. This component is aimed at verifying the security of the two systems when the
    Elmed line is operational, studying the system behavior during contingencies and grid
    component switching, and evaluating the system reliability and resilience. It will also
    confirm and identify any network reinforcements that may be required for the safe
    operation of the Italian and Tunisian grids.

•   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
     The study will prepare an assessment of the environmental and social impacts of the Elmed
     lnterconnector and recommend measures to reduce, mitigate, and address these impacts in
     Tunisia on the marine route and in Italy. The ESIA Consultants will closely collaborate with
     the Survey Study Consultant with regard to site selection of all project sites and line routes,
     since an adequate site selection significantly reduces the environmental and social impacts
     of the project. The environmental assessment will include and assess the impacts on
     terrestrial and marine biodiversity at the project sites, pollution, broader ecosystem
    ,impacts, and water/pollution from construction. The Environmental and Social Management
     Plan (ESMP) will develop effective mitigation measures for identified environmental and
     social impacts and risks, as well the management expected health and safety risks during
     construction and operation. The ESMP will recommend that the Contractors prepare and
     implement their own Construction ESMP (CESMP) and a comprehensive Health & Safety
     Plan. The ESMP will also describe the responsibilities of Contractors, Supervising Engineers,
               the project developer and other stakeholders with regards to environmental and social
               management, as well as health and safety during co nstruction and operation and the
               experienced staff with international experience which need to be recruited for this purpose.
               The ESIA Consultant will also be responsible for obtaining the environmental permits in
               Tunisia and Italy.


               The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and social assessment will assess the potential social
               impacts of the project, including land acquisition required for the project and the
               resettlement that may result. In addition, the social assessment will assess the loss of
               livelihoods and identify interventions to mitigate the impact. This social assessment will
               examine the potential gender risks that the project may pose, particularly with respect to
               resettlement and loss of livelihoods.


               In terms of citizen engagement, the ESIA will use the findings from the public consultations
               and the technical studies to develop a report that will include an archeological study, a
               landscape study, a geological study, and environmental documentations. Environmental/
               social assessments and documentations will be carried out in line with Italian laws, Tunisian
               laws and World Bank Performance Standards under OP 4.03 and policies', and will assess
               the potential impacts on the sea-bed, in Tunisia and Italy. Due to the public private
               partnership (PPP) nature of the interco nnector, the ESIA will be prepared in acco rdance with
               the Bank's Performance Standards, in addition to relevant Tunisian, Italian and European
               guidelines.


      b) Component 2: Transaction Advisory (preliminary estimated cost: US$ 2.45 million). Making a
           decision on the commercial, regulatory, and financial structure of the Elmed interconnector
           and identifying the agreements necessary for its implementation will require comprehensive
           support that will be accommodated through this component. Specifically, this component will
           include advisory work to the Government of Tunisia and to the implementing sponsor through
           El med Etudes throughout the following tasks:
                additional economic analysis to assess the impact of higher renewable energy targets and
                more integration of Maghreb electricity systems on the interconnector;
               agreeing on the commercial and regulatory structure;
                putting the agreed structure in place through establishing the project vehicle and drafting
               any necessary regulations, contracts, codes, etc regulating access to and use of the line;
               supporting the transaction design, including ownership and governance arrangements for
               the line, approach to procurement, environmental and social management and framework
               for providing access to the link and charging for its use;
               developing the financial model assessing the viability of the project vehicle;
               negotiating and securing the necessary financing for the Elmed lnterconnector, including
               assessing equity from the sponsors, and liaising with private providers and other DFls.




1 The analysis and the consultations to be carried in conjunction with the safeguards documents should have a gap analysis of the

three legal frameworks, and inform which ones should be applied.
     c) Component 3: Project management (preliminary estimated cost: US$ 0.70 million). This
         component will cover project management costs of Elmed Etudes, excluding any wages of
         either El med Etudes, STEG or Terna. This will include the following types of tasks:
          • Preparation of technical specifications for several procurement packages, including
              environmental, social and technical assessment in order to define the hypothesis line
              route and internal landing points (i.e., studies undertaken for Component 1). This
              information will be used as data input for the technical specifications of the packages.
          • Technical assessment of the tender proposal during the World Bank procurement phase.
          • Technical monitoring of the actions and approval of final reports.
          • Participation and organization of co-ordination meetings.
          • At the end of the first part of networks studies (undertaken in Component 1), a list of
              network reinforcements, not yet planned by STEG and Terna could be defined. In this
              case, a pre-feasibility assessment would be necessary in order to assess if the electrical
              scheme identified by the network study is feasible and coordinate its timely realization
              with the overall project.
          • Technical consultations with the supplier of HVDC system.
          • Finally, support to communication efforts would be available as part of project
              management (i.e. capacity to handle communications, stakeholder dialogue, possible
              opposition, the media, etc.).

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The physical infrastructure that is being supported by the proposed TA project is a 192 km, 600 MW
undersea high-voltage direct current (HVDC) interconnector between Italy and Tunisia. The Elmed
lnterconnector will enable trade in electricity between Tunisia and Italy. The interconnector consists of a
192km of undersea cable through the Mediterranean Sea between Italy and Tunisia, a 5km underground
cable in Tunisia, and a 32km underground cable in Italy. In addition to the HVDC interconnector, the
project consists of two HVDC converter stations. One of the stations is located at El Haouaria, in the Cap
Bon area of Tunisia. The other station is in Partanna in Sicily, Italy.

The Elmed interconnector requires significant reinforcements to the power systems in both Tunisia and
Italy. These include the construction of a new 80-km double-circuit 400 kV link between the converter
station at El Haouaria and the bulk transmission system of Tunisia at a new 400 kV substation at
Mornaguia. On the Italian side, additional reinforcements are also anticipated, notably the construction
of the new double circuit 400 kV Chiaramonte - Ciminna line. This latter reinforcement is currently
under development.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Effective ESMS:

The project is expected to be implemented by Societe Tunisienne de l'Electricite et du Gaz (STEG), in
close collaboration with the Italian power network owner and operator TERNA.

STEG and TERNA will identify staff with expertise in environmental and social safeguards management,
as well as on health and safety, who will contribute to the supervision of all studies that are supported
by the TA project, including the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the
interconnector.
    Beyond this TA project, it is expected that the governments of Tunisia and Italy will form a public-private
    partnership (PPP) to develop the Elmed lnterconnector; the PPP entity will be responsible for developing
    an environmental and social management system "ESMS" and for identifying, assessing and managing
    environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the Private Sector Activity 2, all in accordance
    with the World Bank Performance Standards.

    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

    Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    Antoine Lema, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Robert Robelus, Environmental Safeguards Consultant

    II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

    Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes           No          TBD
    PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                         X
    and Social Risks and Impacts

The studies that are supported by the project aim to enable the development of the Elmed
interconnector, which is expected to be a category A project consistent with submarine HVDC links
across seas. The interconnector could have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive,
diverse, or unprecedented. For the marine part, during installation, maintenance and repair work and
removal phase, these environmental impacts may concern seabed disturbance with impacts on marine
biodiversity, damage/disturbance of organisms, re-suspension of contaminants, visual disturbance,
noise (vessels, laying machinery) and emissions and wastes from vessels. During operational phase, the
impacts may be related to the introduction of artificial hard substrate, to the electromagnetic fields and
to thermal radiations. For the terrestrial part that will be buried, during installation, operation,
maintenance and repair work and removal phases, the environmental impacts may concern terrestrial
habitat alteration, and forest fires. Other impacts are related to the management of hazardous wastes
and occupational and community Health and Safety. All these impacts may affect an area broader than
the sites or facilities subject to physical works especially in coastal and marine areas.

A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared prior to appraisal of the TA project to describe
the consultation plans during the preparation of the ESIA. During its implementation, Elmed Etudes is
responsible to retain independent environmental and social assessment experts not affiliated with the
project to carry out the ESIA for the interconnector. Elmed Etudes will consult project-affected groups
and local nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) about the project's environmental and social aspects
and takes their views into account. El med Etudes will initiate such consultations as early as possible.

Relevant environmental guidelines can be found in the documents referred to in the footnotes below
3456
    Before appraisal, the Bank will disclose an Environmental & Social Review Summary (ESRS),




2 Please see the definition of Private Sector Activity in OP 4.03
3 WBG EHS Guidelines: General and Electric Power Transmission and Distribution
4
  WBG EHS Guidelines for Ports, Harbors and Terminal
Performance Standards (please explain why)                              I    Yes      I    No       I    TBD
incorporating a Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), as well as any relevant safeguards instruments like
TO Rs of relevant studies.

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                      I     X       I             I
   The ESIA will specify labor conditions and Health and Safety aspects to be applied during
construction and operation of the interconnector by all sub-contractors, contractors, and developers.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                      I     X       I             I
    Pollution prevention and other environmental management responsibilities will be part of the ESIA
and will be implemented by the Developer, the Contractors, sub-contractors of the interconnector if it
goes ahead. The client will refer to EHS Guidelines or other internationally recognized sources, as
appropriate, when evaluating and selecting resource efficiency and pollution prevention and control
techniques for the project.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                            I     X       I             I
     The ESIA will evaluate the risks and impacts to the health and safety of the Affected Communities
during the interconnector life-cycle and will establish preventive and control measures consistent with
good international industry practice (GIIP), such as in the World Bank Group Environmental, Health and
Safety Guidelines (EHS Guidelines) or other internationally recognized sources. The ESIA will identify
risks and impacts, including any potential non-local labor influx, workers camp management and
propose mitigation measures that are commensurate with their nature and magnitude. These measures
will favor the avoidance of risks and impacts over minimization.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                    I      X       I             I
    As the interconnector project is expected to induce land acquisition in Tunisia and Italy for
the terrestrial portion of the interconnector, the project will help the client to prepare a resettlement
action plan (RAP) including consultations with various stakeholders in both countries, a social impact
assessment and costed mitigation measures, in parallel with the environmental impact assessment.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                               X
Management of Living Natural Resources                                 I              I             I
     The ESIA will determine how PS6 is to be applied to the interconnector in case it determined that it
will affect or modify, natural and critical marine and terrestrial habitats. The ESIA will consider direct and
indirect project-related impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem services and identify any significant
residual impacts, as well as cumulative impacts. This process will consider relevant threats to
biodiversity and ecosystem services, especially focusing on habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation,
invasive alien species, hydrological changes, nutrient loading, and pollution. It will also take into account
the differing values attached to biodiversity and ecosystem services by Affected Communities and,
where appropriate, other stakeholders. The ESIA will consider project-related impacts across the
potentially affected landscape or seascape.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                               I              I     X       I
    There are no indigenous people in the project area.
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                I              I             I     X
    The ESIA will identify and protect cultural heritage if relevant by ensuring that

5 Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic ( the "OSP AR Convention")
reports on environmental impacts of submarine cables
https ://qsr2 0 l O. ospar. org/media/assessments/p004 3 7 _Cables. pdf
6
  Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution (Barcelona Convention)
    Performance Standards (please explain why)                                       I     Yes        I     No        I    TBD
    internationally recognized practices for the protection, field-based study, and documentation of
    cultural heritage are implemented. Where the risk and identification process determines that
    there is a chance of impacts to cultural heritage, the client will retain competent professionals to
    assist in the identification and protection of cultural heritage.

OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways is not triggered: The Project supports a number of
TA studies for the feasibility stage of the Elmed interconnector. The route of the planned
interconnector crosses the Mediterranean Sea between Tunisia and Sicily, which is divided
between the two countries in accordance with the Italy-Tunisia Delimitation Agreement of 1971.
The Elmed interconnector, which will be laid at the bottom of the sea, will not be using any
water and is not expected to cause pollution to the sea route. The Bank will ensure that the
borrower respects the relevant international environmental treaties and agreements, including the
1995 Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the
Mediterranean (Barcelona Convention).

OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas is not triggered.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the TO Rs for the ESIA and RAP
   would be disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: No QER is envisaged; a Decision
   Meeting is scheduled for October 18, 2017

B.     For Category C or Category Fl projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for preparing the
       PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing7 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: Due to the TA nature
of this project, safeguard-related studies will not be prepared before appraisal. Before appraisal, the
Bank will disclose an Environmental & Social Review Summary (ESRS), incorporating a Stakeholders
Engagement Plan (SEP), as well as any relevant safeguards instruments like TO Rs of relevant studies.




7   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the Bank's website and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.
IV. APPROVALS

Si ned and submitted b :
Task Team Leader:

                           Nina Chee
   Comments:
 Practice Mana er:         Erik Fernstrom
   Comments:
