                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
                                               0                                                         Report No.: ISDSC15700

                                   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2015
                                   I. BASIC INFORMATION
                                     A. Basic Project Data
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                      Country:              Tunisia                        Project ID:      P157919
                                      Project Name:         Tunisia FIP preparation
                                      Team Leader(s):       Taoufiq Bennouna
                                      Estimated Date        14-Dec-2015
                                      of Approval:
                                      Managing Unit:        GENO5                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                           Instrument:
                                      Sector(s):            Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
                                      Theme(s):             Biodiversity (10%), Climate change (50%), Other environment and natural
                                                            resources management (40%)
                                      Financing (in USD Million)
                                      Total Project Cost: 0.25                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                                      Financing Gap:           0
                                         Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                                        Climate Investment Funds                                                                        0.25
                               O
                               -      Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                                      Category:
                               0

                                     B. Project Development Objective(s)
                                     The Development Objective of this activity is to support the elaboration of Tunisia FIP investment
                                     plan and R-PP
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                     C. Project Description
                                     In agreement with the Tunisian Government, the Multilateral Development Banks hold a scoping
                                     mission in Tunisia in September 2015 in order to inform key stakeholders on the FIP process and
                                     agree on an action plan for the elaboration of the FIP/IP and the R-PP. The activities proposed below
                                     are the main finding of this mission. The proposed project activities are as below:
                                     1- Hiring a group of experts or consultant firms to bring institutional and legal expertise in the
                                     following fields: forestry, rangelands, monitoring and evaluation, environmental and social
                                     safeguards, social development, gender, private sector, climate change and REDD+;
                                     2- Organization of meetings and consultation workshops at local and central levels with all
                                     stakeholders;
                                     3- Elaboration of the R-PP and FIP investment plan and the proposed projects concept notes.These
                                     documents will include, as per the FIP operational guideline, specific sections on safeguards.
      D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
      analysis (if known)
      The FIP/IP and R-PP are national wide plans and related to Tunisian Forests and rangelands
0
      E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
      The FIP executing agency is the General Directorate of Forestry (DGF) of the Ministry of
      Agriculture, water resources and Fisheries.
o     The DGF is responsible for applying the forest code and for managing, protecting and developing the
      state forests and rangelands submitted to the country's forest regime. This administration is also
      responsible for (i) Improving sand dune stabilization techniques; (ii) Formulating adapted forest and
      rangelands management plans; (iii) Organizing the sustainable exploitation of wildlife; (iv)
      Organizing and developing hunting, and (v) Protecting nature and creating national parks and natural
      reserves.

      Throughout its very decentralized organization and experience in managing national and
      international projects, the DGF is highly qualified to execute the project, especially since it is co-
      implementing the 'Ecotourism and Desert Biodiversity Conservation Project' and other projects with
      IFAD, AFD, FAO, GIZ and JICA. Moreover, the DGF staffs are fully familiar with Bank safeguard
      policies, having participated in various Bank safeguards training undertaken by Bank safeguards
      specialists, and have overseen the environmental and social issues related to these aforementioned
      projects.
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GENDR)
      Markus Friedrich Vorpahl (GSURR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              the FIP investment plan and the R-PP will
0
      BP 4.01                                              incorportae aspecific sections on social and
                                                           environmental safeguards as per the FIP and
                                                           FCPF/UNREDD guidelines. Throught these
                                                           documents, social and environmental impacts
                                                           will be transparently and inclusively assessed
                                                           and addressed.
                                                           FIP Investement plan and R-PP will set out
                                                           how these plans will catalyze, support and
                                                           measure and monitor the delivery of, inter alia,
                                                           the following (as appropriate):
                                                           i. Demonstrable improvement in social and
                                                           economic well-being of forest dependent
                                                           communities, including poverty reduction,
                                                           equitable benefit sharing, and acknowledgement
                                                           of the rights and role of indigenous peoples and
                                                           local communities
                                                           ii. Protection and enhancement of biodiversity
                                        iii. Strengthened resilience of ecosystems, with
                                        associated ecosystem services
                                        iv. Economic viability

                                        FIP uses safeguard principles and guidelines
                                        from the Strategic Climate Fund, FIP Design
                                        documents and FIP Investment Criteria and
                                        Financing Modalities during the selection
                                        process. Proposed country programs must
                                        demonstrate clear strategies and a viable
                                        roadmap on achieving greenhouse gas
                                        mitigation and sustainable development while
                                        also implementing safeguards.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The FIP investement plan and the R-PP will
                                        assess the national strategy on Biodiversity
                                        "Priority Areas" and "Gap Analysis" during the
                                        participatory planning process to ensure key
                                        policy and regulatory recommendations from
                                        the readiness phase will be taken into account
Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The R-PP and the FIP/IP will be elaborated
                                        largely on the experience of the country on the
                                        forest conservation and Sustainable Forest
                                        Management. During this preparation phase,
                                        these initiatives, the national strategy fot
                                        sustainable management of forests and
                                        rangelands 2-15-2024, and other forestry and
                                        rural development initiatives will be evaluated
                                        in order to ensure lessons are incorporated early
                                        in the design and key social and environmental
                                        risks and potential impacts associated with FIP/
                                        IP and R-PP are considered in they safeguard
                                        sections.
Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Pesticides or spraying equipment are unlikely to
                                        be procured under the FIP/IP.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Physical and cultural resources, if located in the
BP 4.11                                 potential FIP projects areas, will not be
                                        impacted. No heavy excavation will be planned
                                        and any large infrastructure under the potential
                                        projects.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    This policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   The FIP activities will not involve land
4.12                                    expropriation, land acquisition, or relocation or
                                        loss of shelter, for projects interventions. The
                                        FIP would also not accept voluntary land
                                        donation at an individual level.
      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No                   The FIP does not support the commissioning or
                                                                       construction and/or operations related to dams.
      Projects on International                   No                   No international waterways are involved
U     Waterways OP/BP 7.50
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                              This policy is not triggered.
      7.60

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
    IV. APPROVALS
      Team Leader(s):                 Name: Taoufiq Bennouna
      Approved By:
      Safeguards Advisor:             Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                              Date: 30-Oct-2015
      Practice Manager/               Name: Benoit Paul Blarel (PMGR)                                   Date: 02-Nov-2015
      Manager:



      1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
      InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
      affected persons.




0
