INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1077
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tunisia                    Project ID:  P146502
Project Name: TN-Road Transport Corridors (P 146502)
Task Team       Vickram Cuttaree,Andrew Michael Losos
Leader(s):
Estimated       29-Apr-2015                Estimated    08-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Export
development and competitiveness (30%), Regional integration (20 %)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    245.11             Total Bank Financing:  200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   44.20
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     200.00
MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                                           0.91
Total                                                                     245.11
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objectives are (i) to reduce transportation cost and time and improve road
safety on select road corridors between lagging regions in Tunisia and more developed areas and (ii)
strengthen the Ministry of Equipment's capacity in road asset management.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
Component 1: Road Corridor Improvement. The project will improve about 145.5 km of existing
single-lane national and regional road sections on three road corridors. This component would
include: (i) 56 km of National Road 12 between Sousse and Kairouan, (ii) about 65 km of National
Road 4 between El Fahs and Siliana, and (iii) 24.5 km of Regional Road 133 between Zaghouan and
Tunis. Civil works will include widening and upgrading of the road sections when necessary,
upgrading of 17 bridges and improvement of 230 culverts, 52 road intersections, traffic signs and
o        implementation of other road safety measures.
Component 2: Road Network Management Improvement. Project preparation included a preliminary
sector assessment which identified maintenance needs and areas for capacity building. The project
will support the transformation in the way the Ministry of Equipment manages the road network and
plan public investment. This component is divided in two sub-components:
(a)    Sub-Component 2.1: The project will support purchasing monitoring equipment to assist
MET to better manage the national and regional road network. The CETEC has equipment dating
from the 1960s to 1980s which is obsolete. It is therefore indispensable that CETEC's central
laboratory in Tunis, as well as the regional laboratories at Sousse, Kairouan, Zaghouan and Siliana be
equipped with updated materiel. Equipment will be used primarily to support quality control and
supervision of works. The project will also finance the purchase of six vehicles for supervision of the
civil works on the road network. The use of the equipment financed by the loan will not be limited to
the project. Although there are private professional laboratories, their number is considered too small
to ensure proper competition, thereby requiring a public institution to fill the gap. The long-term
plan is to move to a situation with a stronger role for the private sector in road quality control, but the
proposed equipment will support immediate needs to support quality control beyond the project.
(b)    Sub-Component 2.2: The project will support institutional strengthening of MET as it moves
from traditional managerial models of road asset management to a more modem, evidence-based
asset management system supported by information technology. Specific activities will include: (i)
design and implementation of decision-making tools to better plan maintenance and public
expenditure, including lagging regions; (ii) reviewing the role of public and private sector in the
management of the sector, including the use of performance-based contracts for rehabilitation and
maintenance of roads; and (iii) building the capacity of Government staff and the private sector
(contracting industry) on modem asset management and performance-based contracts. The project
will monitor the implementation of this activity, which is expected to be completed by December
2016.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will finance 3 roads including (i) 49 km of National Road 12 between Sousse and
Kairouan, (ii) about 65 km of National Road 4 between El Fahs and Siliana, and (iii) 22 km of
Regional Road 133 between Zaghouan and Tunis. Civil works will include widening and upgrading
of the road sections when necessary, upgrading of 17 bridges and improvement of 230 culverts, 52
road intersections, traffic signs and implementation of other road safety measures.
Rights-of-way exist for National Road 12 and Regional Road 133 and is sufficient along the roads in
rural areas, though some land acquisition will be necessary, particularly around the improvement of
road intersections. Little encroachment was identified during screening; on RN12 and RR1 33 the
Page 2 of 9


﻿census confirmed that less than 10 (non-residential) structures and some fences constructed within
the right of way would be affected. Impacts on RN4 are expected to be less given that the road is
situated in a less populated area. In urban and semi-urban areas, lanes are either already doubled, or
will not be doubled thereby avoiding the need for physical resettlement. There are no known natural
O
U         habitats along National Road 12 and Regional Road 133, but the reduction of man-planted economic
and non-economic trees line along stretches of the roads will need to be managed to mitigate the
environmental impact. Some sections of RN4 pass through forested land and some section of forest
area will be impacted in the widening of this road, especially at Djebel Mansour.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
John R. Butler (GSURR)
Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSURR)
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The policy is triggered since adverse environment impacts
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                are likely to occur if upgrading and/or rehabilitation of
selected roads are not properly planned, designed or
constructed. Environmental impacts can be related to
improper management of issues related to site clearance;
construction waste and debris; slope stability, soil erosion
and sediment control; fugitive dust, noise, spills and other
emissions; storm water and wastewater runoffs etc. The
environmental impact of the cutting of economic and non-
economic trees that line stretches of the roads will need
appropriate mitigation measures. Occupational health and
safety issues associated with road construction workers
and pedestrians and traffic safety will also need
management, particularly in urban areas.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           There are no registered or known natural habitats in the
4.04                                 project area and no adverse impacts are anticipated. Any
potential impacts of the proposed operation on natural
habitats, if found will be defined in the ESIA/ESMP.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          One of the roads, RN4 will pass through designated
forested land. The widening of this road will impact some
sections of the forest cover, and the policy is being
triggered to ensure that appropriate due diligence
measures are taken to address this impact
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           It is not envisaged to procure or use any pesticides under
the project.
Physical Cultural       No           The project is not expected to impact on physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 resources. However, chance finds procedures will be
described in the respective ESMPs and the ESMF to
safeguard any cultural resources that may be discovered
during works or services performed under the project
under any of its components.
Page 3 of 9


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The policy is triggered because the improvement of the
U         OP/BP 4.12                           three road corridors will necessitate land acquisition on
small strips of land along the three roads. Land
acquisition will involve primarily agricultural terrains,
and only few permanent or semi-permanent structures
willould be affected. Identification of affected terrains has
been completed for the two roads for which technical
design was completed will be ready by Appraisal (RN 12
and RR133).
Two draft Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have are
beeneing prepared I in accordance with OP 4.12 to ensure
the application of the appropriate safeguard policies of
National Road 12 and Regional Road 133. On these two
roads, a total of 510 people are affected by the project
with less than 10 non-residential structures affected. No
physical relocation of households will be necessary. 7
informal vendors will be moved a few metres. They will
be able to maintain their businesses; their infrastructure or
income will not be negatively affected.
During the census and public consultation, legacy issues
were identified on RR133, RN12 as well as a bypass off
RN 12. The bypass is not part of the project but there may
be overlaps with PAPs. Preliminary information indicate
this concerns respectively, 10, 157 and 10 parcels on the
o                                              three roads. An audit and remedial Action Plan are being
prepared to ensure affected people receive compensation
in accordance with OP 4.12.
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
prepared to guide the preparation of the RAPs and ensure
application of the appropriate safeguard policies on the
third road for which the technical design will be known
during implementation (RN4).
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                 of any dams as defined under this policy.
Projects on International  No        None of the project roads are expected to be across
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           None of the project roads are expected to be in disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 4 of 9


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project has been assigned to environmental Category B, because it will support the
rehabilitation of existing roads within the current right-of-way and with minimal change in
existing alignments. This is associated with environmental risks which are not significant and have
well-defined mitigation measures. The main types of potential negative impacts which are likely to
occur due to the project implementation are:
- generation of solid and liquid construction wastes;
- dust, noise and vibration due to the use of construction machinery (construction phase), and due
to increased traffic flow (operation phase);
- air pollution by exhaust gases and dust;
- soil damage due to excavation works and borrowing construction machinery;
- soil contamination due to accidental spills of fuel and lubricants;
- water pollution due to improper waste management and accidental fuel and lubricant spills.
- issues related to occupational safety and pedestrian and traffic safety during the construction
phase.
- removal of about 2500 trees during the widening of the three roads
- acquisition of small strips of land along the three roads (affecting 510 project-affected people, or
PAPs, on RN12 and RR133. Significantly less impacts are expected on RN4)
- removal of about 10 structures and some fences constructed within the right-of-way on RN12
and RR133
The above impacts will be minimized or mitigated by the implementation of measures envisaged
by the respective Environmental and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans and
monitored by DGPC
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential positive impacts include improved traffic flow and congestion mitigation effects
(loss of time, reduced emissions due to reduced wait-time), ensure better road safety (fewer
accidents, safer pedestrian crossings) and provide employment opportunities to the local
workforce. This improved connectivity will result in improved employment opportunities and
access and strengthen business revenues due to easier and increased movement of people.
The potential long term impact could include increased traffic movement and associated noise
impact, especially around habited areas which should be mitigated through the implementation of
specific measures, such as sound and safety barriers.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The proposed project does not include new developments; it will be financing the widening and
upgrading of existing roads, therefore no alternatives were considered. It will finance upgrading of
bridges and improvement of road intersections, traffic signs and implementation of other safety
measures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The DGPC has undertaken Environmental Impact Assessments of the three roads and has prepared
an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) for RN4, since the exact road alignment is not yet decided. The DGPC has
prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure application of the appropriate
Page 5 of 9


﻿safeguard policies and to guide the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) .
The RPF and ESMF were consulted with policy level stakeholders and disclosed on Borrower
website and on Infoshop in December 2014. The site-specific ESMP for RN4 will be prepared
O
when the road alignment is finalized and the process of consultations and disclosure will be
followed. The Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for RN 12 and RN 133 have
been completed in coordination with the road design team. In addition to the environmental
mitigation measures, the ESMPs include institutional arrangements for supervision, reporting and
monitoring and training and coordination requirements between the multiple stakeholders.
Screening tools for chance finds procedures have been included to safeguard any cultural
resources that may be discovered. Resettlement Action Plans for RN12 and RR133 have also been
completed in accordance with OP 4.12. The DGPC has hosted site-specific consultations on draft
documents (ESMPs and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)) with all relevant and impacted
stakeholders (including communities, land owners and land users, other relevant agencies at
national and local levels etc.) and the comments and feedback have been incorporated in project
design and ESMPs/RAPs. The final ESMPs/RAPs have been disclosed on Borrower website and
on project specific areas for easy access by all stakeholders prior to Appraisal. The Bank has also
disclosed the two ESMPs and RAPs on Infoshop. The ESMPs will be incorporated in designs and
bidding documents of contractors and implementation documents and will be supervised to ensure
due diligence measures are being strictly followed. Implementation of RAPs form an integral part
of the overall project monitoring and an independent evaluation will be undertaken after
compensations have been paid to ensure there are no outstanding payments or concerns.
A rigorous Grievance system has been put in place for ongoing feedback from project affected
persons, including issues related to involuntary resettlement. The GRM is described in the ESMF/
RPF, as well as ESMP/RAPs for the project. Brochures detailing the GRM process were
distributed during the public consultations.
The MET has had experience working with other IFIs, including the African Development Bank
and the European Investment Bank, but has less familiarity with World Bank safeguards
requirements in recent years. Extensive support has therefore been offered by the Bank during the
preparation of the necessary safeguards documents. The MET has demonstrated strong ownership
in responding to Bank requirements, which is evidenced by them preparing the Resettlement
a          Policy Framework (RPF) in-house, actively participating in briefing and training sessions and
having nominated social and environmental focal points to prepare and implement the social and
environmental safeguards
instruments.
The MET will hire full-time environmental and social expertise to support the project team during
implementation and supervision to ensure compliance with ESMPs and RAPs. Budgetary
provision is included in the ESMPs for technical training of the Borrower's project team at both
national level and local levels in environmental aspects of road design, implementation,
monitoring, reporting and maintenance. These measures will build the capacity of the MET to
manage environmental and social impacts in adherence with international best practice in the
future. The DGPC's main staff specialists for environmental and social/resettlement issues during
project preparation have been assigned to the PIU to handle those issues, and a grievance
mechanism is in place providing citizens affected by the project with multiple points of contact
for their concerns.
Page 6 of 9


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are the DGPC, local municipalities, and other Government bodies.
Their respective roles and responsibilities are clearly spelt out in the ESMF and RPF. Local
communities and road users are direct beneficiaries of the Project. A wider range of the population
of Tunisia will benefit in a longer term from the expected increased access to economic and social
opportunities as well as improved road safety.
Consultations on the ESMF and RPF were held on December 26 in Tunis. The key stakeholders
identified in the ESMF and RPF were invited, though the consultation was also open to members
of the public and included representatives of environmental NGOs. The questions and comments
raised, as well as the answers given are included as an annex in the ESMF. The RPF was
disclosed in-country on December 1 and the ESMF is expected to be disclosed in February on the
website of the MET. During the preparation of the RAPs, consultations have been held with
Project Affected People, representatives of Civil Society as well as NGOs operating in the area.
The DGPC has hosted formal site-specific consultations of draft ESMPs and RAPs in March 2015
with all relevant and impacted stakeholders (including communities, land owners and land users,
other relevant agencies at national and local levels etc). The comments and feedback have been
incorporated in the documents and have been disclosed in country nd in Infoshop in French.
The GRM has been designed to handle the social and environmental questions, concerns and
complaints related to the project. DGPC is responsible for setting up, maintaining and for
monitoring the system. A variety of channels will be available to project affected people and other
stakeholders (in person, via phone, mail and/or email at the local and/or central level). A brochure
detailing the mechanism has been produced and was made available to project affected people
during the public consultations.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
o          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tunisia                                                  23-Apr-2015
Comments: Published on website of the Ministry of Equipment, Habitat, and Land Planning:
http://www.mehat.gov.tn/
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Tunisia                                                  23-Apr-2015
Comments: Published on website of the Ministry of Equipment, Habitat, and Land Planning:
http://www.mehat.gov.tn/
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 7 of 9


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
0
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[    NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[   NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 8 of 9


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Vickram Cuttaree,Andrew Michael Losos
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 24-Apr-2015
O
Practice Manager/     Name: Olivier P. Le Ber (PMGR)           Date: 28-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


