Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1710 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/08/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P095012 
Project Name: Tunisia Integrated Solid Waste Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Dahlia Lotayef 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (100%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Climate change 
(S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IBRD FUND 
4.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
3.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is to support the Government of Tunisia in establishing 
an integrated municipal solid waste management system and improving its health care waste 
disposal system. The project also aims at supporting the Tunisian Government in accessing the 
global markets for Green House Gas emission reduction and identification of opportunities under 
the Kyoto Protocole?s Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).  
 
More specifically, the project aims at:  
 
?
Strengthening the institutional and financial frameworks, developing adequate cost 
recovery mechanisms and promoting the involvement of the private sector into the proposed 
system.  
 
?
Building the necessary capacities for the reduction of the environmental and health risks 
associated with municipal and health care waste services across the entire spectrum and ranging 
from segregation at source, collection, transportation, treatment to final disposal.  
Page  2
?
Supporting the Government of Tunisia in the implementation of its 10th Development 
Plan (2002-2006) that calls for the establishment of nine sanitary landfills and the rehabilitation 
of the existing dump sites.  
 
?
Purchasing Verified Emission Reductions that would be generated from certain CDM 
projects in Tunisia.  Priority projects have already been identified by the project, and will be 
further developed. Upon request, the World Bank will assist the Government of Tunisia in the 
sale of emission reductions from other underlying projects to third party buyers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have 4 main components addressing (i) institutional strengthening and capacity 
building; (ii) municipal solid waste investment projects; (iii) health care waste management 
project; and (iv) solid waste Clean Development Mechanism projects.  
 
Component 1: 
Institutional Support and Capacity Building  (US$3 million)  
 
This component is intended to support the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable 
Development and the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) in order to develop a 
strategic an ISWM Policy and to establish a viable framework for urban solid waste management 
systems ant national and municipal level to achieve strategic objectives and approaches. Focus 
will be mainly on :  
 
a) 
Institutional level: enhancement of the existing institutional framework; improving the 
financial system and developing adequate cost recovery systems; improve the level of 
coordination among municipalities and inter-communality;  
 
b)
Economic/Financial level: identification and adoption of appropriate fee systems and cost 
recovery mechanisms, taking into consideration the capacity of the poorer to pay, create an 
enabling environment for private sector participation, formulation of efficient market rules;  
 
c) 
Technical level: support the development of tender documents, evaluation criteria and 
contracts; development of performance monitoring and benchmarking systems; sensitizing the 
general public to raise its willingness to pay for solid waste services; and organizing awareness 
campaigns on environmental and health impacts of solid waste.  
 
Component 2:  
Investment Component  
 
(US$ 14 million)  
 
a. 
Rehabilitation of the existing cells n? 1, 2 &3 of the Grand Tunis landfill at Jebel Chekir.  
 
b.
Financing the extension of the Jebel Chekir landfill.  
 
c. 
Financing the rehabilitation of 6 existing dumpsites, (in conjunction with the 
establishment of 9 new landfills financed by KfW and the EIB).  
 
d.
Designing and implementing a composting plant project:  
 
Component 3: 
Health Care Waste Management and Reduction of Dioxins, Furans and 
Mercury Emissions (US$ 6 -8 million)  
 
(This component is a GEF funded activity and a separate concept note following the GEF 
criteria and requirements is under development.)  
 
Page  3
This component aims at reducing the environmental threats caused by the emissions of 
persistent organic pollutants (dioxins, furans and mercury) to the environment, by demonstrating 
and promoting best techniques and practices for managing and reducing hazardous healthcare 
wastes.  
 
The project will achieve its objectives through an institutional support component for the 
finalization of the legal and institutional frameworks; implementation of health care waste 
management plans in a select number of facilities; and the iImplementation of 2 demonstration 
HCWM projects, one in Greater Tunis and one in a secondary city.  
 
Component 4: 
Implementation of a Solid Waste Clean Development Mechanism Project 
(US$ 3 million)  
 
The World Bank will purchase Verified Emission Reductions (VERs) that would be generated 
from the solid waste management operations in the Grand Tunis landfill in Jebel Chakir, the nine 
dumpsites and eventually from the emissions reduction of the nitrous oxide from Group 
Chimique?s nitric acid manufacture facility in Gabes.  
 
The purchase agreement will be of 30 to 50 percent of the potential emission reductions 
generated during the period 2006-2012 from the identified projects, which according to the 
preliminary estimates might amount to between 2.45 to 3.7 million tons CO2-equivalent to $12.2 
to $18.5 million. Further, the Bank proposes to buy an additional 1 million tons of emission 
reductions generated in the period 2013-2015, worth almost $5 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in Grand Tunis where the Jebel Chekir landfill is located, and in 
other cities where the dupm sites to be rehabilited are loacted: Bizerte, Sousse, Gabes, Sfax, 
Kairouan and Raoued/Tunis. The GEF project will be implemented in a select number of 
hospitals and clinics, located in Grand Tunis and another city still to be identified.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development, and its National Agency for the 
Protection of the Environment have  the necessary capacity for safeguard policies. The Tunisian 
system is in general relatively advanced in terms of institutional and legal capacity, and this is 
why Tunisia was proposed as one of the two MNA countries for piloting the use of the country 
systems for environmental assessment. Progress has been made concerning one of the major 
discrepancies between the two systems, which is the content of the EMP, A revised decree of EA 
decree No. 362 of 1991 has been prepared, adding three new elements to the EMP (mitigation, 
monitoring and institutional strengthening plans. The decree should be enacted by July 2005.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSRE) 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo (MNSRE) 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (YPP) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
O.P. 4.01 is the only environmental safeguards policy likely to be triggered. As an 
environmental category "A" project, an Environmental Impact Assessment will be carried out 
before appraisal that will cover all the solid waste management related activities (essentially 
rehabilitation of landfill sites) and another environmental impact assessment will be carried out 
for the GEF component relative to hospital waste management. The project intends to be a pilot 
for testing the "country system"approach but the concurrence of the Tunisian authorities has not 
yet been confirmed. In case it is confirmed that the project will be prepared following the 
"country system" approach, the mission will carry out an equivalence assessment as well as an 
acceptability assessment in order to confirm the possibility for this project to be prepared and 
implemented on the basis of the Tunisian environmental regulation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
O.P. 4.12 might be triggered during the course of this project. This will be assessed during 
the course of the upcoming pre-appraisal mission (July 18-July 31). A social scientist will be part 
of the mission and will carry out this assessment.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/07/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The implementing agency has already started the preparation of the necesary EAs for the 
extension of the existing landfill of Jebel Chekir in Grand Tunis, and the EAs for the 
rehabilitation of the 9 dump sites.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
07/07/2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
07/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
