INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC808
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 26, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Tunisia                      Project ID: P064836
Project Name: TN-URBAN WATER           Task Team Leader: Ines Fraile
SUPPLY
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2005  Estimated Board Date: October 25, 2005
Managing Unit: MNSIF                   Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Water supply (90%); Central   Theme: Water resource management (P);
government administration (10%)       Pollution management and environmental
health (P); Regulation and competition
policy (S); Gender (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Environmental Specialist: Jaafar Friaa;
Social Specialist: Concepci6n Esperanza del Castillo
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 50
Other financing amounts by source:                               ($m)
SONEDE (self financing)                                            20
B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed Urban Water Supply Project will support Government of Tunisia and SONEDE
achieve the following development objectives:
*     Strengthening of water supply and sewerage sector policy development and
implementation processes to enhance sector performance, promote private sector
participation and improve sound tariff and subsidy policies
*     Enhancing  of SONEDE's performance through     operating and financial
management capacity building
*     Sustaining the reliability and quality of water service in Greater Tunis and other
urban centers, through added production capacity, and transmission and
distribution network upgrades
C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]
The project investments and technical assistance components will support activities to improve
the policy and regulatory framework in the water supply and sewerage sectors; enhance service
delivery; and strengthen SONEDE's efficiency, autonomy and financial sustainability.



Tentative Project Components                   Million   US$
Dinars equivalent
Policy (to be implemented by Ministry of Agriculture, Environment and  1,0    0,80
Water Resources)
*  Support development and implementation of sector policies
Infrastructure investment (to be implemented by SONEDE)              70.0    56,00
*  Greater Tunis                                               35,0     28,00
- Construction of << ST4 »> treatment plant in Ghdir El Golla
- Construction 2 x 10.000 m3 storage in Tunis
- Rehabilitation of GEG-Ras Tabia pipeline
*  about 40 urban centers: production et distribution system upgrades  35,0  28,00
Capacity Building (SONIEDE)                                         20.0     16.00
Demand management capacity, Conservation program                  9.2      7,36
*  Meters, leak detection, telemetry, instrumentation & controls, flow  9,2  7,36
regulation, radio systems, public awareness programs, training
Institutional strengthening, studies and technical assistance     9,7      7,76
*  Demand studies, customer satisfaction surveys;               0,2      0,16
*  Technical, financial, economic consulting for modernization, training  3,0  2,40
*  Assistance and studies on private sector participation;      0,5      0,40
*  Technical designs, bid documents and supervision of project works;  4,0  3,20
*  Water supply Master Plan studies for other cities            2,0      1,60
Equipmentfor improved utility andproject management               1i1      0,88
*  Hardware & software                                          0,6      0,48
Vehicles                                                     0,5     0,40
Total                                                          91.0      72,8
1 US$ = 1.25 Tunisian Dinar
The "policy and sector reform" component will be implemented by Ministry of Agriculture,
Environment and Water Resources and will include a global assessment of the performance and
reform needs of the water supply and sewerage sectors. Both sectors will be jointly analyzed
given their close interconnection and potential synergies. Such analytical work may identify
reform options of current institutional framework and sector policies (tariffs, sector regulation,
subsidies, etc.), focused in particular on increasing efficiency gains and improving the financing
capacity of the sector through greater competition and PSPs. The scope and specific activities of
this component will be further developed during preparation and first years of implementation
but, given the status of the sector, required reforms may include measures to increase autonomy
and improve the efficiency of existing public sector operators though restructuring and use of
more advanced technologies, as well as advocacy and promotion of private sector development
in the sector.



SONEDE will execute the "infrastructure" and "capacity building" components of the project.
Works will be located in Greater Tunis and in about 40 urban centers across Tunisia. SONEDE
has performed well under Bank operations in the past, and is familiar with Bank procurement
procedures. The project aims at responding to anticipated demand growth and maintaining
current quality levels, by building increased capacity and reliability in the systems. Finally, the
project will support SONEDE's modernization, by strengthening strategic programs and
management capabilities, as well as preparation and supervision of project works.
D. Project location (if known)
Project location comprises the Greater Tunis and about 40 medium size cities. According to
available information, there are no known protected areas or a critical natural habitat in the sub-
project areas and the project is not expected to affect cultural sensitive areas. Most of the 40
cities will be identified prior to appraisal. Final selection of cities will be based on the level of
needs or volume of demand for potable water expected to be unmet without the project, and
expected economic return of sub-project investments.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
SONEDE, which is responsible for implementation of the proposed project works has only
modest experience and expertise in managing and incorporating environmental considerations,
and its environmental division established a couple of years ago needs to be reinforced.
Therefore, training and capacity development for safeguard policies will be part of the
institutional strengthening component of the proposed project.
Tunisia is known as a country especially sensitive to environmental protection and has a
comprehensive enabling legislation framework for environmental impact assessment (ETA).
More specifically, Law No. 91 of 1988 defines the roles of the Agence Nationale de Protection
de l'Environnement (ANPE) and provides obligations for undertaking EIA. ANPE is the
national entity in charge of the management of this EIA system including the review and
approval of EIA reports. ANPE staff participated in many Bank safeguard policies training and
is familiar with the Bank policy. Executive regulations for ETA are defined in Decree No. 91-
362 of March 1991
The project will address under the policy and the capacity building components the
environmental issues of additional wastewater generation caused by new investments in water
supply. Two tools will be considered for this purpose: Strategic Environmental Assessment and
Sector Environmental Assessment. These tools can be implemented during the project, and are
capacity building instruments that should involve the participation of several agencies to
mainstream environmental issues.
In addition, the World Bank's Middle East and North Africa (MNA) region is starting a new
safeguards pilot for institutional strengthening in Tunisia. The objective of the pilot is to test the
transfer of environmental clearances by the Bank to the Government for B Category projects.
This project is proposed as a pilot case for next fiscal year (FY05) to test the national procedures



used by ANPE. For this pilot the MNA environment unit would technically and financially
support the incremental efforts for piloting purposes.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
Some investment sub-projects such as the construction of a water treatment plant, rehabilitation
of a large pipeline, construction of high capacity reservoirs, etc. may have site-specific potential
negative effects unless mitigation measures and environmental management plans are developed
and implemented. The detailed technical parameters of these sub-projects are not yet defined.
All necessary technical designs will not be completed during the preparation stage and
consequently, only a general assessment of possible impacts will be undertaken during project
preparation. This general assessment will follow the approach under the "Draft Manual for
Safeguards Compliance in Demand Driven and Community Development Projects" of the MNA
region. More detailed assessments for each sub-project with potential impacts will be carried out
during project implementation.  SONEDE will manage safeguard compliance for these
investments, with approvals by ANPE and monitored by the Bank.
To this end, the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) would be triggered with site specific
potential impacts that will be managed systematically within the project, using appropriate local
experience and standards.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
During the preparation mission undertaken in January 2004, special attention was given to OP
4.12 on involuntary resettlement. The nature of the identified sub-projects requires no land
acquisition or displacement of people. The main land requirement anticipated will be for the
construction of the fourth module of the water treatment plant in Ghdir El Golla, Greater Tunis,
which has already been acquired by SONEDE. At this point, OP 4.12 is not triggered.
Cultural Property (OP 4.11)
Although the project is not expected to affect important physical cultural property, as part of the
EA study this issue will be evaluated, and if found warranted, adequate mitigation measures such
as "chance finding" procedures for construction, will be incorporated in all the construction
contracts. The triggering of the policy is to be determined (TBD).
Natural Habitats (OP4.04)
During the preparation process the locations of proposed investments will be identified in most
of the 40 cities in Tunisia. It will be possible to decide on the triggering of this policy prior to
appraisal, and at this time the policy application is to be determined (TBD).
All other safeguard policies are not expected to be triggered by the proposed project and this will
be confirmed in the Environmental Assessment to be undertaken by the SONEDE, in close
coordination with the project mission, during project preparation.



Applicable? Safeguard Policy
pp_______e. If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[ X]     Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
[TBD]     Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[NO]      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
[TBDI     Involuntary Resettlement (OPJBP 4.12)
[NO]      Indi2enous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[NO]      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
[NO]      Safety of Dams (2P/BP 4.37)
[TBD]     Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[NO]      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/B P/GP 7.60)
[NO]      Proiects on International Waterways (QP_BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
The proposed investments are not likely to result in large scale, significant and/or irreversible
environmental impacts both individually or cumulatively. The potential environmental impacts
of most of the envisaged sub-projects are typically site-specific and limited to the construction
period.  These impacts can be managed by development and implementation of good
environmental management and mitigation plans as well as adopting good engineering practices.
Thus, based on the information available till date, the Environmental Category proposed for the
project is B.
[ ] A  [X] B  []C  [FI  []TBD (to be determined)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
ISDS would be prepared.
February 22, 2005
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final detennination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS
Not applicable
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the PAD-stage
ISDS.
An Environmental Assessment (EA) process of the envisaged project using the approach of
MNNA "Draft Manual for Safeguards Compliance in Demand Driven and Community
Development Projects" will evaluate the extent and significance of environmental impacts due to
the proposed investments. SONEDE is preparing terms of reference for the preparation of this
assessment with the support of the World Bank. The EA results will be ready for disclosure
before appraisal.
This EA will include particularly: the identification of potential impacts, the definition of
anticipated generic mitigation measures, the design of a screening procedure for identification of
sub-projects requiring EIA during the implementation of the project; development of training and
capacity building program; and the preparation of an environmental management plan (EMP).
The EMP will be annexed to the Project Appraisal Document and its costs will be integrated into
the project budget.
For sub-projects identified (based on the above screening procedure) as having several potential
impacts, a specific sub-project EA will be carried out during the implementation of the project.
IV. APPROVALS
Signzed and submitted by:,.                      <      ,r 
I Task Team Leader:            Ines Fraile                .                   IfDate *   09/CL1
Approved by:                                                         0 h / ov. b o/
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Sherif Kamel F. Arif  !-Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager:                Francoise Clottes                Date gd(   '6 g
Comments
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
lnfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



