Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/31/2005 
Report No.:  AC1793
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P093765 
Project Name:  GAS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader:  Ranjit J. Lamech 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 7, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Oil and gas (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
325.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
213.00
213.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project objective is to increase the reliability and stability of gas supply in Turkey by 
implementing critically needed gas storage and network infrastructure, and support 
BOTAS in strengthening its operation as a financially stable and commercially run 
corporation.   
 
3. Project Description 
I. 
The Gas Storage Facility - The gas storage facility will be in an underground salt 
formation located close to Tuz Golu, a salt lake in South Central Turkey.  The facility 
will have 12 caverns which will be "solution-mined" in phases of four caverns each. The 
facility, upon completion, will have a storage capacity of about 960 Million cubic meters 
of working gas and 460 million cubic meters of cushion gas.  The facility will have the 
capacity to deliver 40 Million cubic meters of gas per day for up to 24 days and can be 
refilled at the rate of 30 Million cubic meters per day for a period of up to about 32 days.  
The cushion gas however, must remain in the caverns as long as the storage facility is in 
operation in order for the caverns to maintain their structural integrity, given the pressure 
from the surrounding salt.  This component will finance the following investments:  
 
(a) 
The surface and sub-surface facilities including engineering and construction, 
solution mining, the gas pipelines and the compressor facility;  
Page  2
(b) 
The water and brine discharge pipelines;  
 
(c) 
460 million cubic meters of cushion gas; and  
 
(d) 
Consulting services including an Owner's Engineer (for assistance in supervision 
and monitoring of implementation), environmental monitoring and regulatory aspects.  
 
The Bank loan will finance the first 8 caverns, with BOTAS obtaining additional 
financing for the remaining investment.  
 
II. 
Network Expansion - The project will also finance two compressor stations for 
BOTAS at Erzincan and Corum.  These stations are required to help transmit the 
increasing volumes of gas expected to be imported into Turkey from existing and new 
sources.  The Corum station will have a capacity of 30 MW and is required in order to 
enable increased supply from Russia, while the Erzincan Station will have 39 MW of 
compression capacity and will enable the import of natural gas from Azerbaijan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
I. 
The Gas Storage Facility:  The storage project is located south of the Tuz Golu 
salt lake in south-central Turkey. The facility will be built in an underground salt 
formation that runs south of the Tuz Golu salt lake - the salt body has an average width of 
2-2.5 km, is about 15 km long, and has an average salt thickness of 1,500 meters 
(exceeding 2,000 meters in several places). Geological screening has ranked Tuz Golu as 
thepreferred location for storing large volumes of gas.  The caverns will be 'solution 
mined' using fresh water drawn from the Hirfanli reservoir through a 130 km pipeline.  
The fresh water demand is about 10-12 million cubic meters per year for six years.  
 
DSI (the State Water Board) has agreed to allocate this water which represents less than 
0.5% of water inflow to the reservoir. The proposed salt caverns are about 20 km from a 
main gas trunk line near Aksaray making connection to the network easy.  The brine from 
the solution mining will be discharged into an area of the Tuz Golu salt lake where there 
are no plant or animal life of any special interest.  The brine will also help preserve the 
lake which is evaporating.  
 
II. 
The compressor stations will be located in Corum and Erzincan respectively next 
to the existing main gas pipelines.  The site for these compressor stations is estimated to 
be about 30x40 meters.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECSIE) 
Mr Alessandro Palmieri (ESDQC) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Social safeguards - The project will involve land acquisition (less than 2 ha) and the 
acquisition of permanent easement (approximately 210 ha over 136 km) for the pipelines 
and some land acquisition for the storage facility and the two compressor stations, which 
will be determined during final design of the facilities.  The pipelines and storage 
facilities are located in land that is used primarily for extensive grain cropping or is 
unproductive due to soil salinity.  The easements will restrict actions on the surface that 
may damage the pipelines, but the impact will be insignificant.  Similarly, land 
acquisition for the pump stations and the storage facility will have insignificant effect on 
cropping or economic use of the land.  
 
Dam Safety - The project will use water from the Hirfanli Dam to solution mine the 
underground caverns. The dam is operated by EUAS.  Even though the project will use 
less than 0.1% of the reservoir capacity, since the project, during construction, will 
depend on the Hrifanli dam, the Bank's operational policy (OP 4.37) on Safety of Dams is 
triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant long-term impacts are anticipated as the result of land acquisition and 
acquisition of permanent easements as they will be located on land that is extensively 
farmed or unproductive.  
 
No indirect or long term negative environmental impacts are anticipated from the 
leaching and brine discharge activities. The area which will receive the brine discharge 
(Tuz Golu) is currently saturated with brine of the same quality as the discharge and this 
area is devoid of any significant terrestrial or aquatic flora and fauna.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project would initially have used ground water for solution mining purposes.  During 
EIA consultations however, the local population expressed concerns with this approach, 
given the scarcity of water in the region. The project design was thereafter changed to 
utilize water from the Hirfanli dam.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Land acquisition -
 BOTAÅ  prepared and disclosed a Land Acquisition Plan for 
thepipelines and storage facility and a Policy Framework for the two compressor stations 
whose sites have not be
en selected.  BOTAÅ  has considerable experience inhandling 
involuntary land expropriation.  BOTAÅ  has a special Land Expropriation Department 
based in Ankara, and experienced, trained staff located in regional offices who meet 
owners and negotiate compensation, based on information generated by professional land 
appraisers.  The staff are well-acquainted with Turkish expropriation law.  Through their 
ongoing implementation of the Turkish portion of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) 
pipeline, following the BTC Resettlement Action Plan, staff of the Land Expropriation 
Department have gained valuable experience on Bank safeguard requirements and 
practices.  
 
Environmental aspects - The BOTAS environmental specialist assigned to the project 
prepared a comprehensive Environmental Management Plan (EMP) of outstanding 
quality. Implementation arrangements which BOTAS has incorporated in the EMP 
include engaging an environment monitoring consultant to oversee detailed day to day 
supervision of the EMP and reporting back to BOTAS management of their findings.  
 
Dam safety -   DSI, the Government-owned agency which designs, constructs and 
operates dams in Turkey, carried out a site visit to Hirfanli and submitted its report on 
May 9, 2005.  The Bankâ
 ™s dam safety specialist completed his assessmentof the dam, 
and agreed on a framework of regular monitoring with DSI and EUAS.Both these 
agencies have agreed to take the necessary measures required for ensuring dam safety 
(Refer to Annex 11 of the PAD for more details), and have signed a protocol to this 
effect.  DSI is a capable agency with significant experience in dam construction and 
safety monitoring.  EUAS has been operating a large number of dams efficiently for 
several years and is capable of maintaining the dam adequately.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key direct stakeholders are residents of the villages located near the pipelines and the 
storage facility whose land is subject to acquisition or encumbrance with permanent 
easements.  The Land Acquisition Plan was disclosed o
n
the
BOTAÅ  web site (in 
English and Turkish) and in meetings held in the villages near the pipeline and the 
storage facility (in Turkish).  The Policy Framework was posted on the BOTAÅ  web 
site.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/06/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/08/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
07/11/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/29/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/07/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Bank's dam safety specialist inspected the dam and existing safety monitoring 
arrangements, and agreed on a set of actions for ensuring dam safety and monitoring to 
be taken by EUAS, the dam operator, and DSI, the the Government-owned agency which 
is responsible for constructing dams in the country.  These actions have been listed in a 
protocol signed by these agencies.  These have been disclosed as part of the EIA.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
Yes 
Page  6
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
08/29/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
09/07/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Alessandro Palmieri 
09/07/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
09/07/2005 
Comments:  The ISDS has been approved by Rita Klees. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
09/07/2005 
Comments:   
