The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2017| Report No: ISDSR22382




                      Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                             Country Director:    Diarietou Gaye
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Michal J. Rutkowski
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Dena Ringold
                           Task Team Leader:      Michael Mutemi Munavu
            The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P149965                                                      Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3)
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Michael Mutemi Munavu                                        Uganda
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    27-May-2015                                                  Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
    GSP01

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                           Total Financing
    130,000,000.00                                               130,000,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                      130,000,000.00
    Total                                                                                            130,000,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to provide effective income support to and build the resilience of poor and
    vulnerable households in Northern Uganda.?



.
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project has four components. The first component contains two sub-components - Labor Intensive Public Works
(LIPW) and Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) - that provide temporary/seasonal employment opportunities for poor and
vulnerable households and are capable of being scaled up in response to disasters in selected pilot areas. The second
component - Livelihood Investment Support (LIS) provides livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households to
enable them increase their productive assets and incomes. The third component - Transparency, Accountability and Anti-
Corruption (TAAC) - covers activities implemented by the Inspectorate of Government (IG) to improve transparency,
accountability, and anti-corruption efforts in northern Uganda. The fourth component - Safety Net Mechanisms and
Project Management - provides institutional support to implement the project and help to develop the social protection
system that is envisioned in the draft Uganda Social Protection Policy (USPP).
Component 1: Labor-intensive Public Works and Disaster Risk Financing
LIPW provides beneficiaries from poor and vulnerable households with a seasonal transfer for multiple years in return for
their participation in LIPW. Following disasters, the DRF sub-component can be activated in order to scale up the LIPW
activities temporarily and rapidly to provide additional support to core LIPW clients and/or to extend coverage to new
beneficiaries. The ability to rapidly scale up LIPW is expected to prevent household consumption from dropping after
climatic disasters and to protect their livelihoods and assets, leading to a more rapid post-crisis recovery. While the core
LIPW sub-component is implemented throughout Northern Uganda, the DRF sub-component is piloted in selected
districts to generate adequate evidence on which to base the design of a possible extension of the program to other areas
after the midterm review.
Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support
The Livelihood Investment Support component supports the government’s aim to extend livelihood support to poor and
vulnerable households and, by doing so, increases their productive assets and incomes. The LIS component is comprised
of an Improved Household Income Support Program (IHISP) and a Sustainable Livelihoods Pilot (SLP).
Component 3: Strengthening Transparency, Accountability, and Anti-Corruption (TAAC)
Under NUSAF 3, the TAAC component is tailored in such a way as to contribute to the government’s commitment to
increasing transparency and accountability in public service delivery as enshrined in Vision 2040, the NDP, and the
Accountability Sector Strategic Investment Plan (ASSIP). The strengthened TAAC enhances the effectiveness of
transparency, accountability, and anti-corruption processes in project areas.
Component 4: Safety Net Mechanisms and Project Management.
The Safety Net Mechanism aims to lay the foundation for a social safety net system as envisioned in the draft Uganda
Social Protection Policy (USPP). The component supports the MGLSD in establishing and strengthening systems to
promote the harmonization of the direct income support elements of the social protection sector. The Project Management
supports the operational expenditures related to the management and the monitoring and evaluation of the project. Its
support will strengthen the planning and coordination of activities supported by the project, as well as the monitoring of
their implementation.

.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



   KNOWN)
The project will provide support in a limited number of districts, prioritizing the 56 districts in the north and
east of the country that participated in the NUSAF 2. It will also coordinate with the WFP-implemented
Cash/Food for Assets program to minimize overlap in these areas. The project will support interventions
designed to improve livelihoods and access to basic socio-economic services in selected districts. The salient
physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis relate to project Component 1: Labor-Intensive Public
Works and Disaster Risk Financing and Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support. Component 1 involves
public works which will focus on a variety of asset creation activities, including rural access roads, tree
nurseries, afforestation, construction of different soil and water conservation measures, and flood control
structures, rainwater harvesting, rehabilitation and construction of market shelters, among others.
Component 2 will support livelihood investments which may involve Value-addition to existing family-based
small income generating activities. The overall environmental and social impacts of the project is expected to
be positive through alleviating pressures on the poor that lead to unsustainable exploitation of natural
resources and environmental degradation. The community sub-projects may involve limited land acquisition
and displacement of land-uses and/or livelihoods. Therefore, by their nature, project components 1 and 2
may have limited and localized negative environmental and social impacts. For this reason, the project is
rated as EA category B. The project ties in the twin goals of the World Bank group of alleviating poverty and
promoting shared prosperity. The potential environmental and social impacts can be adequately managed by
integrating environmental and social due diligence into the sub-project cycle. Since the multiple CDD sub-
projects and locations are not yet known at this time, Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and disclosed both in-country and at
infoshop before project appraisal. In addition, through restructuring process, a VMPP was prepared through
a consultative process to offer special attention to the IK. The Ik community is found in Kaabong District, in
the North Eastern part of Uganda, within the Karamoja sub-region. The instrument was disclosed in-country
and the Bank's infoshop for a wider access.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Constance Nekessa-Ouma, Social Safeguards Specialist
Sammy Ratemo Kinara, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered             Explanation
                                                                Because of the public works and livelihoods support
                                                                projects there are likely negative environmental
                                                                and social impacts to be generated, though
                                                                localized and readily manageable. Since the specific
 Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                multiple sub-projects and their locations are not
                                                                yet known, an Environmental and Social
                                                                Management Framework has been prepared to
                                                                guide implementation of the environmental and
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



                                                              social aspects. The ESMF has been prepared in a
                                                              consultative manner, and disclosed both in-country
                                                              and at info-shop before project appraisal. Specific
                                                              safeguard instruments (ESIA, ESMPs) shall be
                                                              prepared during project implementation following
                                                              guidance in the ESMF.
                                                              The project shall not support any activities that
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No
                                                              affect natural habitats.
                                                              The policy is not triggered because NUSAF-3
                                                              supported activities will not have any direct
                                                              impacts on the health and quality of forests, or on
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                              the health and safety of people who depend on
                                                              forests. There is no intention to change the
                                                              management, protection, or utilization of forests.
                                                              Under project Component 2 Livelihoods Support,
                                                              the project may support CDDs that involve small
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 Yes                 scale use of pesticides that may be applied to
                                                              veterinary care of animals. A Pest Management
                                                              Plan has been included in the ESMF.
                                                              The civil works involved in Component 1 of Public
                                                              Works may impact on known and/or unknown PCRs
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                              and therefore a Chance Finds Procedure has been
                                                              included in the ESMF.
                                                              NUSAF 3 was designed as a Community Demand
                                                              Driven (CDD project. In light of the project design,
                                                              that encompasses enhanced participatory and
                                                              broad consultative criteria, the assessment at
                                                              preparation did not find it necessary to trigger OP
                                                              4.10. However, this was reassessed in order to
                                                              ensure that the Ik; which is a minority community
                                                              found in Kaabong District in Karamojong region; is
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes                 specifically benefiting from the project, thus
                                                              triggering of OP 4.10. The project has undergone
                                                              restructuring to trigger OP 4.10. The client has
                                                              prepared a Vulnerable and Marginalized Peoples
                                                              Action Plan (VMPP) in a participatory and
                                                              consultative manner. The VMPP was cleared by the
                                                              Bank on August 8, 2017, after which it was disclosed
                                                              in-country and on the World Bank’s web sit on
                                                              October 3, 2017..
                                                              Because of the likely small scale land acquisition
                                                              and impact on the livelihood of communities, this
                                                              Policy is triggered. Since the multiple CDDs are not
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                 yet known including their location, a Resettlement
                                                              Policy Framework has been prepared, consulted
                                                              upon and disclosed both in-country and at infoshop
                                                              before project appraisal.
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



                                                                        The project involves the construction of flood
                                                                        control structures and ponds for rain water
                                                                        harvesting, but these do not pose dam safety risks.
                                                                        However, the construction of these works will be
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                   No
                                                                        guided by the Small Dam Guidelines prepared for
                                                                        Uganda and the FAO Manual on small Earth Dams.
                                                                        The project is not supporting the construction of
                                                                        dams.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                               The project will not be implemented in
                                                 No
 (BP 7.50)                                                              International Waterways.
                                                                        N/A because the project will not support any
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)       No
                                                                        activity in disputed areas.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis relate to project Component 1: Labor-Intensive
      Public Works and Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support.
      Components 1 & 2 may generate among others the following environmental and social impacts: Health and safety
      issues: The civil works and use of pesticides will pose health and safety issues. These shall be addressed first and
      foremost by providing and ensuring use of appropriate PPE. In addition, workers and farmers shall be sensitized
      and/or trained on the importance and use of PPE in civil works and use of pesticides; Vegetation clearance and soil
      erosion: The likely environmental and social impacts of community access roads rehabilitation are expected to be
      minor given the low mechanized road works that will be involved. Where loses of vegetation are inevitable,
      compensation measures shall be instituted as per approved Government rates and as outlined in the RPF for NUSAF
      3; Impacts on PCRs – There may be graves or other physical cultural resources along proposed community access
      routes. The subsequent environmental and social assessments should take into account specific measures to address
      mitigations for such resources during project implementation. As for this ESMF, it is proposed that, the design stages
      should propose alignments that avoid graveyards. In addition, measures outlined in the Chance Finds Procedures
      should be operationalized as well; Waste Management – One critical issue observed during NUSAF 2 was waste
      management especially hazardous waste. The NUSAF 3 Waste Management Plan (WMP) has been prepared to
      address waste management issues associated with the NUSAF3 project in line with legal and regulatory requirements
      as detailed in Annex 5 of the ESMF.

      Component 2 may involve use of pesticides and other veterinary chemicals or result in their increased usage through
      Livelihoods Investments support and triggers OP 4.09 on pest management. The subprojects are expected to have
      only minor use for nationally approved pesticides; otherwise there will not be significant pesticide use in subprojects.
      Where pesticide use will be required, District and sub-county extension staff (agricultural and veterinary
      officers/assistants) will train farmers on appropriate use, storage and disposal of pesticides.

      The project will also be implemented in Karamoja region, in Kabong District hosting a recognized minority group of
      people called the IK, who despite the community demand driven approach used in the project implementation was
       The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



  noted to require special attention. An VMPP was prepared by the client to address the special needs of the IK. A
  budget to support the special activities was planned for the potential activities.

  The assessment has taken into account the potential social risks that might undermine benefit and participation of
  the vulnerable members of the community such as women, children, elderly, disabled and regions which are
  historically marginalized (Karamoja). specific consideration to ensure that all these groups benefit from and
  participate in the project though effective targeting and meaningful consultations are in place.

  There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with the project.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

  None


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  None


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Since the exact location of the CDDs is not known at this stage, a framework approach was adopted. The borrower
  has prepared ESMF and RPF which were both cleared by IDA and disclosed both in-country and at infoshop before
  project appraisal. The ESMF gives a step by step guidance on how to screen, identify, assess, mitigate and manage
  any environmental and social impacts that the project may pose, including monitoring and reporting. Where
  necessary and based on the screening outcome as guided in the ESMF, site specific ESIAs/ESMPs shall be prepared
  during implementation. Similarly the RPF gives a step by step guidance of how to screen, identify, assess, mitigate
  and manage social impacts including involuntary resettlement issues. It gives guidance on how consultations and
  compensation are undertaken, including preparation of RAPs where deemed necessary. The client has committed to
  undertake any arising compensation in line with OP 4.12. Both the ESMF and RPF provide guidance on establishment
  and operation of a Grievance Redress Mechanism to address any complaints that the project may generate. The ESMF
  has also provided guidance/Pest Management Plan (PMP) on the use and management of pesticides under sub-
  component 2. It gives basic guidance on the procurement, transportation, storage, handling and application of
  pesticides, including disposal of the empty pesticides containers. This guidance shall later be part of the Project
  Operations Manual. The purpose of the PMP is to describe a Plan by which the project can promote and support safe,
  effective, and environmentally sound pest management.

  The institutional arrangement which has been used to implement the NUSAF 2 project will be used to implement
  NUSAF3 project. The Office of the Prime Minster (OPM) will be the implementing agency of the project and will work
  with a wide range of institutions at central, district and sub-county levels to deliver the project. The OPM will continue
  to be supported by a Technical Support Team headed by a Project Coordinator and staffed by relevant technical
  experts. The exact composition and number of staff will be reviewed following further elaboration of the design but
  it is expected that the team will have a cost effective structure and more practical presence. OPM will consolidate
  and review monthly reports submitted by the different agencies. At the district level, the District Environment Officer
  (DEO) and Community Development Officer (CDO) will monitor environmental and social issues respectively.
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)




        An VMPP was prepared by the client to address the special needs of the IK. A budget to support the special activities
       was planned for the potential activities. The instrument includes guidance on community targeting for the vulnerable
       communities and persons, meaningful consultation, and an enhanced community based grievance handling approach
       to be employed during implementation. The instrument was cleared by the bank and disclosed both in-country and
       infoshop.

       NUSAF-TST has a qualified Environment and Social Specialist and Technical Support Team, who will be equally
       responsible for implementing the VMPP as a stand alone and an integrated part of the project in close collaboration
       with relevant local government staff and communities.


     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The key stakeholders consulted include the Inspectorate of Government Office, Ministry of Water and Environment,
       Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Health, Ministry pf Gender Labour and Social Development, Ministry for
       Karamoja Affairs, NUSAF District Desk Officers, District Environment Officers, District Health Officers, NUSAF2
       beneficiary communities and groups including the IK people, general communities, etc. More stakeholder and
       community consultations shall be undertaken as part of project implementation, as dictated by the nature of the
       project.

       The consultations were undertaken through focused group discussions, questionnaire administration, community
       meetings organized through the local leaders. The national level meetings were undertaken through individual
       appointments and face to face talks guided by interview schedule.

       The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed both in-country and at infoshop. In-country disclosure was undertaken
       through a disclosure notice in the daily newspapers, through the websites of OPM-NUSAF, and MGLSD.

       Consultation process will go on during the construction and operation phases of the project. To this effect, OPM will
       be required to maintain long term and mutually beneficial open dialogue with local authorities and the public through
       its Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists and Officers during implementation. The majority of the target
       beneficiaries include Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) returnees, widows, Orphans, People living with HIV/Aids, Ex-
       combatants, former abductees, female headed households, child mothers, unskilled and unemployed youth,
       disarmed Karamojong, youth, Elderly, Child head families, Persons with disability and Landmine victims. Interest in
       the NUSAF3 will therefore vary among different vulnerable groups (and individuals) in the community, and they may
       be affected differently. It will be important to keep this in mind during the consultation process, and in some cases it
       may be more appropriate to consider the needs and priorities of sub-communities rather than those of a whole
       village. The required consultations during implementation are well elaborated in the ESMF and shall be followed.

       The VMPP benefited from double consultation process during the project consultation and during the specific
       instrument preparations which has also had extensive follow-ups and community disclosures. The process was
       participatory involving Local Government teams, Community based organizations and IK communities.

DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
                      The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure


         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            Uganda                                                       14-Apr-2015
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                            Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
          Uganda                                                         14-Apr-2015
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Date of submission for disclosure
22-Feb-2017                                                              03-Oct-2017
“In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                      Date of Disclosure
            Uganda                                                       03-Oct-2017
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



 Comments
 in New Vision Newspaper



PEST_TABLE
Pest Management Plan

Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?


Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure


“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                       Date of Disclosure
 Uganda                                                        14-Apr-2015
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                No



 PM_TABLE
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                       Yes

 Is a separate PMP required?                                                                      No

 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or
 PM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project                    NA
 team include a Pest Management Specialist?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                              Yes
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IP_TABLE
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                    Yes
been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                    NA
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework
                                                                                    Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager
                                                                                    Yes
review the plan?

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads
to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods)



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                    Yes
cost?
            The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)



    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
    of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                      Yes
    and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                     Michael Mutemi Munavu


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
