                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:119834
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 13, 2017

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Uganda             Project ID: P124296
                                        Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: UG - FCPF REDD Readiness (Additional REDD+ Readiness Preparation
Support
Task Team Leader: Nigel Ross Hughes
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A           Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: GEN01                    Lending Instrument: Recipient Executed
                                        Activities
Sector: Forestry (100%)
Theme: Climate change (100%)

FCPF Amount (US$m.): 3.75
Other financing amounts by source: n/a


Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing              Simple [ X]               Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [ ]                  No [ X ]


B. Project Objectives:
1.      The Project Development Objective is to design a socially and environmentally viable
national strategy for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation as compared
to a reference level.

C. Project Description:

2.      The grant will provide Additional Funding (AF) to the original REDD+ Readiness
Preparation Support in the amount of US$3.75 million from the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPF) to the Republic of Uganda.
3.      Uganda’s Request for AF was approved in 2016 by the FCPF Participants’ Committee
(PC), the Governing Body of the FCPF. In accordance with the PC Resolution, the World Bank,
as the Delivery Partner for Uganda, conducted its due diligence in order to provide the AF.
4.      Drawing on an independent mid-term evaluation of the REDD+ process in January-
February 2016, Uganda self-assessed its REDD+ Readiness progress and identified the
remaining technical gaps vis-à-vis Uganda’s roadmap for REDD+ Readiness (Readiness
                                                                                            1
Preparation Proposal (R-PP)) and associated financial needs. The proposed additional activities
seek to complete the REDD+ Readiness process within a two-and-a-half year period, with the
Closing Date of December 31, 2019.
5.     It should be noted that the activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+
Readiness Program in Uganda do not include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the
ground. The FCPF support will support analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation
processes at the national and sub-national levels. It should be noted that these additional funds
will not finance the on-the-ground implementation. Through the Readiness Program, the
Government of Uganda (GoU) is expected to identify priority investment needs to achieve the
goals of REDD+. These investment needs will be financed by public and private donors and
investors and the Government itself, and not by the FCPF Readiness Grant.

Component 1: Coordination and Monitoring of REDD+ Readiness Process ($0.525 million,
all from FCPF)
1.     The objective of this component is to continue supporting national level coordination and
monitoring of the REDD+ process. This support builds on structures and processes of the current
REDD processes involving the REDD Secretariat and national REDD+ coordination, supervision
and stakeholder participation. Uganda also intends to prepare its Readiness Package (R-
Package)1 for submission to the FCPF PC in early 2018.
2.      The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs
for the following:
       Provision of Technical Support to the REDD+ Secretariat. This will include support
        from a part-time Lead Technical Advisor, a full time Communications/Projects Officer
        (who will also be responsible for coordinating stakeholder engagement), and inputs from
        an International Consultant to provide targeted advise on design options for Emissions
        Reductions (ER) Program, including specific support on safeguards. This support will
        provide inputs and guidance to all aspects of the national REDD+ program.
       REDD+ Secretariat office and operational costs (including vehicle running costs).
       REDD+ representation in regional/international meetings and a South-South exchange
        event for learning and sharing experiences and lessons on REDD+ (potentially with
        Ghana as a country with the much-advanced REDD+ agenda).
       National level supervisions / coordination and harmonization processes (meetings of
        NCCAC, REDD+ Technical Committee, task forces, etc.);
       Preparation of the R-Package; and
       Revisions and update of the M&E Framework for REDD+ to include gender-related
        indicators (it is expected that this work will be led by the REDD+ Secretariat and the


1
  The Readiness Package (R-Package) is completed at the end of the readiness preparation phase, at a stage when
activities proposed in the R-PP are well-advanced or completed. The R-Package consists of a national multi-
stakeholder self-assessment by the country, using the Readiness Package Assessment Framework as guidelines. The
Readiness Package Assessment Framework was formally endorsed (resolution PC/14/2013/1) by the FCPF PC at the
14th PC Meeting, March 19-21, 2013, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                             2
          validation workshop for these updates will be combined with a self-assessment workshop
          for the R-Package).


Component 2: Stakeholder Engagement and Feedback in Readiness Process ($0.1 million,
all from FCPF)
3.      The objective of this component is to support broad stakeholder engagement – with a
particular focus on implementation of the Uganda REDD+ gender strategy. The support aims to
implement key actions as identified in the Uganda REDD+ Gender Strategy (to be further
reviewed prior to implementation) and foster gender integration in national REDD+ processes.
The strategy recognizes that any future REDD+ investments will need to explicitly acknowledge
existence of gender-specific issues in any proposed future REDD+ investments and take
appropriate steps to ensure that gender issues are addressed and integrated in a comprehensive
manner.
4.     It should be noted that stakeholder engagement is an integral element of the REDD+
process in Uganda and, as such, each activity supported by the FCPF grant will also integrate
involvement of relevant stakeholders.
5.        The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs
to:
      -   Support implementation of key priority activities as identified in the Uganda REDD+
          Gender Strategy; and
      -   Support capacity building and engagement of indigenous peoples in the Albertine region
          (which is considered as a possible jurisdiction for REDD+ implementation). This will
          enable their meaningful engagement in REDD+ and their informed participation. The
          support will be specifically targeted in one of the areas where the Government of Uganda
          is considering targeting its future ER Programs. Training will build on extensive previous
          programs that have sensitized communities for possible future REDD+ programs and will
          be designed to deepen capacity for engagement in future ER program design and to
          further develop and pilot training inputs for future use by the Government of Ugnda. The
          specific groups to be targeted will be selected once the AF is approved.


Component 3: REDD+ Strategy and SESA ($0.3 million, all from FCPF)
6.      The objective of this component is to continue supporting the National REDD+ Strategy
process and environmental and social elements of it. The initial design of Uganda’s National
REDD+ Strategy and Implementation Plan and Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) and ESMF was completed June 2017. As noted above, the National REDD+ Strategy is
a living document and it is important that the lessons from the ongoing global, national and sub-
national REDD+ processes (including experience elsewhere in developing ER Programs) feed
into the REDD+ Strategy and the safeguards instruments.
7.     Parties to the UNFCCC have agreed that seven safeguards should be promoted and
supported when undertaking REDD+ activities. These safeguards were agreed at the UNFCCC
Conference of Parties (COP) in Cancun in December 2010 and are known as the ‘Cancun
safeguards.’ To help Uganda comply with this agreement, this component will also support

                                                                                                  3
development of the Safeguards Information System for Uganda REDD+ as an integral
component of the REDD+ strategy.
8.         The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs
for:
          Revising and updating key Readiness documents (Uganda's REDD+ Strategy and
           Implementation Plan (as informed by the SESA report and review by the World Bank);
           finalizing safeguards instruments), and
          The design and establishment of the Safeguards Information System (based on the
           roadmap earlier developed with support from the Austrian Development Cooperation)


Component 4: REDD+ Implementation Framework (ER Programs) ($0.95 million, all from
FCPF)
9.     By end of June 2017, Uganda ‘s REDD+ Strategy and Implementation Plan will define
various strategies and country-appropriate options for reducing emissions from deforestation and
forest degradation, sustainable forest management, and enhancement of carbon stock. The
National REDD+ Strategy proposes that sub-national ER Programs be pursued as different
approaches would be required for tackling deforestation and degradation in different parts of the
country.
10.     The objective of this component is to support the development of design options for ER
Programs nested in the National REDD+ Strategy. In this regard, the FCPF grant will support
design of two or three landscape level ER-Program options for selected landscapes. These are
likely to focus on the Albertine Rift and Mt. Elgon ecosystems. These landscapes are also target
areas for the proposed landscape operations under the FIP and PPCR. The fully developed ER
Program packages will include complete documentation covering implementation, financing, and
safeguards aspects.
11.     The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, travel, training, services, and operational
costs to identify options and put in place outline designs for two such ER Programs.
12.     Uganda does not have a committed buyer for the ERs under these potential ER Programs
– thus, development of short idea notes to define design options will be a first step, followed by
the development of outline designs. The Government of Uganda will then be able to use these to
gauge interest from potential investors and buyers (including under the emerging REDD+
financing window of the Green Climate Fund).


Component 5: National Reference Scenario and Inventory of Forest Resources ($1.4
million, all from FCPF)
13.    The ongoing REDD+ preparation grant supported the development of the first reference
scenario (Forest Reference Emissions Level (FREL). Uganda made its first submission of its
national FREL to UNFCCC in January 2017 and will submit revisions based on updates and
improvements going forwards. The FREL provides an important part of the National Forest



                                                                                                4
Monitoring System2 (NFSM), initial design of which is currently under development with
support from the UN REDD Programme (under activities undertaken by the FAO).
14.      The objective of this component is to refine the National Reference Scenario / FREL –
most notably by undertaking analysis to better determine forest degradation levels as well as
establish and institutionalize the NFMS as approved by the national REDD+ structures. It is
expected that the FAO will be engaged to support the GoU in the implementation of activities
under this component, under a Technical Assistance framework agreement (this mechanism has
operated effectively under the original grant).
15.     A first round of grant support from ADC and technical inputs from FAO succeeded in
putting in place a robust platform for the NFMS and it’s Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
(MRV) functions. Further support is now required to expand geographical coverage and to
generate the additional data to enable Uganda’s MRV system to deliver to UNFCCC Tier 2
reporting level.
16.       The FCPF grant will support goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs
to:
         Improve estimations of emissions from forest degradation. These are currently poorly
          understood and yet could comprise one of the largest sources of national GHG emissions.
          Uganda is currently considering the use of RADAR technology, although other options
          will be explored (including a system piloted by Ghana which is reportedly less costly to
          operate).
         Implement the 2018 National Forest Inventory to update forest inventory and quantify
          biomass and stock estimates for trees outside “forests?. This work will include updating
          the database of inventory data and training the National Forestry Authority (NFA) and
          the Uganda Wildlife Authority staff (and others) in forest inventory and data analysis.
          Inventory work will be at the national level but with a particular focus on the landscapes /
          areas proposed for the ER-Programs. It is expected that the National Forest Inventory
          work will be undertaken by the NFA through a Memorandum of Understanding with the
          FSSD.
         Institutionalize the MRV system and its deployment at regional/zonal level – as per the
          approved design.
         A specific activity will pilot community-led monitoring and integrating community-based
          data into national MRV systems. This will include ground truthing of forest inventory

2
  Uganda’s NFMS is intended to meet all the Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) functions. The three
technical pillars or building blocks of the NFMS that are essential to support its MRV function are as follows:
• Pillar 1: A Satellite Land Monitoring System to co llect and assess, over time, the Activity Data related to forest
land. The ultimate goal is to institutionalize this function which will have to be budgeted and supported by GoU core
budget. This will still require time in order for the system to be fully functional and effective.
• Pillar 2: National Forest Inventory (NFI) to collect information on forest carbon stocks and changes, relevant for
estimating emissions and removals and to provide emissions factors (EF – Emission Factors) – normally NFI is a
continuous exercise which should be repeated regularly (with a minimum standard frequency of every 5 yrs). GoU
has already institutionalized this function, but resources remain the biggest constraint.
• Pillar 3: A national GHG Inventory as a tool for repor ting on anthropogenic forest-related GHG emissions by
sources and removals by sinks to the UNFCCC Secretariat (Emissions in figure 3) – the National GHG inventory is
maintained by the CCD at the MoWE; however, forestry related data is collected and reported by the NFA.

                                                                                                                   5
       land cover changes. It will explore existing community monitoring practices in Uganda,
       and how these could be beneficial in support of forest co-management, monitoring,
       benefit sharing and the design of landscape programs.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

6.      The grant financed activities are limited to analytical studies and consultation processes
at the national and sub-national levels and do not include investment activities. The AF grant will
provide particular focus of support to advancing the Uganda REDD+ gender strategy and
building capacity of indigenous groups and forest dependent communities to engage in the
design of future REDD+ intervention plans.
7.      It is envisaged that the ER Programs, to be outlined with the AF support, will focus on
the Albertine and Mt. Elgon landscapes. The Batwa, and Benet indigenous forest dependent
communities occupy some of the thargetted forest ecosystems of in the Albertine region and
Mount Elgon.
8.      The Albertine region has wide habitat diversity within its dense network of national
parks, wildlife reserves, and forest reserves (natural forests).It is one of the most biodiverse
regions on the continent. It is home to more than half of Africa’s bird species, 40 percent of
Africa’s mammal species, and about 20 percent of its amphibian and plant species. It also
conserves more threatened and endemic species than any other region of Africa, and as a result is
recognized globally as a Biodiversity Hotspot, a Global 200 Ecoregion and an Endemic Bird
Area.
The Batwa are indigenous to south-western Uganda.
9.      Mt. Elgon Ecosystem is an invaluable water catchment for Uganda (and also Kenya and
the countries along the Nile basin). However, the region is reportedly experiencing effects of a
changing climate in the form of reduced stream-flow (e.g. the Manafwa river base flow) and
reduced recharge of groundwater partly as a result of degradation of forests within the region.
Satellite images from the 1970s to present indicate that the Mt. Elgon region has experienced
significant reduction in forest cover due to clearance for agriculture. The Benet community
which is a sub-group of Sabiny is an indigenous group that has traditionally lived in the high-
altitude areas of Mt. Elgon.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

1.      Adequate capacity exists for safeguard issues - the project is implemented by an
experienced team in the Ministry of Water and Environment that deals with the national
environmental issues in their daily work. The safeguards arrangements are well imbedded in the
existing structures of the GoU and the current REDD+ process. The MWE, which is the
Implementing Agency for the FCPF support, is experienced in implementation of the national
and World Bank safeguards requirements. For the REDD+ process specifically, a
Communications and Consultations and SESA Task Force was established (see Annex 3 for its
composition) – it is steering the SESA process and attends to careful consideration of the
safeguards aspects of the proposed REDD+ options and actions.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
                                                                                                 6
Christine Kasedde                     Environmental Specialist, GEN01
Nicholas Meitaki Soikan               Social Development Specialist, GSU07

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

2.       It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may be triggered in the
REDD+ Readiness process. AF activities trigger two new safeguards policies – OP4.10,
Indigenous Peoples and OP4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. These safeguards policies are
triggered based on preliminary findings from the SESA report and preliminary Bank review.
Final determination on the applicable policies is expected to be made when the Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) report and resulting frameworks have been
finalized and reviewed by the Bank (expected in early 2018, during the AF implementation).
3.       The grant will not finance at this stage any concrete investment activities on the ground
and is thus not expected to have any direct environmental and social impact on the ground.
However, grant financed activities might have indirect impacts since the findings from analytical
work carried out under the grant may influence the design of the national REDD+ Strategy
4.       Safeguards considerations of the overall REDD+ Readiness as financed by the main
FCPF grant continue to be covered as part of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA). The FCPF is using a SESA to integrate key environmental and social considerations
into REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches. The SESA
ensures (i) integration of social and environmental considerations into the REDD+ Readiness
process, in particular into the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and
prioritizing key issues; (iii) assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these
priorities and recommendations; and (iv) disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s progress
reports on Readiness preparation.
5.       The initial SESA process was financed with the original grant. The SESA process
resulted in a SESA report, and scoping for the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), the Process Framework, and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.
The SESA report and the ESMF are currently being internalized by the Government of Uganda -
further finetuning of the SESA report and finalization of the frameworks (as required and based
on feedback from the World Bank, including the Regional Safeguards Advisor) is expected with
the Additional Funding support.
6.       The design and elaboration of the National REDD+ Strategy includes a wide stakeholder
consultation process (including local communities and private actors and taking into account
gender considerations) which addresses the need of the key safeguards triggered.

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                 Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                              X
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), to be fine-tuned and finalized
with the AF support, helps ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguards policies. It serves to
identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative environmental and social impacts
associated with the final REDD+ Strategy. It also serves to identify and promote potentially
positive impacts and benefit sharing opportunities in connection with the Strategy. The SESA
will influence the final national REDD+ Strategy, by ensuring that the consideration of social
and environmental risks and potential impacts is a factor in its preparation. It will also provide
guidance and key elements for the preparation of the ESMF.
                                                                                                     7
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                  Yes          No         TBD
The future investments and carbon finance transactions will require specific environmental
and social assessments (ESAs) but these will benefit from the strategy context created by the
SESA and ESMF. The ESMF will include standing methods and procedures, along with
appropriate institutional arrangements for screening, reviewing, implementing, and monitoring
specific ESAs to prevent adverse impacts, as well as cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                       X
The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed in the national REDD+
Strategy take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous
environmental services and products that natural habitats provide to human society. Overall,
REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the
country puts in place an effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA
addresses issues related to natural habitats and potential impacts of the national REDD+
Strategy, which will be included in the ESMF.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                X
Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have significant positive impacts on forests, in that
the main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, while
contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent communities. Potential impact of the
National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests are assessed through the SESA and included in
the ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
Operational Policy regarding forest management.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
This policy could be triggered depending on the final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
Agricultural intensification and reforestation activities, for instance, could trigger this policy,
depending on the methods employed by concrete activities on the ground to manage pests. The
SESA will address critical issues related to pest management, as necessary.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                     X
Some of the future project activities may affect physical cultural resources. Further
investigation is needed to determine if this policy would be triggered or not. The SESA
process will determine the existence of culturally and socially sensitive sites that have
significance to local forest dependent communities. This policy, therefore, could be triggered,
based on the SESA outcomes.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     X
An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to comply OP 4.10 for
addressing issues arising from specific investments during the implementation of the national
REDD+ strategy. Under this policy, Indigenous Peoples communities affected by the National
REDD+ Strategy must be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                              X
REDD+ activities might trigger Involuntary Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
restrictions of access to legally designated parks, land acquisition, protected areas, or forest
management / reforestation areas. Through the SESA process, any issues related to land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be identified. To comply with the Involuntary
Resettlement policy (OP 4.12), a Process Framework will be prepared for managing the
potential restriction of access of local communities to natural resources. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will also be prepared. The policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to

                                                                                                      8
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                Yes          No     TBD
the extent feasible or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts in
cases where resettlement or other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                   X
The REDD+ activities do not involve the construction of new or use of existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X
The REDD+ activities do not involve international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X
Not triggered

       III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                Ross Hughes                                 08/31/2017

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards              Nathalie Munzberg                           09/13/2017
 Coordinator:

  Comments:
 Environment Safeguards           Herbert Oule                                08/31/2017
 Specialist:

 Comments:
 Social Safeguards Specialist:    Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan                    08/30/2017

 Comments:
 Sector Manager:                  Magdolna Lovei


   Comments:




                                                                                             9
