Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC492 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  March 10, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P083809 
Project Name: PRIVATE SECTOR EXPORT 
COMPETITIVENESS II 
Task Team Leader: Michael D. Wong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 04/03/2004 
Estimated Board Date: 07/27/2004 
Managing Unit: AFTPS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (30%);Agro-
industry (30%);Law and justice (20%);Aviation 
(10%);Other industry (10%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness 
(P); Small and medium enterprise support 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Serigne Omar Fye 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 25 
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower / Recipient  
2.5($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project objective is to improve the competitiveness of the private sector in international and regional export 
markets. This will be achieved by:  (a) improving the efficiency of trade related services to the private sector; (b) 
improving the investment climate, by reducing business registration time and simplifying the process of business 
registration; (c) reducing set up cost and time for enterprises by providing access to minimum infrastructure 
services; (d) improving supply chain efficiency for high value export crops; and (e) improving the capacity of the 
private sector in particular MSMEs to respond to changing market requirements. 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Component 1:
 Improving the efficiency of trade related services
 
The project will support the Government to 
(
i) streamline procedures, regulations and guidelines in customs 
administration, export licenses and certification; (ii) establish clear regulation and guidelines for public or private 
provision of standards and certification of export related products; and (iii) provide institutional and capacity 
building to public institutions involved in delivering services as in (i) and (ii). 
 
Component 2:
 Establishing a competitive investment climate
 
This component will focus on (a) improving the overall business environment: the project will support the 
government in simplifying and modernizing commercial laws, rationalizing the registration of businesses, 
particularly in areas that involve MSMEs, and will provide institutional and capacity building for related 
institutions
; (b)
 establishing a minimum infrastructure platform for rapid export growth: the project will support 
government to establish private sector led industrial zones to enable quick and easy access to industrial land, and to 
establish efficient air cargo services.  
 
Component 3: 
Improving private sector capacity, in particular MSMEs
 
The project will support the private sector, in particular MSMEs, to develop their capacity to supply products 
according to export market requirements and thus to increase their output and increase employment. The project will 
Page  2
 
 
a) using the matching-grant approach, provide vocational training and business development services; b) improve 
technology and market information transfer by establishing a business linkage programe; and c) improve financial 
services by supporting the transition of Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) to formally registered MFIs (supply side) 
and encouraging repayment behavior by establishing a “Better Business Behavior” registration and compliance 
program (demand side). 
 
Component 4
: Project implementation and coordination
 
Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU), an association comprising of membership 
organizations (Uganda Manufactures Association, Uganda Farmers Association, etc,) is 
mandated to lead the private sector dialogue with government and to be the private sector 
advocate. The project will strengthen the PSFU to (a) make it operationally sustainable; (b) lead 
private sector dialogue with Government;  (c) lead the private sector consultation and (d) 
implement the private sector project on the behalf of Government and the private sector 
beneficiaries.  
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Project implementing agencies will be located in Kampala, and project activities will have a 
nationwide coverage (since potential beneficiaries will be located throughout Uganda). 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
On the Uganda’s Environmental Management Capacity Building I and II to support environmental institutions, 
NEMA was established and well staffed and equipped.  Procedures and guidelines were well developed.  In the 
EMCBP II (Cr-34770), NEMA will further develop its policy tools, its environmental management and extend its 
out reach to districts and local communities  
 
The development objective of the Second Environmental Management and Capacity Building Project (MCBP II) is 
as follows:  Sustainable environmental management at the national, district and community levels.  EMCBP II 
represents the second five-year phase of a long-term effort to assist the Government of Uganda (GOU) in their 
implementation of the National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) and related National Environment Statute 
(1995) and the Local Government Act (1997).  The project consists of three components.  The first focuses directly 
on enhancing environment management capacity in districts and communities and empowering them to address 
environmental degradation problems, and sustainable natural resource use for development through the planning and 
implementation of initiatives.  The second component aims at enhancing environment management capacity in lead 
agencies at national level.  The third component aims at enhancing environment management capacity in the 
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), through institutional support and strengthening.  In a 
similar way as under EMCBP, financing would be provided for training, consultant services (Primarily local, with a 
limited amount for international consultants in specialist fields for short-term assignments), equipment, vehicles, and 
incremental recurrent costs.
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The Project is classified as B which is appropriate considering the activities.  An ESMF is 
recommended as the required safeguard instruments to be prepared. 
 
That is “An environmental assessment is applicable to this project. There will be an environmental 
Page  3
 
 
analysis (EA) whose objectives are to: (i) assess the potential environmental and social impacts of 
the planned construction activities under Private Sector Compe
titiveness II Project; (ii) develop an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which will enable those responsible 
for construction activities to assess the potential environmental and social impacts and to apply 
appropriate mitigation measures; and (iii) preparation of an Environmental Mitigation Plan (EMP) 
to facilitate implementation of the proposed project.” 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
A RPF is recommended as the required safeguard instruments to be prepared. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.  
03/15/2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.  
Not 
Applicable
 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  4
 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Michael D. Wong 
03/10//2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Serigne Omar Fye 
03/11/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Demba Ba 
03/10//2004 
Comments 
 
 
