Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.: 30906 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 1, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P092158 
Project Name: REFORESTATION 
BIOCARBON FUND PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: John W. Fraser Stewart 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date (note 
–
carbon offset 
projects do not have Board Date.  
Equivalent is date of signature of 
Emissions Reduction Purchase 
Agreement):  December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: n/a – Carbon Offset 
intervention through the BioCarbon Fund 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Land Management (P); Climate 
Change (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Social Specialist: Maria Amelina  
Environmental Specialist: Yuriy Chornenkiy (alt. Alexei Slenzak) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 0 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
BIOCARBON FUND 
2.0 
GOVERNMENT OF UKRAINE 
15.6 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The objective of the project is to reconstruct, maintain and manage natural pine and birch 
forest on approximately 15,000 hectares of abandoned agricultural lands in the vicinity of 
Chernobyl in order to re-establish forestry as the most economically productive land use for the 
area, and also sequester Kyoto compliant carbon from the atmosphere.    
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
The project has two components: 
1. Reconstruction of natural forest
.
Approximately 15,000 hectares (ha) of abandoned 
agricultural lands in the vicinity of Chernobyl in the Polessie region of Ukraine will be  
reforested with natural and indigenous species (predominantly pine and birch with some oak). 
8,000 hectares will be planted during the period of 2005-2009 with the remaining 6000-7000 
hectares planted during the period 2010-2014.  
Page  2
2. Monitoring and Verification
:
The BioCarbon Fund would purchase the emissions 
reductions (ERs) generated by tree growth following independent verification that sequestration 
of the carbon from the atmosphere had taken place.  Carbon emissions would be purchased at a 
price to be negotiated between the Carbon Fund and the State Committee for Forests following 
completion of project preparation in the fourth quarter of 2004. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The areas of Zhitomir and Kyiv oblasts located in the 3
rd
 and 4
th
 zones in the vicinity of 
Chernobyl but outside the 30km exclusion zone of more highly contaminated lands.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The State Forestry Committee is responsible for forest regeneration and forestation in 
most of Ukraine. The organization is staffed with highly qualified experts on Forestry with the 
skills necessary to prepare and implement the project and has long experience in general land 
management as well as reconstructing pine and birch forests.   
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] Environmental 
Assessment
(OP
/BP
4.01) 
See below   
[N] 
Natural Habitats (OP
/BP
4.04) 
[Y] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09
)
See below 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP
/BP
4.12) 
See below   
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20
)
[TBD] Forests 
(OP
/BP
4.36) 
See below  
[N] 
Safety of Dams (OP
/BP
4.37) 
[N] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
)
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP
/BP
/GP
7.60)
*
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP
/BP
/GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Environmental Assessment
:
The Project has no major adverse environmental impacts. As noted 
above the reforestation of the area is expected to improve the control of fire and associated  
distribution of low-level radioactive contamination as well as contribute to mitigation of global 
climate change. The need for special precautions to mitigate the impacts of radioactive 
contamination related to project implementation will be assessed during preparation and 
appropriate actions taken accordingly. Likely mitigation efforts will be associated with site 
selection (i.e., only areas with very low levels of contamination) and the use of protective 
clothing by individuals engaged in field work. A potential threat to fully achieving the 
environmental development objectives would be unplanned losses of carbon through forest fires. 
Forest fires would result in increased atmospheric carbon as well as the spread of radioactive 
material. However, as noted the prevailing grass and shrub lands are considered more fire prone 
than forests that the project would re-establish. 
Involuntary Resettlement:
There is currently a mixed population of about 50,000-70,000 people 
living in areas adjacent to the project sites. The population lives legally in villages with most of 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
them working in local agriculture, local forest enterprises, or enterprises located in other areas. 
Commercial livestock farming does not exist in the areas. No resettlement or adverse impacts on 
the population’s livelihood is expected as a result of the project interventions. Nevertheless, a 
detailed social assessment will be undertaken as part of project preparation and possible concerns 
and benefits related to the existing population will be assessed. If OP4.12 is triggered a Policy 
framework will be prepared before project appraisal. 
 
Forestry
:
The Forestry safeguard is considered to be triggered by forest sector activities and 
other Bank sponsored interventions which have the potential to impact significantly upon 
forested areas. The project reestablishes natural forest on areas that were formerly cleared for 
agriculture. However, whether the harvesting aspect of the forest to be planted would trigger the 
safeguard will be assessed, but since the forests have to be operated in a sustainable manner in 
order to be eligible for carbon funding this is not expected to be a problem.       
 
Pest Management
.
The low level application of herbicides might be used in some areas to 
control weeds and fire during the first several years following planting of tree seedlings in which 
case measures will be undertaken to ensure that safeguards are met. The Environment 
Management Plan will specify products, application methods, disposal of surplus pesticides and 
packages.
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  QER not envisaged at this time.  If needed, a QER would take place in 
September 2005. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS.  A follow-up meeting on safeguards will take place in April 2005 to decide on the 
applicability of OP4.12 and OP4.36.  
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard-related studies will be the Environmental and Social Assessments for all areas.  
Both the EA and the SA part of this work will begin in late fall 2004/winter 2005. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
T
ask Team Leader: 
John W. Fraser Stewart  
10/20/2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/01/2004 
Comments 
S
ector Manager: 
Benoit Blarel 
11/01/2004 
Comments: 
