Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2010 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P090389 
Project Name: Public Finance Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader: Cem Dener 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
15.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed project are to strengthen the MoF and to implement 
a
sustainable integrated public financial management system (PFMS) that will: (i) support MoF’s 
reorganization, information needs and new functionality, (ii) expand the scope and functionality 
of Treasury system to ensure better accountability, transparency and integrity, and (iii) improve 
public governance.  
 
Building on further reforms of the Treasury, the project will emphasize the needs of the entire 
Ministry, and target immediate problems being faced by the MoF, as well as medium and longer 
term reforms. It will also help Ukraine with its European Union harmonization efforts.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is designed to improve the MoF institutional capacity and to strengthen 
public financial management system using the latest information and communication technology 
(ICT) solutions. The project includes financial and technical support for implementing MoF 
reorganization; developing new PFM methodologies and procedures; establishing integrated ICT 
solutions and other technological infrastructure; and training.  
 
Page  2
Project implementation will start with the MoF functional review, followed by core competency 
training, business process re-engineering, integration of work flows around core MoF tasks, and 
in parallel to these, design and implementation of ICT solutions and training. The Japanese 
PHRD Grant will be used to hire consultants who can help prepare the project and provide 
immediate advisory support to address current MoF and Treasury concerns and information 
needs. Considering the existing authorities given by the Budget code, the Treasury would 
deserve sufficient operational autonomy to execute its assigned tasks, namely, performing 
routine expenditure and revenue transactions and dealing with accounting policy, while the MoF 
determines the budget execution policy and defines strategic direction.  
 
Development of a Strategic Plan for modernization and improvement of public financial 
management is an important segment of project preparation. This document will include 
allocation of funds in annual budgets for implementation and maintenance of information 
systems (not only for Project co-financing, but also expenses for secure telecommunication lines, 
business continuity infrastructure etc.). This will allow having well defined objectives and 
funding to support the development and avoid the negative effects of possible fluctuations in 
Government in the light of forthcoming parliamentary elections. The Treasury development 
strategy should also include the transition to accrual based accounting, to be designed under EU-
TACIS project.  
 
A
significant amount of multilateral and bilateral assistance in PFM is underway in Ukraine:  
 
•
The Bank provided immediate advisory support on MoF reorganization; debt management 
and debt market development; and prepared a White Paper on public internal financial control 
for KRU (2005).  
 
•
USAID will be providing technical assistance (TA) and training for the MoF Budget Dept. on 
design and implementation of Performance Program Budgeting (PPB) as well as 
macroeconomics (2005-08).  
 
•
US Treasury will be assisting the MoF Budget Dept. on PPB and budget execution.  
 
•
SIDA is providing TA and training on public procurement and internal audit (2004-05).  
 
•
EU-TACIS is providing TA and training to the Treasury for “effective state budget 
management” (2004-06), as a part of the EU-Ukraine Action Plan. EU project covers some of the 
TA needed for the implementation of PFMS, particularly the design of a phased approach to 
move to accrual based accounting, and a close coordination is necessary to avoid overlapping 
activities.  
 
•
French Treasury is providing TA and training for the Treasury decentralization and internal 
audit.  
 
The MoF will convene and lead a “donor coordination group”, meeting on a quarterly basis, to 
avoid over-lapping assistance and to assure maximum value to the GoU of the limited resources 
available.  
 
Larger reforms requiring separate projects were excluded from the present project (e.g. 
Customs, Sub-national Public Finance Reform, and Tax Modernization, which already has a 
Bank-supported project). Also, the project does not include direct support to ongoing reforms 
being supported by other donors (e.g. Program and Performance Budgeting, supported by 
USAID and possibly by the US Treasury). However, ongoing reform activities will be closely 
Page  3
monitored and related project activities will be streamlined with these to avoid duplicate efforts 
and to ensure smooth integration of outputs.  
 
The Public Finance Modernization Project (PFMP) will support the Government over a period 
of five years (2006-2011) and will include the following three components:  
 
1. Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Operational Effectiveness:  
 
The purpose of this component is to assist the MoF in institutional capacity building for PFM, 
functional review of the MoF, business process re-engineering, and design of ICT solutions. 
Further enhancement and optimization of the functions and organizational structure of the 
Treasury are other important objectives. The human resources management system (HRMS) is 
also included to create a personnel database and an automated payroll calculation system, 
initially for the MoF, providing direct input to budget and accounting modules. HRMS can be 
integrated with the central HR database to be implemented by the Main Department of the Civil 
Service (MDCS) as a part of the civil service reform program in Ukraine.  
 
As part of strengthening PFM in Ukraine, there are several additional activities that will be 
included in this component, such as: TA for debt management and debt market development; 
modernizing KRU and assistance in implementing the White Paper (recently prepared by MoF, 
KRU and the Bank on Public Internal Financial Control); and supporting Procurement Reform, 
Capital Budgeting Process improvements, and Macro Economic Forecasting, which span the 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry of Economy (MoE).  
 
The indicative cost of this component is USD 3 million (?) to be allocated for consultancy 
services and training. Counterpart will be the Ministry of Finance.  
 
2. Development of an integrated Public Financial Management System (PFMS):  
 
With the recent completion of the Bank’s first Treasury project, a well functioning interim 
treasury system is in place. Based on the functional and technical requirements defined in the 
first component, the next step is the establishment of an integrated PFMS (based on accrual 
accounting model), including the enhancement of existing Treasury system.  
 
PFMS will be implemented in two parts, to ensure successful and timely completion of planned 
activities according to existing capacity and resources of MoF and Treasury IT Departments:  
 
A. PFMS modules to be implemented by the Treasury  
 
The Treasury System (Treasury II) will be developed as core PFMS by the Treasury IT Dept., 
who has considerable experience in the design and implementation of countrywide systems. Core 
PFMS can be established within the Treasury by enhancing existing ICT infrastructure and 
implementing a new web based application software (ASW) package. Treasury IT Dept can 
maintain the core PFMS and provide necessary support services to all system users throughout 
the country. All data exchange mechanisms/interfaces will be established through direct links 
between external systems and the Treasury.  
 
Core PFMS (Treasury II) will include the following modules:  
 
1.
Treasury System   [Treasury IT Dept.]  
 
1.1
Budget Execution and Monitoring  
Page  4
1.1.1  Accounts payables + Accounts receivables (including optimization and  
 
 
improvement of budget execution)  
 
1.1.2
Management of commitments (linked with state procurement system)  
 
1.1.3
Management of tangible assets and reserves  
 
1.1.4
Resource (cash) management  
 
1.2
Accounting (treasury general ledger)  
 
1.3
Accounting module for Spending Units  
 
1.4
Financial Reports  
 
1.5
Creation of a single register of budget institutions and organizations  
 
1.6
Interfaces/data exchanges with external systems/users:  
 
1.6.1
Banking system (TSA)  [ NBU ]  
 
1.6.2
Revenue collection 
–
Taxes  [ STA ]  
 
1.6.3
Revenue collection – Customs  [ SCA ]  
 
1.6.4
Revenue collection – Privatization  [ SPF ]  
 
1.6.5
Procurement Agency  [ MoE ]  
 
1.6.6
HRMIS  [ MDCS ]  
 
1.6.7
Internal Audit  [ KRU ]  
 
1.6.8
Statistics Institute  [ SI ]  
 
1.6.9
Line Ministries and Other Gov. Agencies  
 
The indicative cost of this subcomponent is USD 35 million (?) to be allocated for goods, 
consultancy services and training. Counterpart will be the Treasury.  
 
B. PFMS modules to be implemented by the MoF  
 
MoF component of the PFMS, including the Business Continuity Center (BCC) and the 
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) will be implemented by the MoF IT Dept., 
who will also coordinate all technical activities. BCC will contain a continuously updated replica 
of all core PFMS data and communicate with external systems through a direct link to the 
Treasury System. The same central database and application server setup as Treasury II will be 
established within the MoF. BCC will also host the FMIS (data warehouse) and provide 
controlled access to public finance information. MoF IT Dept will maintain the BCC systems 
and provide support to all MoF users. MoF PFMS will include the following modules, in 
addition to the core PFMS:  
 
2. Macro Economic and Fiscal Forecasting [ MoF + MoE ]  
 
3.
Budget Formulation 
 
[ MoF Budget Dept. ]  
 
4.
Debt and Aid Management 
 
[ MoF + MoE ]  (incl cash mgmt outside gov.)  
 
5.
Personnel DB + Payroll Calcs. 
[ MoF ]  
 
6.
Financial Mgmt Information System 
[ MoF ] (MoF Business Continuity Center)  
 
The indicative cost of this subcomponent is USD 22 million (?) to be allocated for goods, 
consultancy services and training. Counterpart will be the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Implementation of the Treasury System can start after the PHRD TA activities without further 
delay, provided that the mid-term Treasury development strategy and the public sector 
accounting reform strategy are approved. A preparation period is needed for the some of the 
Page  5
MoF modules. Both subcomponents include design and development of application software, 
establishment of system centers for central servers, installation of hardware and peripherals for 
central and local offices, establishment of secure countrywide network connections, and system 
management and support services. It’s worth noting that the Project should be implemented 
using principles of outsourcing. Support for complex IT solutions, development of application 
software, system administration, post warranty maintenance and training will be needed not only 
during the project timeframe but also after implementation. It should also be noted that, building 
necessary IT capacity within the MoF and Treasury is essential to be able to successfully manage 
the IT systems after implementation. This requires recruitment on new IT staff and hands on 
training of specialists during implementation. The Government should realize that the system 
will require allocations in annual budgets for recurrent costs to sustain the IT capacity and to 
properly maintain the systems in the future.  
 
Considerable coordination effort is needed to be in line with ongoing donor funded reform 
projects. MoF will coordinate all activities as explained below. The indicative total cost of the 
integrated PFMS implementation is USD 57 million (?). Counterparts will be the MoF and the 
Treasury.  
 
3. Project Management:  
 
A
project management component is needed to ensure timely and efficient allocation of 
resources; to carry out project procurement, financial management, and audit activities; and to 
interact with all local and international entities involved in project execution.  Change 
management activities and study tours are also included in this part. The indicative cost of this 
component is USD 5 million (?) and it will comprise goods, consultancy services, study tours 
and training. Treasury has already established a project implementation unit (PIU) to implement 
Treasury II project.  
 
A
public finance modernization Working Group (WG), chaired by a Deputy Minister of 
Finance, and including representatives of the key institutions that will be affected by the reform 
(internal MoF units, plus Treasury, Tax, Customs, KRU and some representatives of line 
ministries) was formed after the identification mission in November 2005. This WG will be 
supported by staff temporarily assigned from various units, and including the necessary 
substantive skills (e.g. budget, debt) and technical skills (Treasury IT). Treasury has substantial 
expertise that will be harnessed for the over-all reform effort.  
 
The Head of the WG will be charged with developing an over-all public finance reform 
strategy, and implementing MoF modernization. The WG would be in charge of the functional 
review of the MoF, as well as monitoring implementation of the White Paper on Internal Control 
(the White Paper Harmonization Unit), and monitoring progress on any additional reform 
projects. Implementation of each component will be managed by related agencies. Head of the 
WG will also be in charge of coordinating all donors involved in supporting public finance 
reforms in Ukraine, to assure consistent approaches and application of assistance to the most 
important MoF reform priorities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kiev, Ukraine   
 
Page  6
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The PCN does not elaborate on the above since none of the safeguard policies are expected to 
apply.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/31/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Project will not involve any type of civil works or construction.  The loan is for advisory 
support, technical assistance and training activities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Cem Dener 
12/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/16/2005 
Comments:  I concur; also on tranferring to the Task Team and Sector Manager for further review and 
clearance on safeguards. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
12/21/2005 
Comments:  I concur with the ISDS as it currently stands. 
