                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.: 101381


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Ukraine                             Project ID: P155111
Project Name: Ukraine Gas Supply Security Facility
Task Team Leader: Stephanie Gil; Richard Bernard MacGeorge
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 19,       Estimated Board Date: December 17, 2015
2015
Managing Unit: GEE03                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Oil and gas (90%);General industry and trade sector (10%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                      0.00
        IBRD Guarantee                                              500.00
                                                                    500.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project's Development Objective is to increase Ukraine's security of gas supply. Gas supply
security would be improved by facilitating Naftogaz's access to a wider suite of suppliers and
improving the commercial terms of the said supply.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
IBRD and EBRD have collaborated in designing a financing structure that supports Naftogaz in
ensuring security of gas supply in Ukraine. The structure involves a US$300 million working
capital facility from EBRD and a US$500 million rolling Payment Guarantee from IBRD. The
EBRD facility would bring much needed hard currency for gas purchases but, for repayment,
most of Naftogaz's revenues are in local currency and it will need to purchase hard currencies
from the market or the National Bank of Ukraine to repay EBRD and any draws under the
guaranteed facility. This will require review during further structuring of the arrangement.

 The guarantee would be part of a joint World Bank and EBRD facility to support purchases of
gas from suppliers, in which EBRD would provide a US$300 million working capital facility.
EBRD's facility would allow Naftogaz access to short-term funding at highly competitive terms
and improve its ability to meet the escrow funding requirement which is part of the IBRD
guarantee scheme. The World Bank and EBRD facilities would cover gas purchase contracts
from a similar pool of suppliers resulting in a total of US$800 million of monthly gas supplies
being secured at better contract terms.

D. Project location (if known)
The Guarantee would not result in any change in the physical infrastructure of the gas delivery
and transportation both inside and outside of Ukraine.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The safeguard capacity of the Client will be explored during project preparation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nina Chee (OPSOR)
   Ms Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECCUA)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                             X
    The proposed project will not result in a change to the physical infrastructure of the gas
delivery and transportation both outside and inside of Ukraine. As the guarantee facility is
supporting gas purchases and not investment in physical infrastructure, it will not result in any
change in the gas delivery and transportation network.

    The project will also not lead to a significant change in the volume of gas supply in the
Ukrainian system to current and/or historical flows. The IBRD Guarantee would support
purchases of gas equivalent to about 1-1.5bcm/month, which is below the current capacity of gas
imports from Europe, and well below the capacity of the Ukraine transportation infrastructure.

     The guarantee operation will not cause a change in the system and, accordingly, the project
will have an assessment rating of Category C.

     The team proposes to undertake a due diligence with respect to two aspects: the Suppliers,
and the environmental and social management system of the gas infrastructure within Ukraine.

      For the Suppliers the due diligence approach will founded on the definition of eligibility
criteria. These will for instance include the need to make the representations and warranties to
the effect that suppliers will comply with EU directives or WBG Performance Standards.

     For the gas infrastructure within Ukraine, the approach would be to carry out due diligence
regarding the health and safety protection system of the gas transmission and storage
infrastructure owned and operated by Naftogaz. The team would start by obtaining data from
Naftogaz and from the EU, based on Ukraine's participation in the EU Energy Community which
carries obligation to comply with relevant EU Directives. Based on the outcome of this initial
exploration the team would determine the level of risk and discuss the potential for an action
plan to address any identified issues.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                              Yes              No             TBD

     It is expected that Naftogaz will provide data to the Bank to satisfy enquiries regarding the
health and safety performance of its network, which would focus primarily on gas transmission
and storage facilities. Should that review identify critical issues that need to be remedied, a plan
will be developed accordingly.

      The proposed project is expected to involve EBRD and reputable international commercial
banks issuing letters of credit. It is anticipated that the parties will apply Equator Principles with
regard to environmental risks arising from the project, which will be considered and integrated
where possible with Bank performance standards.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                      X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                X
    The project does not envisage any construction or any physical facilities enhancement. Hence
the project will not require any land acquisition and is not going to cause any economic or
physical displacement. Additionally, the project is not expected to significantly change the
volume of gas supply in Ukraine, and therefore is not expected to affect employment and
livelihoods.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                     X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                              X


Environmental Category:                   -

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 10/26/2015

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   10/26/2015

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   Completion of due diligence by October 30, 2015.


1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Ms Stephanie Gil      09/14/2015
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Agnes I. Kiss      09/14/2015
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Ranjit J. Lamech   09/14/2015
   Comments:
