Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1658 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/08/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P095337 
Project Name: URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Seema Manghee 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (40%);Water supply (40%);Sewerage (20%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project objective is to assist the Utilities in implementing Business Plans that lay out the 
financial, operational changes and investments needed to move toward sustainable operations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project design would be based on a demand-driven and competitive selection for 
inclusion in the Project.  The selection for inclusion in the project are: ability to gradually cover 
operating and maintenance costs through the life of the Project; ability to demonstrate that the 
proposed investments would constitute the least-cost approach to meet the given objectives; 
proof that the requesting city or service provider possessed the necessary institution capacity to 
operate and maintain the proposed investment; and compliance with Bank safeguard policies and 
in particular with a satisfactory environmental impact analysis to demonstrate the positive 
environmental effect of the proposed investment.  
 
Institutional Capacity Component - This component would help Utilities to adopt commercially 
oriented business-type practices and become financially viable through the preparation of annual 
Business Plans.  During Project preparation, the utilities are defining the purpose of a Business 
Plan, including its use in managing a company.  
Page  2
The Business Plan will show yearly targets, such as increasing the number of people to be 
served, including the poor; improving water quality; improving the collection-to-billing ratio; 
reducing energy per m3 and of the staff per 100 connections; increasing tariffs and cost-recovery 
levels, up to their break-even points; improved collection of solid waste; safe disposal; and clean 
up of wild dump sites.  During Project implementation, the Business Plan will produce updated 
financial statements (income statement, balance sheet and cash flow statement).  Utilities would 
use such financial statements in managing their resources.  
 
At the central level, the State Committee and the Utilities would be further strengthened to 
ensure accountability and efficiency for the sector.  They would be provided technical capacity 
building on implementation and supervision.  The component would also ensure that proper 
procurement and financial management training, applicable to Ukraine, is provided and that 
feasibility study requirements are met.  
 
Investment Component - This component would address the most urgent investment needs of 
the water, wastewater and solid waste sector of participating cities. The Project will be 
implemented in two phases.  The first phase would address the emergency investments needed to 
mitigate serious health and environmental risks posed by the water, wastewater and solid waste 
sectors.  The second phase would address priority investments that involve efficiency and 
sustainability and most importantly, replace high energy-consuming pumps and related 
infrastructure with efficiency and energy saving to reduce operating costs.  Performance 
benchmarks would also be provided to measure output, depending on the objective of each 
phase.  
 
The investment component will be implemented in two phases; the first phase will address 
emergency investments needed to mitigate serious health and environmental risks posed by the 
water and wastewater and solid waste management system, and the second phase will address 
priority investments that involve efficiency and sustainability issues, as well as health and 
environmental risks. The consultant services for the detailed design and procurement package for 
the second phase will be carried out during project implementation.  This component will be 
generally categorized into the following seven groups:  
 
i.  rehabilitation of water distribution systems, including piping, elevated reservoir, water 
meters, equipment for rehabilitation work and leak detection;  
 
ii.  rehabilitation of water production and treatment facilities including wells and water intake 
facilities, sedimentation, sand filtration, and disinfection system;  
 
iii.  rehabilitation of sewerage systems, including sewer pipes, pumping station, equipment for 
rehabilitation work and vacuum truck;  
 
iv.  rehabilitation of sewage treatment plants, including grit removal chamber, sedimentation 
tank, biological reactor, and sludge dewatering equipment;  
 
v.
rehabilitation of existing disposal sites and closure of wild dump sites, in environmentally 
sound manner, including monitoring and treatment equipment;  
 
vi.  rehabilitation of collection and supporting equipment, including collection bins, collection 
vehicles, and related equipment; and  
Page  3
vii.  rehabilitation of transfer stations that can handle residential, commercial and institutional 
waste for consolidation to regional landfill sites.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Investment is being considered for 4 to 8 cities including Odessa, Kharkiv, Donetsk, and 
Dnipropetrovsk.  The final selection of the cities will be confirmed by the Ministry of Finance by 
May 2005.  Selection process will involve competitive proposals by cities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Discussions have been held with the Ministry of Environment and the State Committee on the 
basic safeguard principles and procedures and the respective responsibilities of the stakeholders.  
The MoE has identified internal specialists who could serve on monitoring committee or provide 
advice to Project Management Team that is currently being established.  Local consultants are 
being used to prepared EA and EFP.  Potential Consultants for monitoring implementation 
process also discussed and identification process underway.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Philip W. Moeller (ECSIE) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (QAG) 
Mr Johnson Appavoo (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The environmental analysis will include an Environmental Assessment (EA) that examines 
the current baseline situation, describes what rehabilitation is proposed, and identifies any 
significant impact arising from the proposed investment.  Qualified local firms are conducting 
this analysis.  
 
As indicated above no significant impact is expected, but in order to minimize impact and 
contain impact from the rehabilitation process, the EA will include a mitigation plan.  There will 
also be a monitoring plan to identify monitoring role and ensure the adherence of responsible 
parties to the mitigation plan.  An Environmental Framework Policy will supplement the EA.  It 
will compare policies and procedures of the World Bank and Ukraine relative to environmental 
protection and resolve any possible conflicts.  It will also address issues related to chance finds.  
 
In addition to the technical information provided in the EA, the preparation of the EA will 
be accompanied by disclosure and stakeholder consultations.  Completion is scheduled by 
September 2005.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project team intends to ask for an exemption from the office of the RVP.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since the project involves rehabilitation of existing sites and facilities that already hold 
permits and licenses to operate, only minimal social or environmental impact is expected.  
The project is being prepared, therefore, as category B.  Social and environmental analysis 
has already been initiated.  
 
Social  
 
The social assessment is being carried out by MAMA-86, a local NGO with experience in 
water and urban infrastructure issues. Methodological review is being provided by the 
Institute of Sociology in Kiev.  The assessment has begun in Odessa and will include a 
minimum of two other cities.  The assessment package will be completed by September 15, 
2005.  Assessment instruments include:  
 
-
Household Surveys  
 
-
Focus Groups  
 
-
Informant interviews  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The assessment will address user priorities and social capital issues that related to building 
the  sustainable monitoring system for social impact that will also be outlined in the 
assessment. The monitoring system will include the periodic use of score cards, filled out by 
the local community.  The development of "Offices of Consumer Relations" within the 
utilities will facilitate the monitoring process and the creation of a user-oriented culture 
within the utilities.  Additionally an information/education program will be developed for 
administration by the utilities throughout project implementation.  Neither resettlement nor 
land acquisition is included. and no other safeguard policies would be triggered.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Seema Manghee 
04/07/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
06/28/2005 
Comments:  This PCN-stage ISDS is approved; I will retain authority for clearance at least through 
QER. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
07/01/2005 
Comments:  I concur with our Regional Safeguards Coordinator. 
