Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/22/2005 
Report No.:  AC1677
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P075231 
Project Name:  Social Assistance System Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anush Bezhanyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
99.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.38
2.38 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project seeks significant improvement of the effectiveness of Ukraine?s social 
assistance system by better targeting of the benefits and reducing burden on beneficiaries.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:  Administrative Modernization ? will focus on modernization and 
improvement of capacity of the local (oblast and rayon) labor and social protection 
offices to enable delivery of better quality services to clients. It will support 
organizational and operational reforms, transformation of social assistance from a disjoint 
set of program-specific arrangements to a unified, function-based and client-oriented 
structure.  It will develop capacities that would enable effective implementation of the 
ongoing social assistance reform program.  
 
Component 2:  Policy Development, Monitoring, Evaluation and Communication - will 
aim to build the MOLSP capacity for development of social assistance policies, with the 
systemic approach to monitoring program outcomes and policy impacts. It will also 
develop capacity of local labor and social welfare offices to outreach to the poorest parts 
of population with an effort to include them into the social assistance programs financed 
by the Government.  
 
Page  2
Component 3:  Institutional Development ? will aim to strengthen institutional capacity 
of the MOLSP for efficient and effective implementation of the program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  3
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anush Bezhanyan 
06/30/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Johnson Appavoo 
06/30/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
