Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  34175 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/07/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P083726 
Project Name: Pension Administration Project 
Task Team Leader: Zoran Anusic 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are i) create a fiscally and socially sustainable pension system in 
Ukraine; and ii) improve collection of social insurance contributions and reduce compliance and 
administrative costs. To achieve these objectives, the project will i) provide a budgetary support 
to bridge the potential revenue shortfall due to reduction in social insurance contribution rate and 
introduction of the second mandatory fully funded pillar, and ii) strengthen the capacity of the 
PFU to collect and manage pension funds and data, and consolidate overlapping functions and 
achieve synergies with agencies that manage other social insurance schemes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Based on the dialogue so far, the Government intends to address the administrative and policy 
issues in the following three areas: (i) consolidation of social insurance administration and PFU 
modernization, (ii) reducing burden of the social insurance system and introduction of the second 
pension pillar, and (iii) pension policy analysis, monitoring, evaluation and public information 
provision.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ukraine   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies are expected to apply to the proposed project.  However, attention to any 
potential conflicts will be paid during project preparation by the Borrower, key counterpart 
institutions and the end-users of the Pension Administration Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/09/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  3
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zoran Anusic 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
10/24/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
 
Comments:   
