                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                  Report number AC7179

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/30/2015
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Ukraine                             Project ID: P155111
Project Name: Ukraine Gas Supply Security Facility
Task Team Leader: Stephanie Gil; Richard Bernard MacGeorge
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 18,       Estimated Board Date: January 21, 2016
2015
Managing Unit: GEE03                         Lending Instrument: IPF
Sector: Oil and gas (90%); General industry and trade sector (10%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         IBRD Guarantee                                              500.00
                                                                     500.00
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]          Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The Project’s Development Objective is to enhance Naftogaz’s ability to increase
Ukraine’s security of gas supply, by facilitating access to cost-effective financing and
improving the terms of the gas supply contracts supported under the Project.

3. Project Description

The Project is composed of one component, which is a Guarantee instrument of US$500
million to improve access to and terms of financing for Naftogaz's gas purchases.

The IBRD Guarantee is intended to improve the commercial terms on which Naftogaz
purchases gas from gas traders in the regional gas market through the provision of a
credit enhancement feature to Naftogaz’s trading arrangements. For this purpose,
Naftogaz will request from international commercial banks that they issue letters of credit
(L/Cs) or loans in amount of up to US$500 million for the benefit of individual gas
suppliers, in support of Naftogaz’s payments to each of the gas suppliers. In turn, the
L/Cs and/or loans provided by international commercial banks will be guaranteed with
the IBRD Guarantee.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the assessment of
environmental and social risks and impacts:

The proposed project will not result in a change to the physical infrastructure of the gas
delivery and transportation both inside and outside of Ukraine, nor result in changes to
existing gas supply in the system. The proposed guarantee is expected to affect factors
such as timing of payment and length of gas purchase contracts, but not significantly alter
the volume of gas delivered to Ukraine. Since the proposed guarantee will support
commercial activities with minimal or no adverse environmental or social risks or
impacts, at PCN stage the proposed IBRD project was classified as Category C for
purposes of OP/BP 4.03. IFC will be presenting a $200 million investment to the Board
at the end of December that will finance the sale of natural gas to Naftogaz by the gas
supplier ENGIE (formerly GDF-Suez). The IFC project has been classified as Category
B according to IFC’s Environmental and Social Review Procedure, principally on
account of the inherent environmental and social risks related to the transportation and
storage of natural gas and integrity of the existing pipeline infrastructure. Although there
has been no change to the environmental or social risks since the PCN Review Meeting,
it has been decided to change the classification of the proposed IBRD guarantee project
from C to B to make it consistent with IFC’s classification.

Project preparation occurred concurrently with both the EBRD and IFC parallel facilities,
enabling a joint decision-making approach to environmental and social due diligence.
The Bank team considered the outcomes of both EBRD and IFC environmental and
social due diligence to inform the Bank’s due diligence to ensure consistency in
safeguards approach and categorization.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Nina Chee (Lead Environmental Specialist)
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (Senior Social Development Specialist)
6. Applicable Performance Standards                            Yes           No
PS 1: Assessment and Management of                              X
Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                              X
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention              X
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                    X
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary                                       X
Resettlement
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                              X
Management of Living Natural Resources
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                     X
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                      X

7. If PS 1 and PS 2 are NOT applicable, provide a brief explanation why:


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Key environmental and social issues associated with this project include: i) management
of environmental, social, health and safety risks associated with Naftogaz operations, ii)
management of occupational health and safety (OHS) risks, iii) management of life and
fire safety and emergency response, iv) energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions
associated with gas distribution, v) human resources management and retrenchment
plans. The business practices of Naftogaz are designed to meet European environmental
protection policies, and basic safety standards in radiation and environmental protection.
Naftogaz code of conduct was adopted in 2014 which covers its principles of the
environmental policy. Additionally, regulations on occupational health are being
developed by Naftogaz and its subsidiaries based on Ukrainian standards, OHSAS 18001
Occupational, Health and Safety Management Requirements and international norms.
Ukrtransgaz (UTG), Naftogaz’s gas transmission subsidiary, has an environmental health
and safety (EHS) system in place and maintains third-party certification for ISO 9001, a
quality management system; OHSAS 18001, an occupational health and safety
management system; ISO 14001, an environmental management system; and ISO 15001,
an energy management system.

The Bank reviewed corporate environmental and social due diligence questionnaires
related to Naftogaz’s environmental and social management systems and IFC’s
Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS), as well as holding several meetings
with IFC and EBRD counterparts to discuss a joint approach to environmental and social
due diligence. An Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) has been developed
with Naftogaz to ensure E&S risks are effectively mitigated. Naftogaz will be required
to: i) develop an integrated Environmental, Occupational, Health and Safety and Social
Management system that will incorporate the existing procedures consistent with
Performance Standard 1, and ii) update existing human resource policy and procedures to
align with the requirements of Performance Standard 2 including the development and
implementation of a retrenchment plan, as applicable.

The Bank also conducted a media search in both English and Russian languages of the
preliminary list of pre-qualified gas suppliers to identify potential EHS reputational risks
associated with each gas supplier. This review did not identify any major EHS incidents,
which could potentially exclude them from participating in the facility. All potential gas
suppliers will be subject to an EHS reputational risk review as part of the eligibility
criteria.


{See Environmental and Social Review Summary in Annex 1, which is also available at
the following website:
http://ifcextapps.ifc.org/IFCExt/spiwebsite1.nsf/78e3b305216fcdba85257a8b0075079d/f
9080382ef8eb0a085257f0200763ade?opendocument:}




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental and Social Review Summary:
  Dates of "in-country" disclosure                                     November 19, 2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                       December 18, 2015
  For Category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                          Not applicable.
  Summary of the client’s ESIA to the Executive Directors
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

Client’s Environment and Social Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone Environmental     Yes [ ]           No [ X ]       N/A [ ]
and Social Assessment (including EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Yes [ ]           No [ ]       N/A [ ]
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Client’s Environmental and Social Management System
Has the client developed an appropriately detailed       Yes [X ]            No [ ]       N/A [ ]
ESMS, and does the client have the technical and
organizational capacity to implement it?
Labor and Working Conditions
Does the client have a written human resources policy    Yes [X ]            No [ ]       N/A [ ]
available to all employees that describes labor and
working conditions?
Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management
If PS 6 is applicable, would the project result in any        Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or      Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
If the project entails use of living natural resources, has   Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
certification been obtained or a time-bound plan
established to obtain certification?
Physical Cultural Resources
If PS 8 is applicable, does the project design include        Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X ]
adequate measures related to physical cultural resources?
Indigenous Peoples
If PS 7 applicable, and have Indigenous Peoples               Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X]
communities been consulted in accordance with
requirements of PS 7?
Have the requirements for Free Prior Informed Consent         Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X ]
been met, and is there reasonable evidence of broad
community support by the affected Indigenous Peoples
communities?
Involuntary Resettlement
If PS 5 is applicable, have the requirements been             Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X ]
complied with by the client?
Pollution Prevention and Efficient Use of Resources
Does the project comply with good international industry      Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
practice as presented in the WBG EHSGs or a similar
internationally recognized benchmark?
Is the project designed for energy efficiency and waste       Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
minimization?
Community Health and Safety
Has the assessment determined that local communities          Yes [ X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
could face significant adverse impacts in event of an
accident or emergency situation associated with the
project?
If so, has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been          Yes [X ]     No [ ]    N/A [ ]
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified by the Bank of the     Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [ X ]
project?
Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the       Yes [ ]     No [ ]    N/A [X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared by the Bank?
     Disclosure
     If Category A or B, has the ESRS been sent to the World      Yes [X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     Bank's Infoshop?
     Have relevant assessment documents prepared by the           Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X ]
     client been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
     form and language that are understandable and accessible
     to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
     Monitoring and Reporting
     Has the client agreed to submit an Annual Monitoring         Yes [X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     Report to the Bank to report on the management of
     environmental and social risks and impacts, and does the
     Legal Agreement contain this provision?
     Has the client agreed to report at least annually to local   Yes [X ]    No [ ]     N/A [ ]
     affected communities on how the project is performing
     with respect to environmental and social risks and
     impacts of concern to those communities?


     D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                Stephanie Gil, Richard MacGeorge            December 9, 2015
Environmental Specialist:        Nina Chee                                   December 10, 2015
Social Development               Angela Nyawira Khaminwa                     December 14, 2015
Specialist:

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards              Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, acting for      December 18, 2015
Coordinator:                     Agi Kiss
  Comments:
Practice Manager:                Ranjit Lamech                               December 18, 2015
Comments:
Annex 1: Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS)
Note that the Project will rely on the ESRS prepared by IFC for Naftogaz, for the purpose
of the US$200 million IFC loan to support gas purchases from one European supplier.
ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL REVIEW SUMMARY

This Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) is prepared by IFC to disclose its findings and
recommendations related to environmental and social considerations regarding potential investments. Its
purpose is to enhance the transparency of IFC’s activities. For any project documentation or data included or
attached herein that has been prepared by the project sponsor, authorization has been given for public release
by the project sponsor. IFC considers that this ESRS is of adequate quality for release to the public, but has not
necessarily independently verified all of the project information therein. It is distributed in advance of IFC
Board of Directors’ consideration and may be periodically updated thereafter. Board dates are estimates only
and this document should not be construed as presuming the outcome of the Board Directors’ decision.
    Project number                      36113

    Country                             World Region

    Region                              WORLD

    Sector                              O-AK - Commercial Banking - Trade and Supply Chain

    Department                          Global Industry, Financial Markets

    Company name                        ENGIE SA

    Environmental category              B

    Date ESRS disclosed                 November 19, 2015


    Status                              Pend FAP


 Overview of IFC's scope of review

 Incremental environmental and social (E&S) risk arising from the proposed project compared with the without-
 project case arises in UTG’s gas storage and distribution infrastructure. IFC’s scope of review therefore focused
 on these operations along with E&S management practices established by NAK. IFC also reviewed ENGIE’s
 E&S management practices, but given that incremental risk is in Ukraine the remainder of this review summary
 will describe only the NAK and UTG operations.

 IFC’s appraisal of this project included meeting with NAK management in Kyiv and site visits in December 2014
 to the UTG’s Dashava gas storage facility in Lviv , and associated pipelines. IFC also reviewed NAK’s and
 UTG’s environmental and social policies, management systems and related procedures, including those related
 to Occupational Health and Safety (OHS).

 Meetings were held with the NAK’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Deputy Director of Labor Protection, Industrial
 Safety and Reliability of Gas and Oil Transportation, Chief Advisor to the Chairman of Board and the Deputy
 Head of Human Resources (HR) and Social Department.

 Project description

 The proposed project consists of a trade finance facility of up to US$200 million (Facility), for up to one year to
 cover importation of natural gas to Ukraine during the 2015-2016 winter season. Gas will be purchased by the
 state-owned National Joint Stock Company Naftogaz of Ukraine (Naftogaz or NAK). Gas will be supplied by
 ENGIE (previously named Gaz de France (GDF) SUEZ) a major European supplier of natural gas, from existing
 gas distribution infrastructure in Germany and Austria through the Slovakian gas transmission company
 Eustream, under ENGIE’s natural gas supply framework contract with Naftogaz

 Naftogaz (NAK), the recipient of the gas, is a state owned company founded in 1998 and is one of Ukraine’s
 largest companies. It is a vertically integrated oil and gas company engaged in the full cycle of gas and oil field
 exploration and development, production and exploratory drilling, gas and oil product processing, transport and
 storage, and supply of natural gas and LPG to consumers, through its different enterprises.

 Naftogaz’s gas transmission subsidiary is Ukrtransgaz (UTG). UTG’s main activities are: nat ural gas
 transmission via trunk gas pipelines; storage of natural gas in underground storage facilities; supplying natural
gas to consumers; operation, reconstruction and servicing of gas mains and associated facilities; capital
construction of gas pipelines and other facilities; production of compressed natural gas and filling vehicles with it
at gas-filling compressor stations.

The proposed IFC project complements a $300 million agreement signed in October 2015 between the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and Naftogaz. For this proposed transaction IFC
has aligned with the approach to environmental and social (E&S) management agreed between EBRD and
Naftogaz even though the due dates of some actions extend beyond the maturity of the proposed IFC loan. IFC
and Naftogaz have agreed interim measures towards delivery of the agreed E&S commitments and IFC will
monitor Naftogaz’s progress on these measures during the life of the proposed IFC loan.

Identified applicable performance standards

PS   1   – Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
PS   2   - Labor and working conditions
PS   3   - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention
PS   4   – Community Health, Safety and Security


Environmental and social categorization and rationale

The proposed investment classified as an E&S Category B project according to IFC’s Policy on Environmental
and Social Sustainability as the environmental and social impacts of the projects are limited, site-specific and
can be avoided minimized, or mitigated by adhering to generally recognized performance standards, guidelines,
or design criteria. Key environmental and social issues associated with this project include i) management of
environmental, social, health and safety risks associated with UTG and how these are identified and assessed
by Naftogaz, ii) managing Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks; iii) management of life and fire safety
and emergency response; iv) energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions associated with gas distribution;
v) human resources management and retrenchment plans.

Main Environmental & Social Risks-Impacts of the Project and Key Mitigation Measures

PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

Policy
The business practices of Naftogaz are designed to meet European environmental protection
policies and basic safety standards in radiation and environmental protection. NAT code of conduct
adopted in 2014 covers its principles of the environmental policy including responsibility and
awareness, balance between economic, environmental and social interests, effective
environmental management, and implementation of modern environmentally safe technologies,
prevention measures, improving environmental education and culture, and open access to
information and transparency of decisions.
In addition, regulations on occupational health are being developed by NAT and its subsidiaries.
These will be based on Ukrainian standards, OHSAS 18001 Occupational Health and Safety
Management Requirements, and international norms.

Environmental and Social Assessment and Management System
UTG has an environmental, health and safety system in place and is certified against ISO 9001, a
quality management system; OHSAS 18001, an occupational health and safety management
system; ISO 14001, an environmental management system, and ISO 15001, an energy
management system. Naftogaz supervises the operations of UTG through periodical audits
covering both safety and environment matters. Naftogaz has a safety management system and
procedures in place, though it manages environmental, safety and social issues separately rather
than in an integrated manner.
Thus, as set forth in the ESAP, Naftogaz will integrate its existing approach to safety and E&S into
an integrated Environmental and Social Management System and enhance this as necessary such
that it aligns with Performance Standard 1.

Identification of Risks and Impacts
UTG has a hazards identification and risk assessment system that was last updated in May 2014.
The system outlines the criteria to identify the risk and assessment procedures and illustrates the
roles and responsibilities in identifying and managing these risks. Risks associated with UTG
activities covering both pipelines and the storage facilities as identified in the UTG system include
explosion, failure of the storage cavity, traffic accidents, falling from heights (in well and pits),
electric hazards, noise, fire, handling and management of hazardous chemicals such as methanol,
and gas leakages.
Preventive measures taken by UTG includes continuous training of workers on Occupational Health
and Safety (OHS) and fire safety; ensuring that all workers are wear personal protective
equipment; inspection, testing and repairing of equipment, conducting fire and emergency drills,
having safety signs clearly placed at the sites; and adopting and being certified against
internationally accepted management system requirements for OHS and environment.

Organizational Capacity and Competency
NAK has assigned a safety officer and UTG has in each facility three safety engineer, one ecology
engineer and five geology engineers. The safety officer has to pass an exam every three years by
the government. The safety officer as part of the requirements of the Government is required to
take a re-certification test every three years.
The induction training of all workers include labor safety and fire safety. In addition, workers
receive training related to OHS and emergency preparedness on annual basis. At the end of the
training there is an exam and the trainees receive a certificate of completion.

Emergency Preparedness and Response
UTG has an emergency preparedness plan and procedures for each of its facilities and all
employees are trained on responding in cases of emergency. The plan is approved by the local
authorities and is reviewed and updated periodically. A firefighting system and plan is also in
place. Firefighting drills are carried out on quarterly basis.

Monitoring and Review

UTG has monitoring plans and conducts continuous monitoring of soil, groundwater, ambient noise
and air emission as well as workplace parameters at each of its facilities. The monitoring results
are in compliance with national regulations and European commission standards.
Geotechnical investigations are conducted on annual basis by a specialized scientific research
center. Soil and ground water analysis are carried out at the end of each season. UTG carries out
visual inspection around the main pipelines every 10 days. All monitoring records are reported by
UTG to NAK. In addition, ecological and safety inspections are carried out by the Ukrainian
authorities.

External Communications and Grievance Mechanisms
UTG has an external communication mechanism which allows the external stakeholders to raise
their concerns. UTG has a website were the public can place complaints and grievances. The
complaints are delivered and handled directly by UTG president office and are processed and
documented according to the nature of the complaint. UTG will clarify that its existing grievance
mechanism can receive and facilitate resolution of concerns and grievances about UTG’s
environmental and social performance, in line with PS 1 requirements.

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions

NAK Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Naftogaz has 721,000 employees, 47% of which are women. The minimum age of recruitment per
Nafotgaz policies is 18 years. Student internships are accepted at the age of 17.
Naftogaz has a code of ethics which covers equal opportunity policy, conflict of interest, labor and
safety. Naftogaz has a grievance mechanism policy issued by an internal order by the CEO
As set forth in the ESAP, the company will update its HR policy to be aligned with PS2
requirements to cover non-discrimination and equal opportunity, grievance mechanism, employee
performance, workers organization, OHS, and training and development.

Retrenchment
Naftogaz is currently in the process of downsizing the number of employees at the corporate level
by 15%. As per the Ukrainian Labor law the employer is required to pay severance for a one-
month period. Naftogaz pays an additional 1-3 months to the employees being downsized.
As set forth in the ESAP, NAK will develop and implement a retrenchment plan to reduce the
adverse impacts of retrenchment on workers.
Workers Organization
UTG has a collective bargaining agreement for 2013-2015. The collective bargaining agreement
covered more than 23,100 workers and 9,900 UTG’s non-working pensioners who were members
of the Ukrainian trade union association as of January 2015.
Under the collective bargaining agreement UTG pays considerable attention to the social
protection of pensioners who have served the company. Guarantees and compensation are
stipulated in collective agreements and support for pensioners is reflected in social assistance and
benefits.

UTG Occupational Health and Safety
UTG keeps records of incidents and accidents that occurs in each of its facilities. One fatality was
been reported in the last three years but there were no other major accidents. The death was due
to an explosion where a worker was attempting to repair a leak in a pipeline. Investigation and
corrective measures were taken to prevent similar accidents from occurring. As part of their
continuous training UTG has incorporated training programs to mitigate this type of accidents.

PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention

Energy Efficiency and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Projects
UTG adopts international energy management standards as set by ISO 15001. Since 2005, UTG
has adopted measures, which resulted in reduction of natural gas internal consumption and losses
by 68% by 2011 compared to the level in 2005.
UTG has reduced gas losses procuring and applying high-quality sealant materials, implementing
innovative pipeline and joint repair methods, using a technology that functions like a composite
wrap, and by creating six ecological laboratories that are trained, equipped, and staffed to
implement inspection and maintenance programs throughout UTG’s system. UTG also replaced
gas-turbine driven compressors by electric compressors.

Air Emissions and Ambient Air Quality
The main source of air emissions is through natural gas leaks as a result of normal operations and
equipment venting. In order to prevent leakage UTG ensures that the pipelines meet international
standards for structural integrity and operational performance. In addition, UTG has a program for
periodic leak and corrosion detection. Moreover, through continuous monitoring of the amount of
gas transmitted leakages in the system are being tracked.
Point source air emissions from fuel combustion in stand-by generators and turbines are also
being monitored to ensure compliance with regulatory limits.

PS 4: Community Health, Safety and Security

Infrastructure and Equipment Design and Safety
The natural gas pipelines network was mostly (approximately 98% of the pipelines) constructed
during the period from 1960 to 1980, where the land was state owned.
There is a right of way for the natural gas pipelines which ranges from 5 meter to 50 meter, based
on the type of pipeline. There are restrictions on the use of heavy equipment in the area
surrounding the pipelines. For pipelines passing in agricultural land, it is requested that heavy
equipment such as tractors not be used. Inspection of the pipelines is carried out periodically to
ensure that there are no leaks. Automatic monitoring devices are installed throughout the pipeline
to monitor the pressure and gas flow and to detect, leaks and corrosion.
Protection of underground infrastructure from soil corrosion and other natural phenomena is
performed by cathodic protection installations, drainage protection units and other protection units
which maintain the system’s reliability.
In order to rapidly identify and address gas transportation system operational issues, UTG
conducts regular comprehensive surveys of all relevant equipment. Evaluation of all infrastructure
is carried out using modern methods including magnetic particle inspection of intra-tube pistons.
According to the results any operational issues are resolved without interrupting their work.
Emergency Preparedness and Response
The emergency response plan addresses civil protection from different types of emergencies as
well as natural and manmade disasters such as terrorist attacks. The emergency response plans
are discussed and communicated with the administrative authorities in each of the locations with
UTG facilities are located.

Security Personnel
UTG sites protection is carried out as mandated by the Laws of Ukraine on Pipeline Transport, Oil
and Gas, Security Activity, and Security Rules for Main Pipelines, approved by the Regulation of
the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine number 1747 dated November 16, 2002.
The security structure and procedures of UTG is set out in coordination between UTG, NAT,
and the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry of Ukraine. These agencies foresee the programs and
plans, such as financial, logistics, procurement of works and services, capital investment,
maintenance, repairs, and anti-terrorism measures, etc.
Under these programs, the critical facilities are protected by the State Security Service of
Ukraine units under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and by the specialized guard units of the
Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry.
The non-critical facilities are guarded by private subcontracted security personnel. Contracted
security also assist the state security forces in the protection of critical facilities. Security
companies can be contracted by UTG only by means of open tender procedure, in accordance with
the Law of Ukraine on Public Procurement. Terms of site protection, training, equipping and
monitoring of contracted security companies are prescribed in the tender documents. The agreed
terms are included in the contract. The government security personnel meet the regulatory
requirements in terms of procedures and equipment they use in protection of critical facilities.
Training requirement for contracted security personnel are stipulated by national regulations and
includes the use of weapons, understanding the risks associated with the protected facilities, and
protection of the facilities as well as civil protection.
In the event of emergencies and protection of critical facilities, UTG security personnel, local
government and national government agencies prepare security management plans in
conjunction.



Client's Stakeholder Engagement

Clients Community Engagement

UTG has identified their stakeholders including specialists of the gas transportation and energy industries,
journalists, representatives of state authorities, representatives of regulatory bodies, representatives of
international companies and organizations, and the public.

Within the scope of the ESIA carried out at project inception scoping and disclosure consultation meetings were
held where representatives from the identified stakeholders were in attendance.

UTG has an access to information policy which is disclosed on the company’s website. Daily data on
underground gas storage levels is available as well as daily statistics on gas transit flows through Ukraine. In
addition, disclosed information includes the environmental and social policy. Through the com pany’s website,
individuals can send requests for additional information and data.

Local access of project documentation

The ESRS and the ESAP will be translated into the Ukrainian language and made available at the company
premises at the following address.

The documents will also be published on Naftogaz’s website http://www.naftogaz.com
For more information, enquiries and comment please contact
Sergiy Oleksiyenko Chief Advisor to the Chairman of the Board National Joint-Stock Company (Naftogaz of
Ukraine) Tel.: +380 (44) 586-39-47 mailto:Oleksiyenko@naftogaz.com http://www.naftogaz.com

Willem Coppoolse
Head of Illiquid Gas Market Origination
ENGIE
mailto:willem.coppoolse@gdfsuez.com/ mailto:willem.coppoolse@gdfsuez.com
+33682033215



Environmental & Social Action Plan

 Environmental & Social Action Plan -Appraisal
  Task Title & Description                                        Anticipated Completion
                                                                  Date

  Develop an integrated Environmental, Occupational Health and    04/30/2018
  Safety and Social Management System that will incorporate
  the existing procedures, and is consistent with the
  requirements of IFC Performance Standard

  Update existing human resource policy and procedures to align   04/30/2018
  with the requirements of Performance Standard 2 including
  development and implementation of a retrenchment plan as
  applicable

Client's Documentation
                          There are no attachments for this document
