Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1717 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P095203 
Project Name: EXPORT DEVT 2 
Task Team Leader: Lalit Raina 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Banking (100%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
250.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The specific objectives of EDP 2 include the following:  
 
(i) 
Enhancing the availability of medium to long term investment and working capital 
funding to private exporters in Ukraine; and  
 
(ii) 
Strengthening the availability of Export Credit and Guarantee Agency (ECGA) type of 
services to exporters in Ukraine   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
EDP2 will be a follow up project to the previously successful EDP1. However, EDP1 was a 
purely retail export intermediation loan directly from Ukrexim to exporters. The proposed EDP2 
design will expand on EDP1 design, and will have a broader set of project components. The 
main project emphasis will be on Ukrexim operating as a wholesale export finance and guarantee 
institution, and a wholesale line of credit to other PFIs will be the anchor component of the 
project. The proposed EDP 2 project components are:  
 
Page  2
(i) 
A wholesale line of credit to Ukrexim, which Ukrexim will lend to other eligible private 
participating financial intermediaries (PFIs), most likely other banks. These PFIs will be selected 
according to financial and export orientation eligibility criteria. The PFIs will in turn make 
medium term working capital or long term investment loans to eligible private exporters to 
increase their export potential. The amount for this component is estimated to be US$150-200 
million;  
 
(ii) 
A smaller line of credit to Ukrexim for direct retail special purpose investment or project 
finance lending to their existing corporate exporters or smaller upcoming new exporting 
enterprises, unable to access the participating commercial banks. The allocation for this 
component is estimated at this stage to be US$50-70 million;  
 
(iii) 
Funding of specific export guarantee or credit insurance services by refocusing the 
Ukrexim products and services and by restructuring of Ukrexim to create a Export Credit and 
Guarantee Agency (ECGA). The amount allocated for this component is estimated to be US$30-
50 million.  
 
The amounts to be allocated among the above components will remain flexible and could be 
reallocated between the component categories during implementation as necessary. The overall 
loan amount requested by Ukrexim for EDP 2 during the mission?s visit is in the range of 
US$200-250 million. While the original amount allocated to this project by the Bank was around 
US$150 million, a higher amount in the proposed range could be considered by the Bank 
depending on the final EDP 2 project design and Ukrexim?s absorptive capacity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kyiv, Ukraine(location of the Borrower - Ukrexim Bank - and some of the financial 
intermediaries which will implement the Project). The remaining PFIs and all sub-borrowers will 
be spread around the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ukrexim bank (http://www.eximb.com/) was the 5th largest bank in Ukraine at the beginning of 
2005, with assets of around US$1 billion and a 4.5% share of the total banking sector. While 
being a well-run, fully-fledged universal commercial banks, Ukrexim also supports Ukrainian 
exporters and importers with various foreign trade finance products. Furthermore, it is the 
official agent of the GoU for the intermediation of foreign credit lines. In this capacity, Ukrexim 
was the Bank?s counterpart for the first successful Export Development Project (EDP) in the 
second half of 1990s. Ukrexim would also be the borrower and the main implementation agency 
under the proposed EDP 2.  
 
Ukrexim is a well-regarded bank, with solid ratings from the international rating agencies. It 
has experienced staff and expertise in working with the World Bank. The Bank's project team is 
convinced there is a critical mass of institutional capacity at Ukrexim to implement the Bank's 
safeguard policies associated with the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
Page  3
Mr Johnson Appavoo (ECSSD) 
Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is expected that there will be a wide range in allowable sub-projects.  It is very unlikely 
that there will be any Category A sub-projects but this will be clarified and due diligence 
adjusted accordingly.  Due diligence on environment will follow requirements for an FI, as 
outlined in OP 4.01 (para. 10 and 11) and BP 4.01 (para. 16).  The project operational manual 
will include screening criteria and procedures for Bank ex-ante and ex-poste reviews as 
appropriate   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/16/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
07/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/14/2005 
Comments:  I approve at this PCN stage. Mr Appavoo and I are not on the project team but 
responsible for clearance unless/until project is transferred to the TT/SM 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
 
Comments:   
