                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: ISDSA12149

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             09-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                         Uzbekistan          1   Project ID:              Ip128516
 Project Name:                    Modernizing Higher Education Project (P 128516)
 Task Team Leader(s):             Naveed Hassan Naqvi
 Estimated Board Date:            20-May-2016
 Managing Unit:                   GED03
 Sector(s):                       Tertiary education (75%), Vocational training (25%)
 Theme(s):                        Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                    No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:          45.00                        Total Bank Financing:   145.00
 Financing Gap:               0.00·
     Financing Source                                                                             Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                    45.00
     Total                                                                                          45.00
 Environmental    Category:       B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project?      No
 Is this a Transferred            Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The project development objectives are to strengthen the system managerial capacity, and to improve
 the labor market relevance and learning environment of selected higher education institutions.

 3. Project Description
 The proposed project consists of four components: (i) strengthening the higher education system; (ii)
 improving learning environment in HEIs; (iii) improving the relevance of higher education; and (iv)
 project management
The summary description   of the project components   follows below.

Component One: Strengthening Higher Education Management
The project will support the enhancement of the managerial capacity of the higher education system in
Uzbekistan in the following ways: (i) strengthening the capacity of the MHSSE to manage the sector;
(ii) supporting the State Testing Center to develop and implement the system of external quality
assurance; and (iii) supporting the Higher Education Institutions to strengthen their systems of internal
quality assurance.

Component Two: Improving Learning Environment in Higher Education Institutions
Improving laboratories and associated academic and research systems in priority areas. The project
will support the Government in improving laboratories and research systems, to help better prepare
higher education graduates to contribute to scientific progress in an effort to increase economic
growth. The proposed subcomponent will support: (i) the establishment and upgrading of modem
basic teaching laboratories and advanced scientific research laboratories in Uzbek HE Is in priority
areas of the economy; (ii) the development and implementation ofa modem curriculum optimizing the
use of the equipment provided; and (iii) training offaculty and stafffor optimal use of the equipment.

Component Three: Improving the Relevance of Higher Education
Establishing a Competitive Academic Innovation Fund. The project will support the establishment of a
Competitive Academic Innovation Fund (AIF) in the MHSSE with the objective of improving the
relevance of higher education by encouraging innovative approaches to academic improvement, and
strengthening HEI linkages with industry. In other higher education systems, well-designed
competitive funds have led to innovative improvements in quality and relevance as well as indirectly
promoted a culture of accountability and attitudinal change at the HEI level. The AIF will finance on a
pilot basis two rounds of academic improvement grants to HEIs. Each round of grant financing will
fund a total ofUS$ 2 million worth of grants. Individual grants will be limited to US$ 200,000 in
funding over two years. All public HEIs, and other related institutions    are eligible to apply for these
grants. Each round of grants will be externally assessed on a rolling basis to see that it has been
effectively implemented in line with the grant objectives.

Component Four: Project Management
The component will support incremental operating costs for the project, including a core team of
consultants to coordinate the project, ensure fiduciary compliance, and monitor it. The project would
also fmance technical experts to support implementation, as needed, and studies/evaluations.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
a. The project will be implemented all over Uzbekistan. At this point no civil works are envisaged
however the project is rated B to account for the possibility that some minor rehabilitation of labs and
universities can be associated with the purchase of new equipment.
b. Uzbekistan's legal and labor codes prohibit child and forced labor. The country is a signatory to the
ILO Conventions on minimum age and worst forms of child labor (CO 138 and 182), and on forced
labor (CO 29 and I 05). The proposed project will mitigate the use of child and forced labor through
participation in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and associated Feedback Mechanism (FBM) led by
the ILO, which will be funded through a separate multidonor trust fund, as well as training and
awareness-raising activities, to be implemented as part of the project. Occurrence of child and/or
forced labor in connection with project activities, as reported by the TPM and/or FBM, would entitle
the World Bank to take any appropriate measures in accordance with any applicable provisions of
legal agreement on the project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nina Kolybashkina ( GSU03 )
Rustam Arstanov ( GEN03 )

6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes          Project Component 2 will include the
                                                         establishmentl upgrading of modem
                                                         scientific and research laboratories. The
                                                         number and the location of laboratories
                                                         will not be defined prior to appraisal.
                                                         The scope of upgrading can not be
                                                         defined at this stage as well. However, it
                                                         is expected that this Component might
                                                         require civil works (refurbishment of
                                                         existing laboratories) and procurement of
                                                         new equipment. The environmental
                                                         issues associated with construction!
                                                         refurbishment are minor, short- lived,
                                                         and primarily limited to the facility sites
                                                         (except for movement of equipment and
                                                         materials to/from the site). These issues
                                                         are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of
                                                         waste material and/or older equipment,
                                                         possibly traffic disruption (depending
                                                         upon specific location), worker safety
                                                         etc. All these issues can be addressed
                                                         with good engineering and construction
                                                         practices. During operation of
                                                         laboratories special consideration should
                                                         be given to good house keeping and safe
                                                         laboratory practices such handling of
                                                         hazardous materials.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No
Forests OPIBP 4.36                          No
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No
Safety of Dams OPIBP 4.37                   No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP   No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OPIBP 7.60       No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Component 2 of the project aims at improving laboratories and associated academic and research
systems in priority areas. Subcomponent 2.1 covers standard basic teaching laboratories and
advanced technical and science laboratories. Purchase of necessary laboratory equipment and
materials as well as laboratory operations might have localized environmental impacts related to the
storage, transportation and use of hazardous substances. Should the provision of equipment be
accompanied by refurbishment and reconstruction activities, these may pose additional hazards for the
environment and the health and safety of personnel and visitors. Such hazards include but are not
limited to construction waste, including asbestos, noise and vibration during the demolition and
construction activities, air and water pollution.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Modem laboratory equipment will be provided under the Component 2 of the project. The project
will ensure that the equipment suppliers provide training to labs staff on safe operations. The part-time
environmental consultant will also provide basic health and safety induction to students and laboratory
staff and students. Thus, positive impact is anticipated because health and safety risks related to
works at laboratories will be reduced.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no project alternatives identified at this stage
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Because of the anticipated impacts mentioned above, the Project triggers the Safeguards Policy OP
4.01 Environmental Assessment. Because the exact list of educational institutions is not known by the
Appraisal, the Client has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that covers
possible impacts mentioned above. The EMF gives an overview of possible environmental impacts,
describes the responsibilities for environmental management, outlines a step-by-step procedure for
site specific environmental assessment and provides a template for Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) Checklist. The project implementation arrangements include a part-time environmental
consultant under the Ministry of Higher and Secondary Education (MHSSO). Their responsibilities
will include the environmental review of the proposals for the laboratories refurbishment submitted by
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), provision of the basic training on health and safety in
laboratories, preparation of periodic reports to the W orld Bank etc.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include Ministry of Higher Education, students of the higher education institutions,
scientific and research community.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/ AuditlManagement            Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    I 1 8-Jan-201 6
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   08-Feb-20 16
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Uzbekistan                                                                       30-J an-20 16
Comments: The document disclosed first time at the website of the Ministry of Highre and Secondary
          Education (http://edu.uz/rulnews/view/299) on January 30, 2016. Public consultation
          meeting was conducted on Feb 8th, 2016. Minutes of consultations were disclosed at the
          same webpage on Feb 8th, 2016.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
n/a

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?    Yes   rx:      No [    1    NA [   1
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes     rx:      No [    1    NA [   1
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in    Yes [Xl        No [    1    NA [   1
the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the W orld Yes [Xl          No [    1    NA [   1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes    rx:      No [    1    NA [   1
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [Xl        No [    1    NA [   1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been, included in    Yes   rx:      No [    1    NA [   1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes   rx:      No [    1    NA [   1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes   rx:      No [   1     NA [   1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):        Name: Naveed Hassan Naqvi
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name:                       Date: ;:::C6n)Q:'(   G 2016
