                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC382
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/07/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: UZBEKISTAN                                          Project ID: P051370
Project: Health II Project                                   Task Team Leader: John C. Langenbrunner
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 28, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: September 9, 2004                             IDA Amount ($m): 39.48
                                                                    IDA GRANT FOR HIV/AIDS: 0.52
Managing Unit: ECSHD                                         Sector: Health (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Health system performance (P); Child health
Status: Lending                                              (P); Other communicable diseases (P); Population
                                                             and reproductive health (P); Injuries and
                                                             non-communicable diseases (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to improve the quality and overall cost-effectiveness of health care
services in Uzbekistan. This will be achieved through
(a) completion of the primary care program in 8 regions (Samarkand, Sukhandarya, Namangan, Andijon,
Djizzak, Ferghana, Navoiy, Syr Darya), and other regions as agreed, and institutionalization of general
practitioners nationally;
(b) extending financing and management reforms related to efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery;
(c) improving public health services, including surveillance, training in public health and control of
communicable disease; and
(d) building capacity in the Ministry of Health to better monitor and evaluate the reforms, and better
manage the restructuring process.

The proposed Health II project follows and builds upon Health I. The current Health I Project supports the
restructuring of primary care and outpatient services in rural areas. The Government, for its part, has
begun building new primary care centers, and rehabilitating some selected facilities already in operation.
The Bank support has provided funding for: (i) equipment, supplies, and small amounts of emergency
pharmaceuticals; (ii) development of a new cadre of medical personnel through short-term training
programs for general practitioners and universal nurses, and longer-run by redefining medical education
curricula; and (iii) management and financing reforms that promote decentralization, incentive-based
payment systems, and management innovations. The reforms have been enacted mainly in three pilot
oblasts, Ferghana, Navoiy and Syr Darya. In addition, elements of the program have been initiated
elsewhere, most recently in Khorezm and the semi-autonomous region of Karakalpakstan. This first health
operation in Uzbekistan commenced in 1998, and will end 31 December 2004.

The proposed Health II Project will scale up Health I, with a limited number of important extensions and
refinements. Five new regions will have primary care facilities equipped. The rural primary care models of
Health I will be extended to new urban area pilots. New GP training centers will allow full national
replication of GP training. A greater emphasis will be placed on access to pharmaceuticals, continuous
medical education and quality improvement.

The financing and management pilots will be replicated nationally. Some extensions such as physician

                                                        2
                                                                                                           ISDS


bonus schemes will be developed to address the maldistribution issues. New provider payment pilots for
hospital services will be initiated. A new rationalization strategy will focus on consolidation of hospital
services and facilities.

The legal agreement is flexible, and allows for extending the program to more than 8 regions as funds
become available through government funding, donor support, or re-allocation from savings.

A new component, Improving Public Health Services, will contribute to the control of emergent
communicable diseases and the long-standing issue of non-communicable diseases, and will improve public
health services, including surveillance and health promotion.

                                                         3
                                                                                                            ISDS




I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Component 1. Primary Health Care Development

The project would extend further support for development of Primary Health Care (PHC) services. In
concert with the Asian Development Bank, all SVPs in the Government's 1996-2005 program not covered
to date, as well as some remaining SVPs not covered under Health I, would be supplied with a package of
equipment. More remote SVPs would be supplied with telecommunication equipment and transport to
improve patient services, referrals, and overall management of these facilities.

Primary health care models will be replicated to urban areas, through pilots. The project will equip ten
pilot sites at urban polyclinics in selected cities and, at least at one location (Gulistan city), an open
enrollment campaign will be undertaken.

The project would scale up training programs initiated under Health I to provide staff for the PHC facilities
who are trained in the new concept of family medicine. The previously adopted strategy of retraining
existing doctors and training General Practitioners at an undergraduate level will be intensified. This will
entail doubling the number of trainers undergoing courses at the Tashkent Institute of Advanced Medical
Education (T-IAME) and opening three more Clinical Training Centers (CTCs) for re-training of SVP and
polyclinic staff. The undergraduate curriculum for GP training will be modified to ensure that clinically
competent GPs emerge at graduation from the medical institutes. In addition, a revised training program for
laboratory technicians will be established, using T-IAME to train oblast level trainers, who in turn will
training technicians at the SVP level.

A series of related activities would provide a broader framework to ensure the sustainability of the overall
reform of making PHC the cornerstone of service delivery. The work of the licensing center, initiated under
Health I, will continue. Linked to this work, a Continuous Medical Education (CME) center will be
established and supported to enable the GPs to sustain skills and be exposed to advances in knowledge. A
Center for Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) will be established at T-IAME to improve the quality of
services provided through the PHC network of facilities. Building on the initial work conducted under
Health I, a more comprehensive study of health manpower will be undertaken to assist the re-structuring of
the medical workforce in keeping with the Government's reform of the system for health service delivery.

Component 2. Financing and Management Reforms

The project would support broad activities to continue to improve the health care financing and
management system, to improve efficiency in the delivery of services and to help increase sustainability of
primary health care reforms. Activities to improve the health care financing and management system would
comprise the scaling up of financing and management pilots initiated under the first Health project, and
extending and geographically expanding the rural PHC financing model of the first project nation-wide
following some adaptations. This would include the pooling of funds at the oblast level, and extension of
pilots for development and implementation of financial reform models and the capitated payment system for
the urban PHC facilities, as well as extending new payment systems for the secondary (hospitals) health
facilities. A physician bonus system will be developed for addressing the maldistribution problem of
physicians in rural areas, especially very remote areas, based on PER analysis.

Furthermore, the management information system (MIS) developed under the first health project would be
replicated, and MIS capacity will be developed in the central rayon hospitals. To support the development

                                                          4
                                                                                                            ISDS


 of an integrated health care system, restructuring and rationalization of secondary level health care services
 and referral facilities will be necessary. Health management capacity building and the development of a
 comprehensive health financing and management strategy will be supported.

 Building on the PER findings, national financial planning and management capacities would be increased
 through the development of National Health Accounts, improvements in the allocation formulas across
 regions and the establishment of comprehensive health management training at the undergraduate and
 postgraduate levels.

 The financing of this component would be shared with the Asian Development Bank; each Bank would
 finance regions consistent with the split under component 1. The Bank will take the lead on management
 capacity building; the ADB will take the lead on national level MIS and financing studies and technical
 assistance.

 Component 3. Improving Public Health Services

 This component aims at contributing to the control of communicable and non-communicable diseases, and
 to improve public health services, including surveillance and health promotion. The component would
 support three main areas:
l capacity building, through development of a national public health strategy, development of a School of
    Public Health, scaling-up health promotion and health education programs under Health I, and local
    community-driven and nutrition programs;
l upgrading and strengthening of essential public health infrastructure and manpower; and,
l contributing to scaling-up activities to prevent HIV/AIDS and STIs, and control TB.


The Bank would fund the majority of activities in coordination with other donors.

 Capacity building in Public Health would support various capacity building initiatives that have been under
 preparation. The Government has been taking initial steps to fully develop a School of Public Health in
 Tashkent. Such a school would provide training in epidemiology, and public health functions such as
 surveillance, health policy, and health promotion. The school would also provide training in health
 management. The school would integrate the training in public health that has been carried out separately
 by the Tashkent Medical Institutes I and II, and the Institute of Postgraduate Medical Training; and it
 would be supported by the Institute of Health.

 The Institute of Health, which is responsible for health promotion, would benefit from building capacity
 that would enable it to adequately carry out its functions; and from being moved to more appropriate
 location and facilities. Under the project, the Institute of Health would be supported to develop health
 promotion policy; carry out advocacy and education activities through the mass media; and supervise
 health promotion activities at the regional and local level, including nutrition (provision of micronutrients)
 and community development activities.

 Support would be provided to modernize surveillance of communicable diseases in Uzbekistan, to develop
 a specific program for upgrading the Sanitary Epidemiological Services, including public health
 laboratories, and would start implementation of this program. The program would be developed in
 cooperation with the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC). There would be an integrated electronic
 database for surveillance of communicable diseases, training of laboratory staff (doctors and laboratory
 assistants) in modern methods of surveillance of communicable diseases, and refurbishment of selected
 laboratories throughout the country. CDC has started providing technical and financial assistance to
 upgrading the surveillance system and public health labs. The project would complement those efforts in

                                                       5
                                                                                                           ISDS


close cooperation with CDC.

The component would contribute to the implementation of the recently approved HIV/AIDS Strategy and
of the TB National Program that aims at extending the DOTS approach throughout the country. The
subcomponent would provide support for TB and HIV/AIDS activities up to an estimated amount of
US$2.5 million, of which part would be grant funding for AIDS. The preparation and implementation of
this subcomponent would be closely coordinated with the activities to be carried out under
l GFATM grant of $5 million for AIDS;
l KfW activities to control TB, and
l USAID/CDC activities to control HIV/AIDS and TB.
Specifically, the subcomponent would finance the following: (i) policy development on HIV/AIDS and TB,
including integration of HIV/AIDS strategy into national policy for development; anti-discrimination
legislation; decriminalization of drug use, CSW and homosexuality; policy on use of ARVs; policy on
treatment of LWHA and TB; etc; (ii) further development of sentinel surveillance of HIV/AIDS in
cooperation with SES and CDC, including upgrading HIV/AIDS labs; (iii) further development of Trust
Points and support to NGOs working on HIV/AIDS control; (iv) extension of DOTS under the project to
two additional regions (Djizzak and Navoiy Oblasts), including the prison system; and (v) a revised TB
grant proposal to submit to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria, to allow for scaling-up of
DOTS throughout the country, including the prison system.

Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

The project will be implemented through the Ministry of Health, its Central Project Implementation Bureau
(CPIB) and Oblast Project Implementation Bureaus (PIBs). This would be a model utilized in Health I. The
CPIB was established under the Health I Project, and will continue to be the management agency of the
Ministry of Health for implementation of Health II. Operation of existing Oblast Project Implementation
Bureaus in the Health I pilot oblasts will continue, and additional Oblast PIBs will be established in each of
the new project oblasts.

It is planned that the CPIB also acts as the implementing agency for the ADB Women and Child Health
program, to ensure efficient implementation of the joint program activities of the World Bank and ADB,
and to maximize economies of scale and scope.

The component would finance CPIB staff salaries, technical assistance, travel costs, annual project audits
and limited upgrade of office equipment for the CPIB and office equipment and vehicles for the oblast PIBs
out of the credit. It is expected that the borrower would fund all office running costs and staff salaries in
the oblast PIBs.

Under the PHRD grant, a strategic Monitoring & Evaluation plan including baseline indicators has been
developed, which will be implemented in the Health II project, and linked to the PRSP process and
longer-term focus of attainment of the MDGs. The objectives of the monitoring and evaluation system will
be to support decision makers in the assessment of the project's impact. Regular facility surveys will be
conducted as a core part of the data collection process during the implementation of Health II.

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS




Components:


1. Primary Health Care Development
2. Financing and Management Reforms
3. Improving Public Health Services
4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: The project would not present any significant environmental concerns and will not finance
rehabilitation or civil works. The project does not deal with disposal of medical waste.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

                                                         7
                                                                                                           ISDS


II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The SVPs at present are financed from the Oblast budget, with further contributions from the recipient
community, and sometimes the collective farm. The funds are given to the Rayon Khokimyat (Local
Government), office of the Otdel Kapitaluogo Stroitelstva (Building Dept). The Building Dept. then i)
commissions designs and specifications from design institutes, ii) advertises, receives, evaluates and awards
tenders for construction, and iii) supervises the works. Utility services are approved and inspected by the
relevant department, and the sanitation and safety aspects by the MOH's SES. The completed building is
then turned over to the Rayon Department of Health and the CRH for operations and maintenance. Under
this arrangement responsibility is thus split, which may account to some extent at present for the poor
quality construction and maintenance. This arrangement will be reviewed. Health I has routinely reviewed
structural standards for SVPs. This will continue in Health II.

The project will work to ensure basic funding for maintenance of facilities is available, and the dialogue for
this has already begun in the five pilot regions under Health I.

A rationalization plan for health facilities has been developed under Health I and is being refined under
Health II through the PHRD grant.

Clinical waste from the SVPs will be transported via vehicles provided by the project to waste disposal
sites located at a rayon health facility. This system is being developed under the ADB project.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                           Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure

                                                     8
                                                                                                    ISDS


Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     John C. Langenbrunner                              08/16/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Jane E. Holt                                            02/03/2003
Sector Manager/Director               Armin H. Fidler                                    02/03/2003
Comments
No specific comments at this point.

