                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA12149
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uzbekistan                         Project ID:   P128516
                            Project Name:      Modernizing Higher Education Project (P128516)
                            Task Team          Naveed Hassan Naqvi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          23-Feb-2016                        Estimated   26-Apr-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED03                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (75%), Vocational training (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          45.00              Total Bank Financing: 45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 45.00
                              Total                                                                                       45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are to strengthen the Recipient’s higher education system
                           managerial capacity, and to improve both the labor market relevance and the learning environment of
                           selected higher education institutions.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project consists of four components: (i) strengthening the higher education system; (ii)

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         improving learning environment in HEIs; (iii) improving the relevance of higher education; and (iv)
                         project management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The summary description of the project components follows below.

                         Component One: Strengthening Higher Education Management
                         The project will support the enhancement of the managerial capacity of the higher education system
                         in Uzbekistan in the following ways: (i) strengthening the capacity of the MHSSE to manage the
                         sector; (ii) supporting the State Testing Center to develop and implement the system of external
                         quality assurance; and (iii) supporting the Higher Education Institutions to strengthen their systems
                         of internal quality assurance.

                         Component Two: Improving Learning Environment in Higher Education Institutions
                         Improving laboratories and associated academic and research systems in priority areas. The project
                         will support the Government in improving laboratories and research systems, to help better prepare
                         higher education graduates to contribute to scientific progress in an effort to increase economic
                         growth. The proposed subcomponent will support: (i) the establishment and upgrading of modern
                         basic teaching laboratories and advanced scientific research laboratories in Uzbek HEIs in priority
                         areas of the economy; (ii) the development and implementation of a modern curriculum optimizing
                         the use of the equipment provided; and (iii) training of faculty and staff for optimal use of the
                         equipment.

                         Component Three: Improving the Relevance of Higher Education
                         Establishing a Competitive Academic Innovation Fund. The project will support the establishment of
                         a Competitive Academic Innovation Fund (AIF) in the MHSSE with the objective of improving the
                         relevance of higher education by encouraging innovative approaches to academic improvement, and
                         strengthening HEI linkages with industry. In other higher education systems, well-designed
                         competitive funds have led to innovative improvements in quality and relevance as well as indirectly
                         promoted a culture of accountability and attitudinal change at the HEI level. The AIF will finance on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a pilot basis two rounds of academic improvement grants to HEIs. Each round of grant financing will
                         fund a total of US$ 2 million worth of grants. Individual grants will be limited to US$ 200,000 in
                         funding over two years. All public HEIs, and other related institutions are eligible to apply for these
                         grants. Each round of grants will be externally assessed on a rolling basis to see that it has been
                         effectively implemented in line with the grant objectives.

                         Component Four: Project Management
                         The component will support incremental operating costs for the project, including a core team of
                         consultants to coordinate the project, ensure fiduciary compliance, and monitor it. The project would
                         also finance technical experts to support implementation, as needed, and studies/evaluations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         a. The project will be implemented all over Uzbekistan. At this point no civil works are envisaged
                         however the project is rated B to account for the possibility that some minor rehabilitation of labs
                         and universities can be associated with the purchase of new equipment.
                         b. Uzbekistan’s legal and labor codes prohibit child and forced labor. The country is a signatory to
                         the ILO Conventions on minimum age and worst forms of child labor (CO 138 and 182), and on
                         forced labor (CO 29 and 105). The proposed project will mitigate the use of child and forced labor
                         through participation in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and associated Feedback Mechanism


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         (FBM) led by the ILO, which will be funded through a separate multidonor trust fund, as well as
                         training and awareness-raising activities, to be implemented as part of the project. Occurrence of
                         child and/or forced labor in connection with project activities, as reported by the TPM and/or FBM,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would entitle the World Bank to take any appropriate measures in accordance with any applicable
                         provisions of legal agreement on the project.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nina Kolybashkina (GSU03)
                         Rustam Arstanov (GEN03)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes           Project Component 2 will include the establishment/
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     upgrading of modern scientific and research laboratories.
                                                                   The number and the location of laboratories will not be
                                                                   defined prior to appraisal. The scope of upgrading can not
                                                                   be defined at this stage as well. However, it is expected
                                                                   that this Component might require civil works
                                                                   (refurbishment of existing laboratories) and procurement
                                                                   of new equipment. The environmental issues associated
                                                                   with construction/ refurbishment are minor, short- lived,
                                                                   and primarily limited to the facility sites (except for
                                                                   movement of equipment and materials to/from the site).
                                                                   These issues are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of waste
                                                                   material and/or older equipment, possibly traffic
                                                                   disruption (depending upon specific location), worker
                                                                   safety etc. All these issues can be addressed with good
                                                                   engineering and construction practices. During operation
                                                                   of laboratories special consideration should be given to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   good house keeping and safe laboratory practices such
                                                                   handling of hazardous materials.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural           No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement    No
                         OP/BP 4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50


                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Component 2 of the project aims at improving laboratories and associated academic and research
                              systems in priority areas. Subcomponent 2.1 covers standard basic teaching laboratories and
                              advanced technical and science laboratories. Purchase of necessary laboratory equipment and
                              materials as well as laboratory operations might have localized environmental impacts related to
                              the storage, transportation and use of hazardous substances. Should the provision of equipment be
                              accompanied by refurbishment and reconstruction activities, these may pose additional hazards for
                              the environment and the health and safety of personnel and visitors. Such hazards include but are
                              not limited to construction waste, including asbestos, noise and vibration during the demolition
                              and construction activities, air and water pollution.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Modern laboratory equipment will be provided under the Component 2 of the project. The project
                              will ensure that the equipment suppliers provide training to labs staff on safe operations. The part-
                              time environmental consultant will also provide basic health and safety induction to students and
                              laboratory staff and students. Thus, positive impact is anticipated because health and safety risks
                              related to works at laboratories will be reduced.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              There are no project alternatives identified at this stage
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Because of the anticipated impacts mentioned above, the Project triggers the Safeguards Policy OP
                              4.01 Environmental Assessment. Because the exact list of educational institutions is not known by
                              the Appraisal, the Client has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that
                              covers possible impacts mentioned above. The EMF gives an overview of possible environmental
                              impacts, describes the responsibilities for environmental management, outlines a step-by–step
                              procedure for site specific environmental assessment and provides a template for Environmental
                              Management Plan (EMP) Checklist. The project implementation arrangements include a part-time
                              environmental consultant under the Ministry of Higher and Secondary Education (MHSSO). Their
                              responsibilities will include the environmental review of the proposals for the laboratories
                              refurbishment submitted by Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), provision of the basic training
                              on health and safety in laboratories, preparation of periodic reports to the World Bank e t c.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders include Ministry of Higher Education, students of the higher education
                              institutions, scientific and research community.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Feb-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                       30-Jan-2016
                           Comments: The document disclosed first time at the website of the Ministry of Highre and
                                         Secondary Education (http://edu.uz/ru/news/view/299) on January 30, 2016. Public
                                         consultation meeting was conducted on Feb 8th, 2016. Minutes of consultations were
                                         disclosed at the same webpage on Feb 8th, 2016.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         n/a
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Naveed Hassan Naqvi
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza   Date: 16-Mar-2016
                            Manager:                   (PMGR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  Page 6 of 6
