                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 105195
Date prepared/updated: April 21, 2016

I. Basic Information

 1 . Basic    . tD aa
        . Projec    t
 Country: Vietnam                               Project ID: 150060
                                                Additional Project ID (if any):
 Project Name: Vietnam Enhancing Teacher Education Program
 Task Team Leader: Michel J. Welmond
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 23 March, 2016       Estimated Board Date: 27June 2016
 Managing Unit: GEDDR                           Lending Instrument: Investment               Project
                                                Financing
 Sector: General education sector (100%)
 Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (50%), Education for all (50%)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.): 0
 IDA Amount (US$m.): 95
 Financing Gap (US$m.): 0
 Borrower/Recipient (US$m.): 5
 Total (US$m.): 100
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a transferred project                  Yes [X]              I No []
2. Project Objectives:

The Program Development Objective is to strengthen teacher education institutions to enhance
teacher and principal effectiveness through improved continuous professional development.

3. Project Description:

Technical Assistance (TA) Component, supported through IPF, will mobilize world-class
expertise to help develop and operationalize the strategies for improving onsite continuous
professional development for teachers and principals at the school level. It will also support the
efforts of the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET), Departments of Education and Training
(DOETs) and Lead Teacher Training Universities (LTTUs) to: (i) elaborate and operationalize
relevant policies and directives for more effective teacher and principal continuous profession
development (CPD), (ii) inform and improve the technical quality of the expected results, and (iii)
reinforce the implementation capacity, including monitoring and evaluation, of the Operation. The
technical assistance will mobilize expertise in the following areas:

   •   Operation management capacity and relevant country systems. These include financial
       management and environmental management.
   •   Technical expertise to ensure satisfactory achievement of expected results. These
       include, inter alia, developing and implementing effective onsite CPD, innovative CPD
       programs, IT infrastructure and architecture for the online platform that will host the LMS
       (Learning and Management System) and TEMIS (Teacher Education Management
       Information System), professional profile of Core Teachers and Principal Advisors and
       relevant regulations and selection and appointment procedures, teacher professional
       standards, training needs assessment methods, and training programs in selected subject
       areas.
   •   Institutional reinforcement of teacher training institutions. Teacher Education
       Institutional Development Index will measure the effectiveness of LTTU s to provide
       quality and relevant teacher education services in a timely manner.
   •   Third party validation. The MOET will identify an independent entity to undertake
       performance audits and confirm DLI achievement. Third party studies will provide external
       validation for key performance data and implementation activities. The MOET may wish
       to hire a firm or institution with strong educational expertise and country system
       understanding to provide this service.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The Operation will be implemented in north, central and south regions of Vietnam. LTTUs are
located in urban settings and border on residential areas. Vinh, Hue and Da Nang LTTUs are
located in central provinces. Ho Chi Minh Education University is located in the South. Hanoi
1&2 and Thai Nguyen TTUs and NIEM are located in the North. Annually, central provinces are
often affected by several storms. Some areas of Ho Chi Minh City are often flooded due to tide.
The project covers areas with presence of ethnic minority groups.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Khang Van Pham (GEN02)
Giang Tam Nguyen (GSU02)
6. Safeguard Policies Trizzered     Yes       No                Explanation
Environmental          Assessment   x              There are no physical investments under
(OPIBP 4.01)                                       this TA component.
                                                   This policy is triggered due to social
                                                   impact associated with TA activities.
                                                   A social assessment was conducted in
                                                   two provinces with high rates of ethnic
                                                   minorities EM, one in the northern
                                                   upland (Yen Bai) and another in the
                                                   Central Highlands (Dak Lak), to inform
                                                   the TA activities. EM school
                                                   administrators and teachers were paid
                                                   special attention to ensure they would
                                                   benefit equally from TA activities.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)             x        TA activities are envisaged not to cause
                                                   any impact or implications on natural
                                                   habitats.
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                      x        TA activities are envisaged not to cause
                                                   any impacts or implications on forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 x        TA activities would not involve
                                                   procurement of any pesticides or cause
                                                   increased use of pesticides as results of
                                                   TA activities.
Physical Cultural       Resources         x        TA activities are envisaged not to cause
(OPIBP 4.11)                                       any impact or implications on physical
                                                   cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)   x   TA activities in mobilizing technical
                                      expertise to        ensure satisfactory
                                      achievement of expected results,
                                      including effective onsite CPD,
                                      innovative CPD programs, relevant
                                      regulations     and      selection     and
                                      appointment       procedures,      teacher
                                      professional standards, training needs
                                      assessment methods, and training
                                      programs in selected subject areas,
                                      would potentially benefit all related
                                      teachers, educational managers and
                                      program managers. A social assessment,
                                      conducted in the provinces with high
                                      rates of ethnic minorities indicates some
                                      concern about EM teachers and
                                      principals not being consulted while
                                      consultancies will be undertaken by
                                      national and international experts in the
                                      afore-mentioned areas. The potential
                                      lack of consultation, if not addressed
                                      adequately, may have some implications
                                      that are related to the growing concern
                                      about the widening gap in education
                                      opportunities and outcomes between
                                      Kinh-dominated areas and ethnic
                                      minorities-dominated ones. Therefore,
                                      OP4.10 is triggered for Component 2.

                                      An EMPF has been prepared and
                                      disclosed on the website of Department
                                      of Teachers and Education Managers
                                      (MOET) to guide the preparation of an
                                      EMDP should one become necessary
                                      and ensure that under that EMDP, EM
                                      education managers, administrators and
                                      teachers are not adversely affected by,
                                      or excluded from, the TA activities, and
                                      that they receive culturally appropriate
                                      benefits from them. It describes the
                                      principles, procedures and
                                      organizational arrangements to be
                                      applied to EM beneficiaries for the
                                      Project to fully meet the objectives of
                                      OP 4.10 and facilitate their active
                                      participation.
                                                         OP 4.12 is not triggered as no
 Involuntary          Resettlement              X
                                                         resettlement is envisaged due to the
 (OP/BP 4.12)
                                                         implementation of the T A activities
                                                         under Component 2.
 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                    X        There is no construction of new dams or
                                                         activities that are concerned with safe
                                                         functioning of existing dams.
 Projects   on   International                  X        There are no interventions plannedl
 Waterways (OP/BP7.50)                                   proposed over or around an international
                                                         waterway that could cause a potential
                                                         conflict. There are also no activities that
                                                         may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                         waterway.
 Projects in Disputed         Areas             X        The project IS not       located   in any
 (OPIBP 7.60)                                            disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

There are no physical investments under this T A component. The T A activities would only aim to
help MOET, DOETs and LTTUs elaborate and operationalize policies and directives, inform and
improve the technical quality of the expected results and reinforce the implementation capacity,
including monitoring and evaluation, of the program.

Education administrators and school teachers from the participating agencies across the country,
including those from ethnic minorities and other vulnerable groups, will benefit from the T A
activities. The consultations indicated general support for the proposed objectives and design of
the TA activities. Given the composition of consultation participants, full support has been
received from a broad range of stakeholders, from all levels oflocal authorities, from the
provincial and district to the commune levels, and various ethnic minorities groups in the project
sites, such as Tay, Nung, Thai, Dao and Ede. All these participants confirmed their full support
for the concept and approach of the proposed TA activities, seeing them as a practical and useful
way to enhance the quality of continuous professional development CPD support for teachers
across Vietnam.

The social assessment, conducted in two provinces with high rates of ethnic minorities, one in the
northern upland and another in the Central Highlands, indicates potential lack of consultation with
EM teachers and principals while consultancies will be undertaken by national and international
experts to support the development of CPD training programs, development of effective onsite
CPD, innovative CPD programs, professional profile of Core Teachers and Principal Advisors and
relevant regulations and selection and appointment procedures, teacher professional standards and
training needs assessment methods.
The potential lack of consultation with EM teachers and principals may have some implications
that are related to the growing concern about the widening gap in education opportunities and
outcomes between Kinh-dominated areas and ethnic minorities-dominated ones. Therefore,
OP4.10 is triggered for the T A activities under T A Component. But OP 4.12 is not triggered for
the T A activities as no resettlement is envisaged due to the implementation of the activities under
this component.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

No potential indirect andlor long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area are envisaged.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

None.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

During the preparation for the Program, a series of consultative meetings, intensive discussions
and workshops were held with rectors of the selected LTTUs, directors of provincial DOETs,
school principals and teachers and private service providers (Viettel, TOPICA). A number of
field visits were paid to provinces and cities of Yen Bai, Hoa Binh, Vinh Phuc, Thai Nguyen,
Nghe An, Hu~, Bit N~ng, B~c Lac, and HCMC throughout the country. The inputs and
comments from the consulted stakeholders had been acknowledged and considered for revisions
whenever deemed relevant. The T A activities will be designed to pay due attention to specific
and effective measures which are culturally and socially appropriate to ethnic minorities
beneficiaries involved. In addition, the design of the related policies, professional standards and
evaluation mechanism, will reflect some specific issues regarding gender and ethnic minorities to
ensure an inclusive approach for program beneficiaries, given a high rate of beneficiary teachers
are women, and teachers in ethnic minority's areas face further disadvantages.

Borrower capacity: The main counterpart of the project will be the MOET, which will be
responsible for social and environmental safeguard issues. Although members of staff from
MOET have been familiar with consultative practices for programs and projects, earlier
experiences show that consultations are limited to the preparation stage, with participation of
local authorities and education administrators, rather than with beneficiary school teachers,
especially those from ethnic minorities and vulnerable groups related. It is recommended that
early social screening and the participation of the related stakeholders, including beneficiary
school teachers, especially those from ethnic minorities and vulnerable groups, be conducted
during the implementation and evaluation of the T A activities to maximize benefits and
minimize adverse impacts to them. This would also allow for broader support from the related
stakeholders, including those from ethnic minorities, for the proposed investments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Stakeholders: The direct beneficiaries of ETEP will include: (i) more than 600,000 general
education teachers and principals; (ii) 28,000 core teachers and 4,000 principal advisors; (iii) 3,200
lecturers, researchers and staff from the LTTUs; and (iv) MOET staff. Indirect beneficiaries of
ETEP will be general education students; pre-service teachers; and DOET and Bureaus of
Education BOET staff.

Consultation and disclosure: The social assessment report was prepared after
consultation/stakeholder involvement at various levels and with different players. The final
version of the report has been informed and revised incorporating comments obtained from
consultation with stakeholders.

The Ministry of Education and Training has an official website wherein important documents of
the program have been disclosed. The said report pertaining to this project has also been
disclosed in the Bank's Infoshop.

 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 Environmental Assessment! Audit/Management Plan/Other:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NA
   For 'category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                 NA
   Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/PolicyProcess:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NA
 Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 12 April
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             12 April
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                             21 April
 Pest Management Plan:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                NA
 * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
 the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
 Assessment! Audit/or EMP.
 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

 OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [X]       N/A [ ]
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     NA
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            NA
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [X]       N/A [ ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or     NA
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]      N/A [X]
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [X]       N/A [ ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          NA
 safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
 requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
 project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
 OP/BP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ ]      N/A [X]
 cultural property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
 the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
 resources?
 OPIBP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [X]     No [ ]      N/A [ ]
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
 consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes
 safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      NA
 design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
 Social Development Unit?
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to   NA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if     NA
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [X]   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the               NA
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been              NA
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:    NA
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                    NA
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer           NA
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes [X]    No []   N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop? '
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [X]   No [ ]           N/A [ ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been Yes
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system ofthe project Yes
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been Yes
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                                   Date
Task Team Leader:                   Michel J. Welmond                                 April 21, 2016
Environmental Specialist:           Khang Van Pham                                    April 21, 2016
Social Development Specialist       Giang Tam Nguyen                                  April 21, 2016

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards                 Peter Leonard
Coordinator:
                                    ____L'1 (, ...            ,u    1            .2 '1     -o-: - Ib

                                   Hrury~p:
                                               I
  Comments:                                                          I
Practice Manager:
                                                                               j...    r


                                                                               , 0 ~ - 0 t; -/6
  Comments:
