                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (ISDS)
                                    CONCEPT STAGE

           VIETNAM: FCPF REDD+ READINESS GRANT - ADDITIONAL FUNDING

Report No. : 108354

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2016

I. BASIC INFORMATION

The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) is a global partnership which assists developing countries
in their efforts to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, sustainably manage forests
and conserve and enhance forest carbon stocks (REDD+). The FCPF has created a framework and
processes to help countries get ready for future systems of financial incentives for REDD+. Using this
framework, each participating country develops a REDD+ Readiness Proposal (R-PP), the key elements
of which include the reference scenarios, adoption of a REDD+ strategy, monitoring systems and setting
up of REDD+ national management arrangements, in ways that are inclusive of the key national
stakeholders. Vietnam's R-PP was prepared and endorsed by the FCPF in 2010. A subset of the R-PP
activities would be fmanced from the FCPF REDD+ Readiness Grant which was in the amount of
USD3.8 million and the proposed Additional Funding (AF) in the amount of USD5.0 million.
Much of Vietnam's forest cover was lost in the last century, declining from an estimated 43% in 1943 to
20% in 1993. More recently Vietnam has made considerable efforts and investment to increase overall
forest cover. According to official statistics, the actual forest area in Vietnam has increased to over 14
mimon ha in 2014 (about 41% of the land area) from 9.2 million ha in 1992. Although an aggregate
increase in forest cover is reported, this conceals high levels of deforestation in certain parts of the
country, as well as widespread deterioration in forest quality. In terms of what is driving deforestation and
forest degradation, this is highlighted in the R-PP as primarily the conversion of forests for agricultural
purposes, unsustainable (and sometimes illegal) logging activities, infrastructure development, and man-
made forest frres. Root causes include issues such as demographic changes, inequality and poverty, public
policies, as well as broader questions of governance and social change and development choices.
The R-PP identified the strategic options for addressing deforestation and forest degradation which
include (i) Land use planning and zoning; (ii) Forest use right allocation process; (iii) Forest policy,
legislative and administrative reform; (iv) Enforcement of planning and environmental requirements; (v)
Promote alternatives to forest conversion and forest degradation; and (vi) Establishment of a transparent
and equitable benefit sharing mechanism. Progress is being made in a number of these areas and the
FCPF Grant will build on the existing works to especially further examine the drivers, land use planning
and land tenure. The Grant will also support the policy review to identify gaps and needed policy reforms
relating to State Forest Enterprises. Works on benefit sharing distribution mechanism had been initiated
and the AF will enhance the mechanism by supporting the design and testing of a national feedback and
grievance redress mechanism (a recourse system) for the REDD+ implementation.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant activity (referred to as "Project" in the ISDS) will fmance some of
this preparatory work; it will not finance any implementation of REDD+ activities on the ground (e.g.,
investments or pilot projects).
A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                             Pro· ect ID : P 124584
Project Name: Vietnam - FCPF Readiness Grant
Task Team Leader: Lan Thi Thu N    en
                      ==.:....::..::..:..:....:...:.:=-:..;..=JL..::.:..:..._~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-1




                                                                                                           1
Estimated Appraisal Date: NIA                      I Estimated Board Date: NIA
Managing Unit: GENDR                               I Lending Instrument: TF Grant
Sector: Environment
Theme: Climate Change and Forestry
FCPF Amount (US$): 5.0million

Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing               Simple   fXl                 Repeater   fl
Is this a transferred project       Yes fl                       No [X)

Work done under the Parent Grant
Under the parent grant of $3.8 the table below provides information on resource use for implementation
of readiness activities.

        Table 1. FCPF Grant Components (disbursement and commitments of original grant
                                    by March 31, 2016)

                          Components                                Budget       Cum Dish            %
                                                                  (mil. USD)        and          Disburse
                                                                                 Commit by       ment and
                                                                                   March         Commitm
                                                                                   2016             ent
 Component 1: Analytical studies and development of                   876,000       847,000           97%
 capacities for the effective and efficient REDD+
 implementation at national and provincial level.
 Component 2: Policies review, studies and development of             522,000        387,000         74%
 user-friendly guidance materials on State Forest Company
 (SFC) reform for REDD+ service provision.
                                                                    1,249,000       1, 111,000       89%
 Component 3: Stakeholder consultation and regional
 cooperation; and Strategic Environmental and Social
 Assessment (SESA) in connection with the refinement of
 national and sub-national REDD+ strategy options.
                         ~




 Component 4: Project management, and monitoring and                1,024,000        868,000         85%
 evaluation.
 Contineency                                                          128,000          92,000        72%
 TOTAL                                                              3,800,000       3,306,000        87%


Additional Finance for readiness
The activities identified in the project paper will continue to support readiness and build on ongoing
readiness activities where gaps in implementation lie. The objectives of the current AF remains the same
as those of the parent grant.
B. Project Objectives:
The objective of the proposed World Bank/FCPF REDD+ Readiness engagement in Vietnam is to
support Vietnam to become ready for fature REDD+ implementation by preparing the key elements,
systems and policies needed in a socially and environmentally sound manner.

                                                                                                        2
C. Project Description:
The activities under AF continues the support for REDD+ Readiness work. The additional work
includes, communications, institutional strengthening through capacity building at national and provincial
levels with the aim of engaging with geographically marginalized and difficult to access communes
found in the Emissions Reductions (ER) program area. Furthermore, the AF would continue to focus on
capacity support to national and sub-national REDD+ Readiness management arrangements with a
special focus on the North Central region where the ER program locates; as well as operationalization of
the Measurement, Reporting, Verification (MRV) system;. The new grant will further support activities to
improve governance and the development of an enabling environment to allow Vietnam to access
potentially significant REDD+ finance in the future. The AF for continued readiness activities is thus a
critical component in a much larger program.
The AF allows the Go V to deepen the work performed to date and to allow the support to be expanded to
provinces in the ER Program area that have not been supported by the current grant (the current grant
supports three provinces, two of which overlap with the six provinces in the ER Program area), in
addition to the support provided at the national level and the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU).
The components of the new Grant Agreement are broadly aligned with the core activities of the current
grant and include sub-components that will help the proposed ER program area through technical capacity
building..
The FCPF additional grant will supports the following four components:
Component 1: Analytical studies and development of capacities for the effective and efficient
REDD+ implementation at national and provincial level (US$1,010,520)
This component will (i) support the Provincial REDD+ Action Plans (PRAPs) in the six Emission
Reduction Program (ER-P) provinces. The information in the PRAP will be the basis for a comprehensive
cost assessment of the different options and guide cost-effective and appropriate strategies to integrate the
REDD+ into provincial planning approaches; (ii) provide technical assistance for sustainable forest
management of existing natural forests and production forests; and (iii) support to sustainable forest
management.
Sub-components:
    •    Capacity building at nationa~ provincial and local level. This includes support for the Vietnam
         REDD+ Office (VRO) and National REDD+ Steering Committee (NRSC) at the national level,
         including: i) distribution and training delivery of the small-holder plantation manual developed
         under the Vietnam Forest Sector Development project (FSDP); ii) supports on capacity building
         for the extension of the use of revolving fund of the Vietnam Bank for Social Policies established
         under the recently concluded FSDP to all six provinces covered under the ER Program, i.e.
         training on small-holder plantation and technical advice to the Vietnam Bank of Social Policy
         (VBSP) to extend the revolving fund to Ha Tinh, Quang Binh and Quang Tri provinces, in
         addition to the existing FSDP provinces of Thanh Hoa, Nghe An and Thua Thien Hue that are
         already covered under the revolving fund as part of the FSDP 1;
    •    Establishment and support for provincial REDD+ Steering Committees;
    •    Follow-up support to facilitate knowledge and responsibilities for the implementation of
         Provincial REDD+ Action Plans in ER-Provinces with focus on Quang Binh, Thua Thien Hue



1 For investment in the plantations there is the need for clarity on the reforestation areas to be included in the ER

program area in conformity with the FCPF guidelines and methodological framework;


                                                                                                                        3
        and Quang Tr~ after approval and support for updating the NRAP policy and guidelines (based
        on experience developing PRAPs);
    •   Stakeholder meetings and workshops for the national REDD+ network, technical working groups
        (TWG) and sub-working groups (STWGs) to facilitate the design of the ERPD and coordination
        with ongoing REDD+ pilots in order to help reduce the overlaps among REDD+ projects;
    •   Improvement of forest reference and baseline data and technical capacity building for forest
        monitoring (i.e. MRV) at the provincial level (with focus on ER-P area) and PFMS small pilots;
        and
    •   Assessment and recommendations to demonstrate the ability to transfer legal title of emission
        reductions to the Carbon Fund. Provision of support to Recipient for strengthening capacity of
        negotiation for carbon credit price.
Component 2: Policies and technical support on SFC reform and Protection Forest Management
Board and Special Use Forest Management Board for REDD+ service provision; private sector
engagement and support for FLEGT {US$910,000)
The component will continue to support capacity building activities that will promote the SFC reform
process. In addition, it includes activities to promote private sector engagement, in particular in the North
Central coast; as well as enhanced action on forest governance and Forest Law Enforcement, Governance
and Trade (FLEGT).
Sub-components:
    •   This sub-component will therefore support the SFC and FMB reform process by building the
        capacity of SFCs and FMBs to be able to better develop processes and policies to promote access
        to REDD+ and equitization of SFCs in the ER-Program. Capacity building activities would
        include: i) assessment of the SFCs and FMBs to include recommendations on how to improve
        their efficiency and effectiveness in delivering services such as the provision of forest extension
        and future REDD+ services to local households and communities; ii) capacity building on
        safeguards to SFCs and FMBs to ensure the integration of social and environmental issues in their
        respective plans and policies; ii) outreach to local communities with the aim of fostering
        understanding and collaboration between SFCs and local communities.
    •   Promotion of private sector engagement. This activity is to promote private sector engagement in
        the capacity building of SFCs and FMBs to prepare their management and business plans for
        REDD services-,. and future carbon fmancing opportunities, Provision of technical support for
        Forest Certification; Capacity building activities on social and environmental safeguards; and
Forest Governance and FLEGT. This sub-component will provide support for further work on forest
governance, FLEGT includes inter agency cooperation, workshops in the six ER-P area provinces and
regional cooperation including mechanisms for discussion for exchange of intergovernmental information
to assist regional cooperation on REDD+ and FLEGT to improve implementation of forest governance
and control of timber imports between Vietnam and particularly with Lao PDR, and Cambodia. Provision
of support to VNForest for negotiation on FLEGT and timber and timber product tracking.
Component 3: Development of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) national
and sub-national REDD+ strategy options; stakeholder consultation and participation
(US$1,234,880)
The additional funding under the new grant will allow the SESA work to be expanded to the national
level in the Phase II and further help to ensure broad stakeholder participation in all REDD+ processes,
including the refinement and updating of the NRAP. The component supports further multi-stakeholder
consultation process, communication activities and engaging with local communities. The SESA Phase II

                                                                                                           4
will integrate social and environmental considerations (including the outcomes and findings from the
Phase I of the SESA) into the national policy-making processes, leading to sustainable nation REDD+
strategy options. The SESA Phase II will be complemented by feedback from the regional Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which will guide potential investments in REDD+ activities
at national level toward comp)jance with safeguards policies.
Sub-components:
    •   SESA and Development of an ESMF. This sub-component will support the completion of the
        ER-program area SESA and ESMF, once the PRAPs are finalized. The concrete activities to be
        implemented in the ER program area once they are known will help the consultants to develop the
        safeguards plans required for the ERDP, such as environment and social management plans,
        resettlement plans, ethnic minority plans and gender action plans. Further, it will support the
        analytic studies on land and resource tenure in the ER program area to include: i) the range of
        land and resource tenure rights (including legal and customary rights of use, access, management,
        ownership, exclusion, etc.), ii) categories of rights-holders present in the Accounting Area
        (including Indigenous Peoples and other relevant communities); the legal status of such rights,
        and any significant ambiguities or gaps in the applicable legal framework, including as pertains
        to the rights under customary law; iii) areas within the Accounting Area that are subject to
        significant conflicts or disputes related to contested or competing claims or rights, and if critical
        to the successful implementation of the ER Program, how such conflicts or disputes have been or
        are proposed to be addressed; and iv) any potential impacts of the ER Program on existing land
        and resource tenure in the Accounting Area.
    •   Multi-stakeholder consultations and participation. This entails workshops and participatory
        consultation activities at national, regional and local levels and communication at the national and
        local level in the ER Program Area. Furthermore, this sub-component will facilitate the
        establishment of civil society organizations and ethnic minority platforms/networks at targeted
        provinces in the ER Program Area.
    •   Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism. This sub-component will finance the assessment
        and finance consulting services to support the strengthening of the Feedback Grievance Redress
        Mechanisms (FGRM) for REDD+ in the six ER-P provinces and at the national level.

Component 4: Project management and monitoring and evaluation (US$1,644,600)
This component would facilitate efficient project implementation and the coordination of the various
government agencies at central, provincial and district levels as well as undertaking project specific
monitoring and ensure effective collaboration and cooperation with other partners such as the UN-REDD
II Program and other relevant REDD+ projects to avoid overlap and enhance effectiveness of the support
from different development partners. This component supports a general monitoring and evaluation of the
FCPF grant and coordinates with the VRO on the NRAP.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known):
The grant focuses on providing analytical work and technical assistance to the Go V for the development
of technical and institutional capacities to participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism. It
does not entail specific projects or investments on the ground.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The institutional arrangements for the implementation of the AF Grant remain the same. The FCPF grant
will be managed by the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) and oversight by Vietnam REDD+
Office (VRO), under the Ministry of Agriculture and rural Development (MARD). REDD+ related
safeguard issues_ were identified and although capacity on safeguards has been improved, there remains

                                                                                                           5
challenge related to somewhat limited capacity in Vietnam and elsewhere to assess and manage potential
safeguard issues. MARD has some experience implementing the Bank's safeguard policies through the
implementation of the Bank-financed Forest Sector Development Project. However, this is mainly limited
to individual staff and consultants, and has not translated into institutional capacity to independently
implement issues pertaining to the Bank's safeguard policies.
The FCPF grant supports capacity building efforts to enable the CPMU to fmalize the SESA and
participatory consultation and participation activities, and to develop the ESMF for future REDD+
investments. The grant also includes activities to build capacity concerning social and environmental
safeguards among GoV entities at national and local levels, and other key stakeholders, including the
resource base, civil society organizations and SFCs. During the FCPF grant, the CPMU continues to work
closely with key members of the REDD+ Network, including civil society organizations, in the
implementation of the grant, particularly for the SESA and consultation and participation program, and
the development of the ESMF. This includes particularly the REDD+ Network Working Group on
Safeguards established in 2011 and civil society organizations (CSOs).
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Hadd J. Se                                                                                       GCCFL
Roxanne Hakim                                                                                    GSU02
Son Van N   en                                                                                   GENDR

II. SAFEGUARDS POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The following table provides information on Safeguards Policies triggered. As the FCPF REDD+
readiness preparation grant will not fund REDD+ projects or define policies, there are no direct impacts
resulting from the grant and the table serves as background to potential future REDD+ investments
financed by the World Bank and serves as guidance for the development of the ESMF. However, issues
and risks concerning ethnic minorities are recognized and incorporated into the grant activities to ensure
that analytical work, consultations, options assessments and recommendations for policy changes and
future REDD+ investments recognize and address such issues and risks. This is in compliance with the
FCPF Charter and the Board Paper on Safeguard Guidance for Readiness Activities under the FCPF.
Safeguards Policies Triggered:
Safe uard Policies Tri ered                                              Yes           No          TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                       x
Overall, the activities under the FCPF REDD+ Readiness Grant are expected to have significant positive
impacts on forests, in that the main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation, while contributing to
the well-being of forest-dependent communities who will be consulted during the course of the program,
and climate change mitigation and adaptation. The Readiness Preparation national REDD program (RPN
REDD Program) itself will not finance harvesting and conversion of forests, so there is no direct adverse
impact associated with activities planned as part of the strategic options. The principal risk from RPN
REDD Program would arise in the event that the strategies fail to achieve their objectives, thereby
creating unexpected indirect adverse impacts on forest, land use, and landowner rights through the
unintended creation of incentives to clear forests for other purposes. This could occur, for example, if
future REDD payment or PFES schemes failed to provide sufficient monetary incentive to retain areas
under forest cover. Similar indirect risks could occur, for example, if lack of land tenure security were to
undermine commitment to maintain land under forest cover for long time periods. However, these indirect
risks could be assessed as moderate, given the grant support for the effective and efficient REDD+
implementation at national and provincial level, and control measures imbedded in the technical support
for Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade. The FCPF REDD+Readiness Grant - Additional


                                                                                                          6
Safe2uard Policies Tris:rn:ered                                     I Yes I No I TBD
Funding will not involve changes the parent project's objectives, nature of the activities, and locations.
Therefore, it is proposed that the project retain Environment Category B.
The assessments and plans generated by the Readiness Preparation Activities and Emission Reduction
Program Docwnent (ERPD) will be informed by policy requirements of the relevant safeguard policies.
The potential social and environmental impacts of the REDD+ national Strategy as well as ER program
level activities are being assessed in detail through the Phase I SESA The ER related activities such as
capacity building and TA support to SFCs, FMBs, Provincial Action Plans, the revolving fund etc., are
expected to have largely positive environmental and social impacts. Capacity building of SFCs and
FMBs, who manage much of Vietnam's forest, will be an important effort to reduce deforestation and
particularly forest degradation. The grant will not provide revolving fund, but help capacity building in
effective use of the fund established under the Forest Sector Development Project (FSDP). FSDP
provided opportunity for more than 43,000 households in the Central Vietnam for access to microfinance
and technical support to establish over 76,500 hectares of forest, and this has brought strong social,
environmental and economic benefits to local communities as assessed by the FSDP Implementation
Completion Report.
The original grant supported work on a national SESA, which was significantly delayed, as a result a two
phased SESA approach was proposed. Phase I will focus on the ER program area, where the analytical
aspects of SESA is being implemented, leading to the development of the regional Environmental and
Social Framework (ESMF) for the ER-P area. The additional funding under the new grant will allow the
SESA work to be expanded to the national level in the Phase II and further help to ensure broad
stakeholder participation in alJ REDD+ processes, including the refinement and updating of the National
REDD+ Action Program (NRAP). The component supports further multi-stakeholder consultation
process, communication activities and engaging with local communities. The SESA Phase II will
integrate social and environmental considerations (including the outcomes and findings from the Phase 1
of the SESA) into the national policy-making processes, leading to sustainable nation REDD+ strategy
options. The SESA Phase II will be complemented by feedback from the regional ESMF, which will
guide potential investments in REDD+ activities at national level toward compliance with safeguards
policies.
The SESA combines analytic and participatory approaches to integrate environmental and social
consideration into the formulation of the REDD+ strategy and develop a framework, the Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF is (i) identifying the environmental and social
risks and impacts of the country's national REDD+ strategy and programs, (ii) developing provisions to
mitigate and manage such risks and impacts in compliance with national legislation and World Bank
safeguards, and (iii) establishing the REDD+ Strategy E&S safeguard management provisions of future
projects, policies and activities. The ESMF prepared for the ER program should be the instrwnent to
address safeguard issues for the TA and capacity building activities supported.
Component 3 will support the development and establishment of a comprehensive monitoring system for
non-carbon impacts of REDD+, including safeguards as well as co-benefits. Activities will review
existing monitoring institutions regarding safeguards and then build a robust safeguards information
system.
Phase I SESA and ESMF
The original Readiness grant supported work on Phase I SESA and ESMF. However, the significant delay
due to contracting difficulties prevents timely delivery of the SESA and ESMF. At this moment only a
very preliminary zero draft of the SESA is available, and its main findings are not at the level of quality
that can be included in the ISDS, a publicly disclosed document. The ISDS will be updated accordingly
upon available of the final findings of the Phase I SESA


                                                                                                         7
Safee:uard Policies Tri!!!!ered                                     I    Yes     I     No      I    TBD
Public consultation
REDD+ activities are based on the requirements of free, prior, and informed consultation; therefore it is
essential that this be implemented as a priority. Public consultation is seen as an important input to the
final design of the ER program, the FCPF, in conjunction with District and Provincial authorities, has
selected a number of communes and the concerns of the local communities including ethnic minorities at
village and commune level will be taken into consideration through further participatory meetings, small
focus groups and further documented. To take account of the wider six province program, additional
consultations and meetings will be held in upland Districts of TT Hue, Thanh Hoa, Ha Tinh and Nghe An.
CSO NGOs participated at the national level through the Vietnam REDD Office (VRO), and through
membership of various sub technical working groups (STWG) particularly the safeguards, REDD+ local
implementation STWGs. The Safeguards and REDD+ Local Implementation STWGs meet periodically.
In those meetings, the CSOs, Indigenous People are encouraged to participate and share the lesson learnt
and contribute to the REDD+ readiness process.
During the SESA process specific consultation and participation events in the six provinces were held
with the vulnerable groups and forest-dependent communities (especially ethnic minorities) to ensure that
they receive culturally appropriate benefits from future REDD+ activities, while ensuring that the NRAP
does not adversely affect these communities. In addition, consultations were also conducted with the local
authorities, line ministries, CSOs, and NGOs.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                       I     x      I             I
The Readiness Preparation national REDD+ Strategy as well as activities proposed in the ER program
area are expected to have significant positive environmental impacts to natural habitats due to a reduction
in forest loss. This policy is triggered given that the NRAP will likely work both within existing protected
areas as well as other forest habitats of varying significance. If the REDD program is successful, the
impacts on critical forest habitats are expected to be positive, nevertheless SESA evaluates the possible
risks associated with strategic options on forest habitats within protected areas as well as other sensitive
forest habitats. The ESMF includes provisions to assess possible impacts prior to any actions being
undertaken on the ground. Critical issues related to natural habitats and potential impacts from the
activities financed under the FCPF will be assessed during SESA implementation and under the ESMF,
which also involve the consultation mechanism with relevant stakeholders.
This policy helps ensure that the REDD+ Strategy and intervention in the ER program area take into
account biodiversity conservation as well as the conservation of critical natural habitats. During the
implementation phase, monitoring activities will be established to ensure that critical natural habitats are
not adversely affected.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                I     x      I             I
The Readiness Preparation National REDD+ Strategy as well as activities proposed in the ER program
will not finance harvesting or conversion of forests and are expected to have significant positive impacts
on the health and quality of forests as the overall objective is to reduce deforestation and forest
degradation. This policy is triggered due to the potential changes in the management, protection, or
utilization of natural forests or plantations that could arise from REDD+ and activities may indirectly
affect the rights and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests.
The NRAP itself built largely on the experience of the PFES program for which should be evaluated in
order to ensure lessons are incorporated early in the design and key social and environmental risks and
potential impacts associated with REDD are considered in the ESMF.




                                                                                                          8
Safe2uard Policies Tri22ered                                        I     Yes     I     No      I   TBD
Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                           I      x      I             I
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation REDD+ Strategy as well as activities proposed in
the ER program might indirectly lead to agricultural intensification on degraded lands, and/or
reforestation and forest management programs that require pest management. The REDD+ Strategy and
SESA addresses critical issues related to pest management. The ESMF includes pest management
procedures and guidance, as appropriate.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                            I      x      I             I
This policy is triggered as the Readiness REDD+ Strategy as well as activities proposed in the ER
program could indirectly affect areas containing sites with physical cultural resources (e.g. monuments,
historical building;, archaeological or paleontological sites, holy sites, etc.). The SESA (and ESMF)
assesses if ground implementation of REDD+ strategy as well as ER program activities is likely to
include these sites and ensure the appropriate measures are adopted in order to protect them, including
guidance on development and implementation of a Physical Cultural Management Plan.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                     I      x      I             I
The Readiness Preparation national REDD+ strategy as well as activities proposed in the ER program are
likely to benefit Indigenous People and occur predominately on the customary lands of Indigenous
People. The application of this policy will ensure that consultations regarding REDD+ Strategy Options
as well as activities proposed in the ER program are culturally appropriate and inclusive, and provides
evidence of broad community support for REDD+ activities on their lands. The nature and extent of
impacts on Indigenous Peoples are determined through a social assessment (SA) as part of the SESA. The
ESMF is containing an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Given that Indigenous Peoples
form the overwhelming majority of people in the project area, guidance for incorporating the elements of
an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) into plans for specific areas will be included in the IPPF and
incorporated into overall project design.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                               I      x      I             I
With the activities proposed in the ER program are under development, potential impacts, including the
type and extent of potential land acquisition, economic or physical displacement or access restrictions to
resources, remains unknown. This policy is triggered to ensure landowners, and land users and forest
dependent communities and/or individuals are properly consulted and not coerced or forced to accept or
commit to REDD+ ac~vities or other forest management/reforestation activities involuntarily, and that
best practice approaches as informed by OP 4.12 are adopted. The SESA is identifying and assessing the
potential for any involuntary land acquisition issues or restriction of access to natural resources to occur,
and management processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The ESMF will include, as required, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework, all of which are part of the SESA, in
order to ensure avoidance, minimization, and/or appropriate compensation for adversely affected persons
or populations in downstream implementation. The sub-component under Component 3 of the Readiness
Preparation Grant will fund assessment of existing grievance mechanisms at the national and
decentralized levels, assess the capacity of institutions and customary mechanisms that would handle
grievances, and support their strengthening specifically for REDD+.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                         I             I     x       I
The REDD+ strategies and activities will not involve the construction of new dams, nor will they be
affected by any existing dams.




                                                                                                           9
Safe2uanl Policies Tri!!!!ered                                                      I     Yes        I     No        I     TBD
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                   I                I      x        I
The REDD+ strategies and activities will not affect any international waterways.
Pro_iects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            I                I      x        I
The REDD+ strategies and activities will not be located in                ~ny   disputed areas.


III. SAFEGUARDS PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country's mid-term progress report, at which time
   the ISDS may be updated as needed: 04/30/2018


B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguanl-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the initial ISDS and/or updated
   ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be applied is the SESA. The SESA includes as part of the SESA
process the preparation of an ESMF for the ER program area as well as a national ESMF. The ESMF(s)
especially for the national one may evolve and be updated over time when the NRAP is revised and new
REDD+ strategy options and projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are
identified during implementation of REDD+.
The SESA process requires that the selection of REDD+ strategy options should take into account the
country's institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks, and the
potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any identified gaps to
manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant World Bank's safeguard policies should
be identified along with the strategy options to feed into the preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF should
provide a framework to manage and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts related to
specific projects and activities (including investments and carbon finance transactions), in the context of
the future implementation of REDD+.
The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant requirements
of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not necessarily limited to, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); Process Framework (PF); and Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF).        ~

There are no requirements for completing safeguard related studies prior to Bank approval of the REDD+
Readiness grant. The SESA and the development of the ESMF will be considered as part of the first steps
of the grant implementation after signature of the legal agreement.
The Phase I SESA and ESMF are expected to be finalized by end December 2016. The Phase II SESA
and ESMF will be completed by April 30, 2018.




2   Reminder: The Bank' s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



                                                                                                                                  10
     IV. APPROVALS

      Signed and submitted by:
      Task Team Leader:
      Approved by:
      Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
        Comments:
      Practice Manager:                  e: Iain Shuker
        Comments:




                          ~




                   -
                                                          11



..
