                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC794
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/16/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                              Project ID: P070197
Project: URBAN UPGRADING PROJECT                              Task Team Leader: Rumana Huque
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 2, 2004                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 29, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m): 222.47
Managing Unit: EASUR                                          Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            sector (70%); Other social services (20%); Housing
Status: Lending                                               finance and real estate markets (10%)
                                                              Theme: Access to urban services for the poor (P);
                                                              Participation and civic engagement (P); Municipal
                                                              governance and institution building (S); Personal and
                                                              property rights (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objectives of the Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project (VUUP) are to alleviate poverty in urban areas by
improving the living and environmental conditions of the urban poor using participatory planning methods,
and influencing planning processes to become more inclusive and pro-poor.

These objectives will be achieved by: i) upgrading basic tertiary infrastructure and other services in
low-income areas through partnerships between communities and local governments, and through capacity
building for participatory planning and management; ii) providing and/or rehabilitating primary and
secondary infrastructure networks to connect with the tertiary infrastructure in low-income areas; iii)
providing affordable housing and/or serviced plots to low-income families that have to be resettled as a
result of upgrading; iv) establishing a housing improvement loan program for low-income households in
upgraded areas; and v) providing technical assistance to improve land administration processes in the
project cities.

The government is in the process of developing a National Urban Upgrading Program for Vietnam. It is
envisaged that this project would be the initial investment of the proposed national program and would
provide lessons and guidelines for future interventions.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Project Location
The project will be carried out in four cities--Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho in the south, and Haiphong
and Nam Dinh in the north. All four cities have numerous low-income, infrastructure-deficient communities
with low grade housing. Within the respective cities, low income communities have been identified using a
detailed mapping exercise and following criteria which take into account household income levels as well as
access to infrastructure and environmental and housing conditions.

Project Principles
§ Theprojectisbasedontheprinciplethatactive participationbycommunities incriticalstagesof
    preparation, design and implementation is a pre-requisite to effectively respond to the needs in these
    areas;

                                                          2
                                                                                                              ISDS


§ Thedesignofinfrastructureimprovementswilltakeintoaccountthecommunities'andlocal
    administrations' willingness and ability-to-pay. As such, infrastructure will be designed to appropriate
    functional standards to ensure that as many people as possible benefit.
§ Relocationand/orresettlementwillbeminimizedinordertomaintainthesocialfabricofthe
    communities.
§ Theprojectisexpectedtoimprovethelivingconditionsofallresidentslivingintheprojectarea,
    irrespective of their registration status.
§ Theprojectwilltakeamulti-sectoralapproachbyprovidingapackageoftertiaryinfrastructure
    improvements to identified low-income areas rather than making single sector investments

Project Components
For each city, there are six components. Details for each component on a city-by-city basis are provided in
Annex 2. A separate component (Component 7) will finance the development of a National Urban
Upgrading Program which will be managed by the Ministry of Construction.

COMPONENT ONE: Tertiary Infrastructure Upgrading and Service Improvements
Within the four cities, low-income areas where basic infrastructure and services are deficient have been
identified for upgrading. In each area, a multi-sectoral package of tertiary infrastructure and service
improvements will be provided. This includes a combination of water supply, drainage, paved access,
electricity, sanitation services and solid waste management in a single package of upgrading works,
depending on the expressed demands of the specific communities. Rehabilitation of markets, public toilet
facilities, health or education facilities will also be included if identified as priorities by communities. For
each identified low-income area, Community Committees are set up consisting of ward authorities,
representatives of mass organizations such as the Women Union, Youth Unions, etc., and residents. Design
consultants hired by the cities work with these Community Committees and with utility companies to
prepare a Community Upgrading Plan (CUP). This plan sets out the layout and details of the
infrastructure investments, and also describes the participation process, the community management
structures, the alternatives considered for upgrading, costs, and cost recovery arrangements. It includes
financial and implementation arrangements for operations and maintenance, and a community environment
management plan. The CUPs take due account of the district/ward investment and development plans, as
well as each city's master plan.

The design of this component draws on valuable lessons learned from pilot operations around the country,
including the Belgian Aid supported upgrading initiative in Ho Chi Minh City, UNDP assistance in five
provincial towns, SDC assistance in three provincial towns and projects supported by NGOs in HCMC. It
also builds on the "alley upgrading schemes" that are common across urban areas in Vietnam.

COMPONENT TWO: Complementary Primary and Secondary Infrastructure
Experience around the world has shown that, for infrastructure services that are part of a larger network,
improving tertiary infrastructure within neighborhoods is not enough. The effectiveness of the community
level improvements depends on whether they are correctly linked to the larger network and whether the
network is capable of absorbing the new additions. The project will therefore finance the improvement of
primary and secondary (or trunk) infrastructure where necessary to complement the tertiary improvements
at the community level. Investments mainly consist of improvements in drainage networks, pumping
stations, road and bridge improvements, and water supply. These works will be carried out under separate
contracts from the tertiary works and will involve relevant city departments such as the Department of
Transport and Public Works and the city/provincial utility companies.

COMPONENT THREE: Resettlement Housing

                                                        3
                                                                                                            ISDS


A key project principle is to apply appropriate design standards to minimize resettlement, for both the
tertiary infrastructure upgrading component and for the trunk infrastructure. However, some resettlement is
unavoidable because many migrants have, over the years, settled in and along canals and other rights of
way, in situations which create hazards to their health and to the health of others. It is estimated that
around 5,363 households will require resettlement. In accordance with the Bank's policy on Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), one of the options to be provided to resettled households is resettlement
housing. Surveys indicate that a majority of households to be resettled under the project will seek
replacement housing at government allocated resettlement sites. Appropriate resettlement sites have been
secured by the cities, and infrastructure will be provided under the project to service these sites.
Affordability analyses carried out during preparation indicate that the poor and the poorest are unlikely to
be able to afford serviced plots (and build a new house on it). Some of the poor may be able to buy
apartments, while the poorest are likely to be able to only afford apartments for rent. Bank funds will
therefore finance some core housing for the poorest. The participating cities prefer to build mixed income
developments with a combination of low-cost and higher cost buildings/plots. Bank funds will only finance
the proportion of site development costs related to the resettlement housing.

COMPONENT FOUR: Land and housing management
This component will provide technical assistance and training for strengthening the administration of land
use certificates which has recently been decentralized to local governments. Depending on the existing
capacity of the relevant departments, assistance will be provided for the following: i) establishment of a
networked land administration and housing management information system; ii) completing cadastral maps
where necessary to accelerate the issuance of certificates; iii) supporting administrative/ organizational
restructuring; and iv) simplifying procedures for providing land use permits. In order to give women more
equal access to assets, and in accordance with Vietnamese law, women's names will be included on all
certificates issued.

COMPONENT FIVE: Housing Improvement Loan Program
The objectives of this component are: i) to provide access to credit to poor households to improve their
houses in the project areas; and ii) to strengthen the housing microfinance system to facilitate the provision
of housing improvement loans to the urban poor. Prudential microcredit principles will be applied (e.g.
interest rates that cover operating costs, rules for repayment, application of sanctions, etc.). Eligibility
criteria and loan terms and conditions are designed to ensure that low-income people are able to access the
loans. Potential implementation partner organizations were assessed and five considered appropriate: the
Women's Unions in Haiphong, NamDinh and Ho Chi Minh City; the Capital Aid Fund for Employment of
the Poor (CEP) in Ho Chi Minh City; and the Mekong Housing Bank (MHB) in Can Tho (in association
with the Women's Union of Can Tho). These represent different types of organization (the Women's Unions
are mass organizations, MHB is a commercial bank, and CEP is a microfinance institution). Because the
government is considering scaling VUUP up to a national level, these different types of implementation
partners are being tested so that the most successful approach can be replicated in other cities. Please see
Annex 13 for details of this component.

This component will finance capital that will be on-lent as housing improvement micro-loans to low-income
households according to arrangements outlined in an Operations Manual and individual Implementation
Agreements with each partner. The amount of capital to be provided to each partner has been determined
according to the potential customer base and the partner's lending capacity. Technical assistance, training
and equipment will also be provided to strengthen the capacities of the implementing partners.

COMPONENT SIX: Capacity Building
This component will finance consulting services and goods/equipment for capacity building for the

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS


following activities:
1. Technical assistance and training at the city/district/ward levels for: a) participatory planning, design
     and implementation; and b) strengthening the capacity of utility companies and District Authorities to
     improve operations and maintenance of infrastructure financed;
2. Technical assistance and training for communities to organize more effectively to participate in project
     planning and design; and Information Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns particularly to
     promote better sanitation practices; and
3. Technical assistance and training for the PMU in: a) project management; b) procurement and contract
     management; c) financial management; d) audits; e) RAP and Environmental Monitoring; and f)
     monitoring and evaluation of the project. Equipment to support the PMUs will also be financed,
     including office equipment (computers, printers, photocopiers, etc.) and vehicles where required.

COMPONENT SEVEN: Development of a National Urban Upgrading Program
The objectives of this component are: i) to develop a National Urban Upgrading Program (NUUP) that will
apply the principles of urban upgrading adopted for VUUP to cities across Vietnam; and ii) to evaluate the
progress and impact of VUUP on a continuous basis. This component will be managed by the Ministry of
Construction (MOC). Technical assistance and training will be provided to MOC for the following
activities:
1. Assessment of demand for urban upgrading at the national level;
2. Sharing experiences and lessons learned with stakeholders at national and city levels (through training,
     workshops, study tours, and reports)
3. A clear strategy and five-year investment plan for NUUP which would form part of the 2006-2010
     five-year plan, including institutional arrangements and a monitoring and evaluation strategy for the
     program;
4. Assessment of the need for peri-urban planning and development in order to prevent the creation of new
     low-income areas; and
5. Evaluation reports on VUUP throughout the course of project implementation

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be carried out in two large cities and two secondary cities--Ho Chi Minh City and Can
Tho in the south, and Haiphong and Nam Dinh in the north. All four cities have numerous poor,
infrastructure-deficient communities with low grade housing. Within the respective cities, low income
communities have been identified using a mapping exercise and following criteria which take into account
household income levels as well as infrastructure, environmental and housing conditions.


B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes    No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes    No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes    No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes    No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes    No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes    No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
This project is an innovative project in the Bank's program in Vietnam. A phased approach has therefore
been adopted so that lessons learned in the initial 2 years of implementation can be used to improve the
design of subsequent phases.

Environment Issues
A major project objective is to improve environmental conditions in poor urban communities. Though the
project will have positive environmental benefits through provision of better services (water supply,
sanitation and solid waste management), there will be localized environmental impacts during project
construction and operation. The potential impacts can be mitigated by incorporating environmental features
in engineering design, enhancing participatory planning process and community involvement during
operation and maintenance

Resettlement Issues
Three components (tertiary infrastructure upgrading component, primary and secondary infrastructure
component, and resettlement housing component) will involve land acquisition and some resettlement will
be unavoidable. The Project Concept Review took place before January 1, 2002, therefore, the Bank's
policy on Involuntary Resettlement OD 4.30 was triggered. In accordance with the OD 4.30 , a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed, because the project adopts a phased approach
in each participating city and only the sites for Phase One projects were identified. The principle objective
of the RPF is to ensure that all project affected persons will be compensated for their losses at replacement
cost and provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain, their
pre-project living standards and income earning capacity. A consultation workshop on this policy was held
on January 28, 03 in HCMC with many participants from ministerial level, relevant departments of the
project provinces and four Project Management Units. This Resettlement Policy Framework was adopted
by three Provincial People Committees (Letters have been sent to PM: Nam Dinh- No. 211/VP5, dated
September 22, 2003; Hai Phong- No. 4315/CV-UB, dated September 26, 2003, and Can Tho- No.
3233/UB, dated August 21, 2003). Following the RPF, four Resettlement Action Plans (one for each of the
four cities) were prepared for Phase One projects in which resettlement issues have been identified.

Indigenous People
There would be only one potential vulnerable ethnic minority group in the Project cities. These are groups
of Khmer living in Can Tho city. The Khmer lived in Mekong delta region centuries before either Hoa or
Kinh settled in significant numbers. The Khme population now constitute roughly 6 percent of the total
population of Me Kong delta region. According to the Report of Preliminary Survey on Khmer Ethnic

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS


Minority (screening study by consultants for Phase one in Can Tho), there are Khmer people in An Hoi (
4 families in the project areas) and An Cu (21 in the project areas) , but consultants described in their
report that these families are scattered (and thus do not form as Khmer communities/Groups). Therefore, a
separate EMDP-Phase 1 for Can Tho is nor required. However, in RAP-Phase 1 of Can Tho, key
information about the Khmer affected people is provided.

Based on the social assessment, the following Phases could impact to Khmer communities in Can Tho city
and thus, EMDPs would be prepared based on the Project Ethnic Minority Development Strategy. The
Project Ethnic Minority Development Strategy is developed in accordance with OD 4.20 on Indigenous
People and Constitution of Viet Nam, 1992. The main objective of this strategy for ethnic minorities is to
ensure that the development process foster full respect for their dignity, human rights, cultural uniqueness
and, more specifically that ethnic minorities (i) do not suffer adverse social and cultural impacts during the
development process and (ii) receive culturally compatible social and economic benefits from the project.

A consultation workshop on this policy was held on January 28, 03 in HCMC with many participants from
ministerial level, relevant departments of the project provinces and four Project Management Units. This
strategy was approved by Can Tho Provincial People Committee (No. 2323/QD-CT-UB dated July 14,
2003).

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
 The cumulative impacts caused by the application of OP4.12 and OD4.3 will be localized to the
 community, and will be positive since housing standards and the supporting urban infrastructure will be
 improved for the families that are relocated.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Provision of improved basic services will improve the quality of life and enhance the livability of these
neighborhoods. Upgrading low income areas may lead to a slight increase in population density and could
increase motorized transport, which could have some related negative environmental impacts. However,
overall, the net impact will be a significant improvement in the environmental conditions of these
neighborhoods.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
n/a

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Following the principles of urban upgrading, every effort has been made to minimize unnecessary
involuntary resettlement and reduce adverse environmental impacts by: i) applying appropriate technical
and design standards particularly for tertiary infrastructure upgrading and resettlement site development;
and ii) limiting the selection of trunk infrastructure improvements to those that have a direct impact on the
tertiary networks being upgraded.

The project will be implemented in phases. Only investments in Phase 1 have been fully designed. Phase 2
and Phase 3 (only in Can Tho) investments have been identified, and detailed designs will be completed
during implementation. As a result, an Environmental Safeguards Framework, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), and an Ethnic Minority Development Strategy have been developed in accordance with
the relevant ODs indicated above. The RPF has been adopted by the relevant local authorities (Nam Dinh -
Decision No. 211/VP5, dated September 22, 2003; Hai Phong - No. 4315/CV-UB, dated September 26,
2003, Can Tho - No. 3233/UB, dated August 21, 2003; and HCMC - No. 4958/UB-DB, dated October 8,

                                                        7
                                                                                                          ISDS


2003) and approved by the central government (Decision No.1513/CP-NN dated November 4, 2003). The
Ethnic Minority Development Strategy was approved by the Can Tho Provincial People's Committee (No.
2323/QD-CT-UB, dated July 14, 2003).

Full EIAs/EMPs and RAPs have been developed for Phase 1 investments (see Annex 11 for Environment
Assessment; Annex 12 for Resettlement). They have been prepared in consultation with Project Affected
People and with local authorities at different administrative levels. Technical assistance will be provided
under the project to assist the PMUs in implementation and monitoring of RAPs and EMPs and for the
preparation and implementation of EIAs, RAPs, and EMDPs for future phases according to the agreed
policies and frameworks.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A fundamental feature of the project is that it is designed with the full participation of communities. A
Community Upgrading Plan (CUP) is prepared for each targeted low income area which ensures that the
main stakeholders participate throughout the project cycle, from identification to implementation and
management. Preparation of CUPs starts with a series of community meetings and information
dissemination to different social groups (with a specific focus on ensuring women's participation) on what
urban upgrading means, the range of options open to communities, and discussions on problems and issues.
Communities are asked to identify their priority needs. Consultants then work with the community groups
to select appropriate technical standards based on the communities' willingness and ability-to-pay for
different standards of infrastructure and services. CUPs for all areas in Phase 1 have been developed using
this process and a manual has been written based on lessons from this experience to guide the preparation
of CUPs for subsequent phases. TORs for design consultants for the tertiary upgrading investments and
CUPs include the need for sociologists and community development specialists in addition to engineers and
other specialists.

Draft drawings and plans are displayed in public places so that everyone has access and can see the impact
of investments visually on their neighborhood. The final CUPs include a description of the community
choice of investments, implementation arrangements (including roles of the communities versus
contractors), cost sharing arrangements, O&M responsibilities, etc. Following approval by the community,
CUPs are submitted to the city/provincial authorities for formal approval. Relevant city/provincial
departments and utility companies have been fully involved in the design of the other components of the
project, and have been required to sign off on the government-required Pre-Feasibility and Feasibility
Studies during preparation.

The environmental assessment process is aligned with the participatory planning process adopted in the
project. Affected communities and other stakeholders were consulted early in preparation of the EIAs. The
project's socio-economic survey included questions and issues on local environmental conditions and
priorities. This survey was followed-up with community meetings. The results were incorporated into the
EIAs and EMPs. Additional consultations with the same stakeholders will take place after the appraisal
mission, and will be used to finalize the EIAs and EMPs. The lessons that have been learned from this
screening and consultation process for Phase I investments have been incorporated into the draft
Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF), which will guide the consultative and
participatory processes for Phases II and III. The ESSF will be finalized during the appraisal mission.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

                                                      8
                                                                                                           ISDS




[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/13/2002        10/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/3/2003         11/11/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/5/2003         11/11/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         11/5/2003         12/19/2003
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/13/2002        8/21/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/3/2003         11/11/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/5/2003         11/11/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                 7/14/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           11/3/2003         11/11/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            11/5/2003         11/11/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Rumana Huque                                          04/16/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Lars C. Lund/Person/World Bank                        10/18/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Patchamuthu Illangovan/Person/World Bank              10/18/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                   Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                            02/04/2004
Sector Manager/Director               Keshav Varma                                          03/13/2004

