                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: 30303
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/24/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                              Project ID: P074688
                                                              Global Supplemental ID: P080074
Project: Rural Energy II                                      Task Team Leader: Hung Tien Van
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 11, 2004                     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 12, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m): 220.00
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.25
Managing Unit: EASEG                                          Sector: Power (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Project's aim is to support Vietnam's efforts towards socio-economic development by improving access
to good quality, affordable electricity services to rural communities in an efficient and sustainable manner.

The overall development objective of the proposed project would be achieved through: (a) upgrading and
/or expansion of rural power networks in about 1200 communes; (b) conversion of current ad-hoc local
electricity management systems to local distribution utilities (LDUs) as legal entities recognized under
Vietnamese law, to improve management of power distribution in rural areas, improve financial
sustainability, and better enable future mobilization of private funds; and (c) capacity building assistance
for the LDUs, provincial national authorities, participating regional power companies, and national
authorities involved in the planning and regulation of rural electrification.

The proposed project would improve access to energy to about 2 million households in Vietnam, including
many living in some of the poorest communes. The project also will enable increases in electric power for
expanding productive uses in rural areas, alleviating a major constraint to local economic growth.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
 The project provides funding for EVN and the power companies for the upgrading and rehabilitation of
 the MV systems and to the Provinces for the upgrading of the LV systems. The project provinces are
 responsible for the management of the funds for LV systems rehabilitation and for the conversion of the
 existing communes electricity groups into local distribution utilities. The project will be under the overall
 management and coordination of the MOI.

 The project includes the following five components:

  (i) Major upgrading and/or expansion of the LV system in the rural power network in 1200
  communes to be implemented by about 30 Provincial Peoples committees (PPC) with technical support
  and assistance from EVN's subsidiaries. The total cost of this project component is about US$242.7
  million of which US$162.80 million will be financed by the IDA credit, US$45.26 million by the PPC,
  and US$34.70 by the customers.

                                                        2
                                                                                                             ISDS


  (ii) Major upgrading and/or expansion of Medium Voltage System in the Northern Region: This
  project component will rehabilitate the medium voltage systems in the same project communes in the
  northern region of Vietnam, where the low voltage systems are rehabilitated and expanded in the project
  component 1. This component is implemented by PC1. The total cost of this component is US$ 42.00
  million of which US$33.00 million will be financed by the IDA credit, and US$9.14 million by PC1 from
  counterpart funds.

  (iii) Major upgrading and/or expansion of the MV system in the Southern Region: This project
  component will rehabilitate the medium voltage systems in the same project communes in the southern
  region of Vietnam, where the low voltage systems are rehabilitated and expanded in the project
  component 1. This component is implemented by PC2. The total cost of this component is US$11.2
  million of which US$8.5 million will be financed by the IDA credit, and US$2.52 million by PC2 from
  counterpart funds.

  (iv) Major upgrading and/or expansion of the MV system in the Central Region: This project
  component will rehabilitate the medium voltage system in the same project communes in the northern
  region of Vietnam, where the low voltage systems are rehabilitated and expanded in the project
  component 1. This component is implemented by PC3. The total cost of this component is US$ 18.00
  million, of which US$14.20 million will be financed by the IDA credit, and US$3.60 million by PC3
  from counterpart funds.

  (v) Technical Assistance: This component, totaling US$ 7.0 million, will support: (i) the development
  and implementation of a framework for regulation of companies and cooperatives; (ii) transformation of
  the LDUs into legal entities; (iii) strengthening the abilities of the LDUs in commercial, technical and
  financial management of electricity distribution companies; (iii) building the capacity of national and
  provincial authorities in planning and regulation of rural electrification; and (iv) to foster replication of
  the best practices developed to other LDUs participating in the later phases of the project and
  subsequently. The component will include IDA financing of $1.50 million, GEF financing of $5.25
  million in GEF grant financing as well as in-kind contributions from GOV of $0.25 million.

Phased Project Approach. Since all of the 30 project provincial programs cannot commence on the
implementation at the same time, it has been decided to implement the project in four phases. This
approach will ensure that all the provinces have time to prepare the project in sufficient detail and also it
will be useful for the later provinces to learn from the implementation results of others. Accordingly, in
phase 1, the project packages of the first six provinces covering 357 communes have been appraised and
approved by IDA. After upgradation and rehabilitation, the MV networks will be managed by the PC's;
while 97 commune LV networks will be managed as cooperatives and 260 communes as joint stock
companies of which one will be at the provincial level and 22 at the district level. In subsequent phases II (6
provinces, 210 communes), III (9 provinces) and IV (9 provinces) with a total of 558 communes, the
provincial level packages, including management structures, prepared by EVN and the provinces, every
year would be reviewed by IDA and MOI prior to implementation. This process will continue until the
$220 million of IDA funds is fully committed.

Project components (see Annex 1):


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

                                                        3
                                                                                                           ISDS


The project would be implemented in all regions in Vietnam in about 1200 communes in 30 provinces.
Phase 1 of the project covers communes in six provinces in the northern, central, and southern parts of
Vietnam. The dominant land use along the Rights of Way (ROW) is agricultural land, and the remaining
land uses are residential areas, disturbed land, and secondary forests. The project would not traverse
primary forests. In Vinh Phuc and Ha Tinh provinces, the project would serve communes that are located
in the buffer zone of Tam Dao National Park.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project is Environmental Category B, based on the size and scope of the project. The
potential for environmental impacts are limited in size and scope, and can be mitigated, and the
Borrower has demonstrated capacity for environmental management of such operations.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project's impacts are local, small, and reversible, consistent with the project's assignment to Category
B. Policy frameworks for EIAs and RPs were approved by the Bank and the Borrower, were applied to
first phase investments that were appraised prior to project approval, and will be applied to investments
that are to be appraised during project implementation.

Environment:

The project will finance the rehabilitation of substations and the installation or rehabilitation of medium
and low voltage distribution lines. The dominant land use along the Rights of Way (ROW) is agricultural
land, and the remaining land uses are residential areas, disturbed land, and secondary forests. The project
would not traverse primary forests. The distribution lines that connect communes would be installed along
existing roads. New access roads will not be built.

The rehabilitation and installation of the low and medium voltage distribution lines and associated
transformers would result in localized soil erosion, air quality, noise, and solid waste management impacts.

                                                         4
                                                                                                           ISDS



In two provinces, the project would serve communes that are located in the buffer zone of Tam Dao
National Park (in Vinh Phuc and Ha Tinh provinces). Detailed EAs for the investments in these buffer
zones found that the impacts would be minor, supported by the following: (i) the communes are located
from 2 to 5 km or more from the core zones of these national parks, and no access roads or other
project-related activities are closer to the core zones than this; (ii) the land uses around the existing
distribution network are mainly agriculture, small roads, and plantation forests. The vegetation ranges from
agricultural to semi-natural, and there are no Red Book plant or animal species in the project areas; and
(iii) the project would rehabilitate the existing distribution network, and access roads will not be
constructed or improved. Therefore, access to the core zones of the national parks by local people and
construction workers will not be improved; and (iv) the EAs for these investments in the buffer zones have
been reviewed and approved by the management board for the national park.

Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples. The Project will not involve any major resettlement but will entail
land acquisition and resettlement impacts due to construction of new lines and substations. Impacts are
mitigated by placing the distribution lines over largely uninhabited land. Land acquisition will be limited
essentially to transmission line right- of- way (ROW) areas and service roads. Most land impacts will be
temporary in the construction period and will require only compensation for crops lost. The DPs will be
able to re-use their plots after construction's end with the restricted conditions according to Decree
54/1999/ND-CP of GOV to regulate the protection for the safety of HV systems.

In the first phase of project 131,955 households will be affected by the Project. The number of DPs is high
because of the DPs are scattered along the lines. However, each of the subprojects will have low-intensity
impacts. Most of impacts on land will be temporary. The land under the overhead lines in the right-of-way
is to be used for agricultural purposes only; therefore most of the displaced persons (DPs) will be affected
only temporarily. Crop compensation will be delivered in cash at current market rates. Land and other
assets will be compensated at substitution cost. Particular attention will be paid in assuring that
compensation amounts indicated in government tariffs have been adjusted as to actually correspond to these
rates. DPs who will have to reconstruct their houses will receive a special subsidy to cover livelihood losses
in the house reconstruction period. Not only entitlement to compensation, but also DPs will be assisted with
allowances in order to restore their livelihood at least as the same level of pre-project implementation.
Impacts on houses will be mostly partial and generally will not require the relocation of families outside
their residential plots.

The subprojects of phase 1 do not cause any specific impacts on the communities of ethnic minorities.
According to the results of social screening for phase 1, there are Ethnic Minorities in the project areas of
Vinh Phuc, Ha Tinh, Phu Yen and Ca Mau provinces and some of them will be adversely impacted by land
acquisition, but the impacts do not cause community-wide or severe socio-economic effects. Three Ethnic
Minority Development Plans (EMDP) for phase 1 were prepared in close consultation with ethnic
minorities and local authorities in the project areas. The EMDPs are based on a Strategy for Ethnic
Minorities (SEM) that was developed by the Borrower in accordance with the requirements of the World
Bank's OD 4.20 on Indigenous People. All EMDPs of the subsequent phases will be prepared in the
implementation phase separately for each project provinces and the same SEM will be applied.

Since compensation at market and substitution rates is assured, the socio-economic impact of the Project is
expected to be positive.

OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
The EIRs for the phase I subprojects show that there would not be important impacts to natural habitats. For

                                                         5
                                                                                                            ISDS


    subprojects that will be appriased during project implementation, a screening process will be used to ensure
    that impacts on natural habitats are identified and mitigated. Sub-projects with insignificant impacts, which
    can be mitigated, will be required to submit EMPs satisfactory to the Bank and the local environmental
    authority. Sub-projects which impact critical natural habitats will not be eligible for project financing.

OP 4.11 - Cultural Resources
It is not anticipated that the sub-projects will adversely affect sites having archeological, paleontological,
    historical, religious, or unique natural values as definied under the OP. A screening mechanism
    incorporated into the EA will ensure that impacts on such sites are identified and mitigated, and accepted by
    the local authorities. Awareness of finding uncovered sites will be raised among the public, the project
    contractors and operators.

OP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Every effort has been through design and construction scheduling to minimize impacts on land acquisition.
    However, marginal impacts (temporarily or permanently) on land and other assets may not be avoidable.
    Most of the Displaced People (DP) would only be temporarily affected in the project construction period.
    There are DPs who would be permanently affected by the acquisition of small areas of land for tower/pole
    foundations, substations or for maintenance of service roads. OP 4.12 will be applied to ensure that all
    DPs will be compensated at the substitution costs for their lost assets and assisted to improve or at least to
    maintain their livelihood as the same level of pre-project implementation.

OP 4.20- Indigenous People
There are subprojects would be developed in the areas of the Ethnic Minorities and therefore, some groups of
    Ethnic Minorities could be affected. Three Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDP) for phase 1 have
    been prepared in close consultation with local authorities and ethnic minorities who are residing in the
    project areas. These EMDPs are also based on the project's Strategy for Ethnic Minorities (SEM) which is
    developed by the Borrower in accordance with the requirements of the World Bank's OD 4.20 on
    Indigenous People. All EMDPs of the subsequent phases will be prepared in the implementation phase
    separately for each project provinces and the same SEM will be applied.

BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
The RPs and EIAs were posted in InfoShop and in country at publically accessible places (e.g. VDIC, all
    PMUs and local governments) prior to the departure of appraisal.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The project would not have adverse cumulative impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project would not have long term impacts.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
None required or needed.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Six Environmental Assessments/Environmental Management Plans (EA/EMPs) and six Resettlement Plans
(RPs) were prepared, one for project investments in each of the six provinces in Phase 1 of this project.
Also, Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs) were prepared for three provinces, where these were

                                                      6
                                                                                                           ISDS


required. The EAs/EMPs, RPs, and EMDPs address all environmental and social issues satisfactorily, and
in compliance with Vietnamese and Bank environmental regulations, policies and procedures.

Monitoring of the implementation of these plans will be carried out by the technical supervision staff of
each PMU. An independent safeguard consultant, hired by EVN, will also provide semi-annual reports on
the implementation of the EMPs and RPs, including results of consultation with local communities
regarding environmental concerns and complaints. Where appropriate, mitigation measures will be included
in construction contracts. There will also be community-based monitoring of EMP implementation. This
was piloted under the Rural Energy I project, and was successful because communities have a special
interest in ensuring that environmental impact are minimized. Communities will provide monthly reports to
the PMUs.


Training on environmental management and monitoring of EMP implementation will be provided to the
PCs and the staff of the Project Management Units, in the transmission companies and in EVN, local
authorities and contractors.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the communes participating in the project. IDA's interlocutors for the main
project design are the Ministries of Finance (MOF); Ministry of Industry (MOI), Project Provincial
Peoples' Committees, Electricity of Viet Nam (EVN), Power Companies No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 (PCs) and
their Project Management Boards (PMBs).

Public consultation. Initial consultation was conducted by the Borrower in the form of discussion and
agreement with the respective local government agencies and communes with regard to the route
alternatives. Further public consultation involving DPs and representatives of local NGOs (e.g. Women's
Union, Youth Union, Farmers Union, Fatherland Front Association of the elderly people), as required by
the Bank safeguard policies, were conducted before pre-appraisal (Nov-Dec, 2003). No objections to the
project or environmental concerns other than those addressed in the EAs have been raised during the
consultation process. The DPs did suggest additional mitigation measures, which were incorporated in the
EMPs. Records of those discussions and written agreements are attached to the EA reports.

Public disclosure: The Borrower has displayed draft EAs as per WB safeguard requirements. Display of
the EAs (in Vietnamese) has taken place in the provincial power companies. The EAs in English and
Vietnamese have been displayed in the Hanoi VDIC and through the InfoShop in Washington DC.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                      7
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/3/2003        5/3/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/3/2003        4/29/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/3/2003        5/13/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                              5/3/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                          4/29/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                           5/13/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                              5/3/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                          4/29/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                           5/13/2004

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Hung Tien Van                                      02/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Phuong Thi Thanh Tran                              03/05/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Vu Hong                                            02/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Phillip Brylski/Person/World Bank                  05/11/2003

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                         03/06/2003
Sector Manager/Director               Junhui Wu                                          03/06/2003

