                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/05/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: VIETNAM                                             Project ID: P077287
Project: VN-Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project        Task Team Leader: Richard W. Pollard
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 19, 2004               IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 13, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m): 100.00
Managing Unit: EASUR                                         Sector: Water supply (60%); Sanitation (20%);
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Health (20%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);
                                                             Fighting communicable diseases (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of this project is to improve the quality of life and assist in alleviating poverty in
poor households and villages in selected rural areas in Vietnam. This would be achieved by providing
financing and technical assistance for developing safe and locally sustainable water supplies, sanitation
facilities for human waste disposal and drainage, and promoting improved hygiene and sanitation practices.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project will be implemented in about eight provinces, selected from one or two contiguous
regions to be identified by GOV based on poverty and current estimated WSS coverage criteria.
Within the selected regions, the project concept will be "marketed" to a long list of provinces. A
final selection of those to be included in the project will be based on interest expressed in the
project concept and willingness to commit local budget resources.

The project builds on pilot and demonstration activities for RWSS2020 financed by Danida
through the Water Sector Program Support Project. Community-based planning, financing, funds
channeling, and capacity building modalities are currently being tested. They will be assessed and
the outcomes adapted for large-scale implementation through the proposed project.

Salient features of the project are the funds channeling arrangements, household-level poverty
targeting, the degree of beneficiary control over decision-making for community-level
investments, the level of institutional focus, and the scope and content of the health component.
The project would support demand-based improvements to water supplies, household and
community sanitation, and hygiene. The project would provide financing for loans for
infrastructure construction, along with grants for households designated as poor or very poor by
MOLISA, and for special social program areas designated by CEMMA. Funds for loans and
grants would be channelled through the Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
directly to households and other entities legally capable of incurring debt. Separate budgets
would be provided for District and provincial level technical support and management. The
project would be implemented through provincial service contracts providing management of the
loan and grant application and selection process and technical guidance to communities.
Communities will be responsible to finance 100% of the cost of infrastructure. Loans would be
available at commercial rates (currently about 12 percent P.A.) to all communities who wish to

                                                   2
                                                                                                  ISDS


borrow. Specific poor households would be eligible to receive grants to cover up to 80% of their
portion of the costs. Operation and maintenance will be fully financed by communities. The WSS
activities will be complemented by substantial community health components implemented
through the Departments of Health and mass organizations such as the Vietnam Women's Union,
Farmers' Union, and Youth Union.

Developing Water and Sanitation Infrastructure. This component would provide rural
communities with accessible, convenient, and clean water in adequate quantity. The component
would provide a choice among a variety of appropriate physical systems and financing strategies.
The content would include:
l Technical assistance to facilitate informed choice by households, villages, and communes to
    select and plan the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure that benefiting families
    want and are willing to pay for;
l Financing for water supply and sanitation (both human waste and wastewater disposal)
    infrastructure design and construction through a combination of loans and targeted grants
    channeled directly to user groups or communes. IDA funds would be used to contribute to a
    loan guarantee fund, and for grants to eligible households;
l Training and technical backstopping for operation and maintenance of infrastructure by
    village-level user groups, either directly or through service contracts between user groups and
    technical service providers (either SOEs or private firms).

Community and local institutions capacity building. This component would assist communities
(either communes or local water user groups) to organize effectively and also to obtain the
technical capacity to manage and control water programs, sanitation, and community health. It is
expected that the capacity developed in the direct project areas would also assist and empower
the community in making choices and managing initiatives in other sectors. The content of the
component would include:
l Training and technical assistance for identification and preparation of community-level
    projects by project beneficiaries, fiscal and organizational management, and operation and
    maintenance of infrastructure improvements;
l Training and orientation for selected provincial and commune-level staff from CERWASS and
    other government agencies, SOEs, and (possibly) NGOS and private organizations to ensure
    adequate skills are in place to foster community management, provide effective health
    education, and backstop operation and maintenance;
l Technical assistance to help provincial CERWASS and other local level agencies re-organize
    and develop more appropriate staff profiles and modus operandi to effectively and efficiently
    support demand-responsive, community-based programs, including closer collaboration with
    NGO and private sector entities;
l Technical assistance for improving program monitoring.

Improving Health Behavior and Services. This component would include health education and
direct services to reduce water borne diseases. The activities will involve women, educators, and
community leaders as lead change agents. Diarrhea, skin diseases, and worms in children would
be a special focus of the component. Content would include:
l Training and technical assistance to further develop participatory hygiene and sanitation

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


     education techniques and programs to facilitate health infrastructure decision-making by rural
     communes, and to affect sustained improvements in personal, household, and community
     hygiene and sanitation practices;
l Financing for community-based programs, targeted health center-based programs, and further
     development Women's Union initiatives to promote sanitation and combat water-borne
     diseases. Other health programs targeting related community health priorities and integrating
     cost effectively with the water-borne disease package might be considered for inclusion in the
     component (for example worms, selected childhood nutritional problems, selected respiratory
     and immunizable diseases).
l Financing for health impact monitoring.

Project Management. This component would involve the establishment of systems,
accountability, and management/financing rules to the end that:
l Many project management functions would be carried out at the user group or commune
     level;
l Financing for WSS systems would be channeled directly to communities through Water User
     Groups and Cooperatives via the banking system;
l Financing for health activities would be channeled directly to communes or provinces.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented in about eight provinces, selected from one or two contiguous
regions to be identified by GOV based on poverty and current estimated WSS coverage criteria.
Within the selected regions, the project concept will be "marketed" to a long list of provinces. A
final selection of those to be included in the project will be based on interest expressed in the
project concept and willingness to commit local budget resources.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: An Environmental Safeguards Framework will be prepared. Sub-project specific EA
documentation will be prepared for those activities needing such assessments, as per the Framework.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No     TBD

                                                        4
                                                                                                            ISDS




Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
OPs 4.01, 4.04, 4.20, and OD 4.20 may be triggered. There will be limited, short term, environmental impacts
   associated with the project during construction activities. Land acquisition and involuntary resettlement
   issues will be identified during project preparation, as will issues related to equity in access to project
   benefits for ethnic minority groups. The nature of the proposed activities (very small-scale water supply
   and on-site sanitation and drainage systems) is only expected to require very limited use of public land in
   the case of new systems and resettlement is unlikely to be an issue.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None anticipated at this time.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The main potential area of impact will be increased drainage problems due to increased water use around
homes and water points, if the drainage structures that the project will require are not built, are poorly
built, or are not maintained. This could potentially lead to increased mosquito breeding and increased
malaria and dengue fever transmission.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Analysis of alternatives will be an integral part of sub-project design and guidelines will be provided in the
   Operations Manual to guide project components

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmental Safeguards Framework, a Policy Framework for Compensation, Resettlement, and
Rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons, and an Ethnic Minorities Action Plan will be prepared by the
borrower by appraisal and publicly disclosed. The two frameworks will be integral parts of the Operations
Manual. Project implementation staff in the provinces will be trained in the application of the two
frameworks.

Land acquisition - While no adverse impact or resettlement for land acquisition is anticipated, it is
possible that some minor land acquisition may be required for construction of water supply and sanitation
infrastructure. Therefore, a resettlement policy framework will be prepared that complies with OP 4.30
and OP 4.12. No involuntary resettlement is expected to take place. Since the project is demand based,
precise land acquisition impacts cannot be known by appraisal. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
Framework, drawing on the experience of projects with comparable land acquisition issues, will be agreed
with GOV for the limited acquisition anticipated. Abbreviated Resettlement Plans to handle acquisition
under specific sub-projects would be developed during implementation. The key elements of the Policy
Framework, including the activities involved in identifying acquisition impacts and preparing,
implementing, and monitoring specific sub-project resettlement plans will be described in the Project
Operations Manual and tested through ongoing pilot activities prior to appraisal.

Natural habitats - As a highly decentralized investment project, RWSSP will support thousands of small

                                                          5
                                                                                                           ISDS


sub-project investments in poor villages. Some may be in fragile locations potentially susceptible to
damage to their physical and biotic environments. No sub-projects will be allowed in national parks, forest
reserves, or nature tourism areas.

Indigenous peoples - Ethnic minorities will likely be included in the project, and OD 4.20 objectives will
be met through the project design, which will provide the means for participating communities to receive
culturally compatible benefits from sub-projects through their informed participation. Typically, ethnic
minorities do especially well with demand-driven projects because of their strong community organizations.
Project management guidelines give prominent roles to traditional leadership in sub-project
decision-making. TA selection criteria will give preference to fluency in local languages. Monitoring will
include field visits to isolated areas to ensure that all provisions are being implemented. The project will
also invite NGOs to provide independent monitoring of isolated areas. An Ethnic Minority Strategy will be
developed and included in the Project Operations Manual.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project beneficiary groups will be directly involved in the design of the project using a participatory
approach. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring the equitable involvement of women and poor
households in planning and decision-making. Prevailing social structures often limits the voice of women
and the poor, but project field staff will be trained to facilitate their inclusion through, inter alia,
participatory poverty analysis to identify the poor, separate focus group discussions, and preparation of
guidelines for village water management groups. Target communities as a whole will be directly
responsible for sub-project planning, decision-making, and financial management. Within these
communities, key stakeholder groups include the formal community leadership, mass organizations such as
the Women's and the Youth's Unions, local school and parent/teacher associations, and individual families.
Project facilitation, training programs, the participatory planning approach, transparency mechanisms, and
fiscal decentralization are all elements of the project design to promote stake holder ownership of the
project.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                             Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    12/9/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                9/9/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 1/9/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive

                                                     6
                                                                                                     ISDS


Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/9/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/9/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           1/9/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/9/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          9/9/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           1/9/2004

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Richard W. Pollard                                 Sept. 23, 2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Patchamuthu Illangovan/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Asger Christensen/Person/World Bank
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Lars C. Lund/Person/World Bank

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan
Sector Manager                        Keshav Varma

