                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

                                        APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                                        Report No.:   96333

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: MAY 1, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data
     Country:               Socialist    Republic    of Project ID:          P152797
                            Vietnam
     Project Name:           Partnership for Market Readiness in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
     Task Team Leader: Christophe Crepin
     Estimated Appraisal May 11, 2015                     Estimated Bank June, 2015
     Date:                                                Aooroval Date:
     Managing Unit:          GEN DR                       Lending             Investment Project
                                                          Instrument:         Financing
     Sector:                 General Public Administration (50%), General Industry and Trade (25%),
                             Solid Waste Management (10%)
     Theme:                  Climate chan2e (1000/o)·
     Is this project         No
     processed under OP
     8.50 (Emergency
     Recovery) or OP
     8.00 (Rapid
     Response to Crises
     and Emel'l!:encies)?
     Financin2 Un USD Million)
     Financlne: Source                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                   0.60
     Partnership for Market Readiness                           3.00
     Total                                                      3.60
     Environmental           C - Not Required
     Catee:ory:
     Is this a Repeater No
     project?
     Is this a Transferred No
     pro_lect?
   2. Current Project Development Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDQ) is to assist t/1e Government.of Vietnam to progressively
   become equipped with seleeled information, ·technical capacity, and policies that guide the
   development ofmarket-based instruments to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the country.


   3. Project Description
                                           Page I of 10
Background for the PMR. The PMR is a grant-based, multi-donor trust fund that provides capacity
building, technical assistance and grant funding for innovating and piloting market-based instruments
(MBls) to reduce GHG emissions. It provides a platform for technical discussions, policy exchange,
and collective innovation on new market instruments, fostering North-South and South-South exchange
to facilitate financial flows that lead to scaled-up GHG mitigation actions. The PMR also creates and
shares knowledge products on market instruments and lessons learned.

Proposed PMR activities for implementation phase. The Project Development Objective (PDO) will
be delivered through three complementary components that will work towards developing the
Government's core technical, policy and institutional regulatory market readiness to reduce GHG
emissions in the country. This will be conducted through essential capacity development and improved
data management at the central level, sustained stakeholder engagement to ensure efficient and effective
leadership and implementation, and the design and preparation of selected elements of MBIs in selected
sectors to inform future carbon pricing approaches. The efforts towards preparing for and designing
sector-specific MBis in this project (Component 2) will work in parallel with the development of policy
and management tools for carbon pricing readiness (Component I), both of which will prioritize "no-
regret measures" that would be beneficial irrespective of future policy decisions and of the evolution
of international climate negotiations.

Given the above, the proposed project is designed to comprise three project components as follows:

Component 1: Strengthening capacity for developing carbon pricing approaches. including
through supporting priority building blocks for MBis CUSD 1.105 million)

The first component will support the analytical works and institutional capacity building to facilitate
future development of carbon pricing policy approaches, including MBis. This component focuses on
evaluating carbon pricing options for Vietnam and assessing and developing the technical, policy and
management tools available to the Government for MBI implementation.

Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR support activities will include:
    1. Assessing the overall institutional, policy, and technical gaps and opportunities/or designing
       and implementing carbon pricing approaches in Vietnam. This will be conducted through
       three main activities: i) analysis and evaluation of market-based carbon pricing approaches
       [including crediting Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), emissions trading,
       and carbon taxes] applicable in Vietnam and definition of relevant sectoral scopes for these
       approaches; i1) research and formulation of financial mechanisms and policies needed to
       mobilize support from private sector, bank and credit funds including international sources,
       such as the· Green climate Fund, to establish and implement carbon pricing approaches in
       accordance with instruments recommended in the preceding activity; and iii) preparation of a
       mid-term action plan to help the Government of Vietnam to prepare and establish policy, legal,
       Institutional and administrative infrastructure and financial mechanisms to establish and
       implement the recommended market-based carbon pricing approaches including establish clear
       pathways from piloting of crediting NAMAs in priority sectors towards establishing more
       comprehensive market-based appro~ches. These activities will work to inform the Government
       and relevant stakeholders of the options available to the Government to employ carbon pricing
       policies.
    2. Development of the main building blocks for recommended market-based carbon pricing
       approaches at the national level, with focus on the data collection, MRY-related components
       and the crediting process. This sub-component includes four main activities: i) supporting the
       development of the national systems for GHG emissions data collection, reporting and
       management through the improvement of the national GHG emissions inventory process to
                                           Page 2 of IO                                             ·
        support the design and development of market-based carbon pricing approaches; Ii) developing
        the guiding principles for the national MRV and registry systems to ensure transparent
        accounting and tracking use of emission reductions that could be achieved through
        implementation of market-based carbon pricing approaches, mainly the crediting NAMAs in
        Vietnam (e.g. in steel sector and solid waste sector); Iii) supporting the development of national
        principles and criteria for credited NAMAs, including the participation requirements, approval
        processes, accreditation of independent verification entities, outline of quantification
        approaches (e.g. baseline setting and crediting thresholds where applicable) and general
        approach to net mitigation.; (iv) stakeholder training on carbon pricing approaches including
        organized training and capacity building workshops on requirements for credited NAMA, and
        dissemination, awareness raising for implementing OHO emission reduction and trading of
        carbon credits (at the central, sectoral and local levels). These aim to support the Government
        in developing the institutional and technical capacity to enhance the country's readiness for the
        implementation of MB Is and for the development of measurement, reporting, and verification
        (MRV) activities.

Comoonent 2: Readiness to pilot selected market-based instruments CUSD 1.52 million)

Through this component, the Go V will lay the foundation for piloting and implementing market-based
instruments, through selected Sectors. The selection of sectors and activities to be covered during the
implementation of the Project was primarily based on three criteria: competitiveness, cost-
effectiveness, and donor coordination and avoidance of overlap with existing initiatives. In additional
to these factors, the Government has also considered alignment with Vietnam's climate change and
green growth strategies, interest of stakeholders in the sectors, sector experience with MBis, and
technical and MRV capacity. As a result, the Government has selected the steel and solid waste sectors
for this project.

Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR will support the following activities:
  1. Designing a pilot for selected elements of MBls in t/1e steel sector. This sub-component will
     include four main activities: i) designing and developing data collection and data management
     system and MRV in steel sector in accordance with a selected crediting instrument in the steel
     sector; Ii) developing a credited NAMA for steel sector, including the choice of the crediting
     instrument [sectoral crediting or project/Programme of Activities (PoA)-based implementation],
     main building blocks; and implementation of a pilot of a OHO emissions database and voluntaiy
     reporting system in steel sector; iii) developing an action plan for mid- to long-term market-based
     carbon pricing approach in the steel industry (including participation in a potential domestic
     Emissions Trading Scheme) in coordination with the work on the national level Action Plan being
     developed under Component I, activity I (iii); and (Iv) capacity building for stakeholders involved
     in the implementation of MBl(s) in the steel industry. These activities will support the
     development of the institutional and data structure for OHO emissions management and the
     design of a pilot credited NAMA for the steel industry;
  2. Designing of no-regret measures in solid waste sector with analysis of potential MBls. This
     sub-component will include five main activities: I) developing a OHO emissions data collection
     and management system and relevant reporting forms, as well as a MRV protocol for the targeted
     sub-sectors of the solid waste sector (in accordance with a recommended crediting instrument and
     to support design of piloting activities for the crediting NAMA in 3 pilot cities); ii) defining the
     targeted sub-sector(s) and the choice of the crediting instrument (sectoral crediting or
     project/PoA-based implementation) and defining the outline of the required building blocks
     (crediting components) for a credited NAMA; iii) designing a concept for a representative piloting
     activities for the crediting NAMA in the solid waste sector to test data collection and management
     system and the outlined approaches for the building blocks of the credited NAMA [defined under
                                              Page 3 of JO                       ·
         activity 2 (ii)]; iv) conduct relevant capacity building focused on the 3 pilot cities [data collection,
       · reporting and testing of the approaches defined in the building blocks designed in activity 2 (ii)]
         and on the relevant sectoral institutions to facilitate future implementation of piloting activities;
         and (v) developing an action plan for mid- to long-term market based carbon pricing approaches
         in the solid waste sector (including participation in a domestic ETS, e.g., through offsetting) in
         coordination with the work on the national level Action Plan being developed under the
         Component 1, activity 1 (iii). These will establish the core elements of data management and
         capacity building coupled with the design of a credited NAMA for the solid waste sector.

   Component 3: Program management and stakeholder engagement facilitation CUSD 0.375
   million)

   This component will support MONRE to guide the implementation of the proposed activities and other
   MBI-related activities in Vietnam. This component would also support enhanced stakeholder
   engagement and communication efforts, including the reporting of PMR project implementation
   progress to the NCCC.

   Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR supported activities are as follows:
      1.  Supporting project management wilh a dedicated project team to ensure an efficient and
          effective implementation. This primarily support project coordination, monitoring of progress
          and results, ·and management of fiduciary requirements. This will include quality control of
          reports, document reviews, clearances and publications (-in both Vietnamese and English) as
          well as ensuring that documents go through the official reviews and clearance processes across
          relevant line ministries;
     2.   Supporting communication and stakeliolder engagement including conducting a feedback
          and learning process with stakeholders to ensure awareness raising and dissemination of
          results. This primarily supports designing and implementing a strategy for stakeholder
          engagement, which includes elements on communication involving stakeholder meetings,
          workshops ~d seminars. This includes engaging stakeholders by sharing information on the
          objectives, basic elements and technical requirements associated to the design, implementation
          and operation. This will also support stakeholder consultations on proposed regulations with
          public and private sectors, as well as conducting workshops with representatives of countries
          that have already implemented comparable schemes. The institutionalization of a structured
          consultation process with stakeholders on carbon pricing and MBls will also be supported (e.g.
          a structured series of dissemination and knowledge-sharing activities, such as workshops,
          seminars and meetings aimed at raising awareness on climate change· issues and the role of
          carbon pricing and MBls in the country). The·content of this work will be propagated to line
          ministries, the private sector, and Provinces identified as having potential for steel and solid
          waste GHG emissions management in the form of a regularly undated website, newspaper, and
          brochure coupled with workshops and conferences.


    4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguards Analysis (if
        known)
Uie project does not finance any physical activity on the ground but rather consists solely of technical
assistance activities. The project activities includes analysis and evaluation of market-based carbon
pricing approaches applicable in Vietnam, research and formulation of financial mechanisms and policies
needed to mobilize support from concerned stakeholders, preparation of a mid-term action plan to help
GoV to establish policy, legal, institutional and administrative infrastructure and financial mechanisms for

                                                 Page 4of10
the establishment and implementation of the recommended market-based carbon pricing approaches,
development of the national system for OHO emission data collection, reporting and management,
development of national principles and criteria for credited NAMAs, designing and developing of data
collection, data management system and MRV in steel and solid waste sector, developing a credited
NAMA for steel sector and implementation of a pilot of a OHO emissions database and voluntary
reporting system, and capacity building for concerned stakeholders. In addition, the project supports the
establishment of core elements of data management and capacity building coupled with the design of a
credited NAMA for soli~ waste sector. The technical assistance activities and capacity building will take
place in various locations in Vietnam. The identification of potential sites for developing a credited
NAMA in the solid waste sector will focus on surveying and researching large solid waste generators in
three selected pilot cities: Hanoi, Da Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City. The project will select the major
landfills of each city that are not currently covered by other donors undergoing similar GHQ emissions
management activities. The development of a baseline emissions calculation for selected solid waste
landfills in the pilot cities will set up the possibility of future implementation of the accredited NAMA.


    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

           Warapom Hirunwatsiri                - Senior Environmental Specialist

           Tuan Anh Le                         - Social Development Specialist

    6. .Safeguard policies
      Safe2uard Policies             Trbnr:ered?      Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment       No               The project will provide technical assistance
      OP/BP4.0I                                       and capacity building to Vietnam to become
                                                      equipped with information, technical capacity,
                                                      policies and a mid-term action plan that will
                                                      facilitate future development of carbon pricing
                                                      policy approaches, including MBls and
                                                      enhance country's readiness for the
                                                      implementation of MBis. Specifically, the
                                                      project support will be solely directed towards
                                                      technical assistance activities to support
                                                      capacity development, improved data
                                                      management and reporting, stakeholder
                                                      engagement and the design of selected
                                                      elements of MB Is in steel and solid waste
                                                      landfill sub-sector to inform the future
                                                      potential development of carbon pricing policy
                                                      approaches. It will not support preparation of
                                                      feasibility study, technical or engineering
                                                                  •              I

                                                      designs or other activities in support of the
                                                      preparation for the construction of physical
                                               Page S of 10
                                       infrastructure or a future investment project. It
                                       is anticipated that the project will lead to long
                                       term positive impacts to the environment
                                       particularly on GHG emission reduction and
                                       energy consumption reduction. The project
                     '
                                       activities are likely to no adverse impacts.
                                       Therefore the proposed project classification is
                                       Category C. However, there is possibility that
                                       the studies and recommendations may lead to
                                       legal, financial policy or institutional structure
                                       formulation or amendment of certain
                                       provisions of the existing law and policies in
                                       the next phases to provide adequate platform in
                                       launching and implementing market-based
                                       carbon p~cing approaches. Therefore, the
                                       TORs of these studies will embed the
                                       directions and principles of the safeguard
                                       policies.

Natural Habitats OP/BP     No          No negative impacts to natural resources are
4.04                                   anticipated since the project would not finance
                                       any physical investment. The project will focus
                                       on capacity building activities in the steel and
                                       solid waste landfill sub-sectors to lay the
                                       foundation for piloting selected MBls. In
                                       addition, it is expected that the project will
                                       lead to long term positive impacts to the
                                       environment particularly on GHG emission
                                       reduction and energy consumption reduction.
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No          No negative impacts to forests are anticipated
                                       since the project would not finance any
                                       physical investment. It is expected that the
                                       project will lead to long term positive impacts
                                       to the environment particularly on GHG
                                       emission reduction and energy consumption
                                       reduction.
Pest Management OP 4.09    No          The project will not promote purchase/use
                                       /promote an increase use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources No         The project will not involve civil work or
OP/BP4.ll                              activity that potentially affects Physical
                                       Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No          The project supports will be solely on
4.10                                   provision of technical assistance to relevant
                                       agencies in Vietnam to enable the
                                 Page 6 of IO
                                                  development of market-based instruments
                                                  to reduce OHO emissions in the country.
                                                  Thus, there is no adverse impacts anticipated
                                                  on indigenous peoples.
    Involuntary Resettlement      No              The project activities will be primarily on
    OP/BP 4.12                                    technical support to reduce OHO emissions.
                                                  There are no physical activities under the
                                                  project that involve involuntary resettlement or
                                                  restricted of access to legally designated parks
                                                  and protected areas.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No              The project will not involve construction or
                                                  rehabilitation of dams nor investment, which
                                                  rely on the services of existing dams.
    Projects on International     No              The project will not involve any international
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas    No              The project supports will be implemented
    OP/BP 7.60                                    within Vietnam territory and will not involve
                                                  disputed areas.


II. KEY SAFEGUARDS POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
  A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues
       l. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured
          project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or
          irrevenible impacts:

           The project is designed to assist Vietnam in preparing readiness for piloting data
           collection of OHO emission, data management system and voluntary reporting as well
           as MRV protocol in steel sector and solid waste sector with a view to developing
           market-based carbon pricing mechanisms in the future. PMR support will be directed
           solely to technical assistance activities that support capacity development, improved
           data management, stakeholder engagement and the design of selected elements of
           MBls in steel and solid waste sector. It will not finance any activities such as
           feasibility studies; technical, engineering design studies; preparation of bid documents
           that would facilitate construction of physical infrastructure which may or may not be
           financed by the Bank. The project will conduct analytical works and studies of legal,
           financial policies and institutional framework that involve market-based carbon
           pricing approaches. It is anticipated that the project will lead to long term positive
           impacts to the environment particularly on OHO emission reduction and energy
           consumption reduction. The project activities are likely to have no environmental and
           social impact. The project is therefore categorized as Category C.
           No safeguards instrument is required for this TA project. However, since the PMR
           project focuses on capacity development and supporting communication and
           stakeholder engagement that include design of a strategy for stakeholder engagement

                                           Page 7of10
    (including a communication strategy and implementation of strategy involving .
    stakeholder meetings, workshops and seminars), this provides an excellent
    opportunity to promote broad stakeholder engagement and participation through
    public infonnation disclosure at all critical phases of the project. However, there is
    possibilitY, that the studies and recommendations may lead to legal, financial policy or
    institutional structure fonnulation or amendment of certain provisions of the existing
    law and policies in the next phases to provide adequate platfonn in launching and
    implementing market-based carbon pricing approaches. Therefore, the counterpart
    will be asked to incorporate directly environmental and social safeguards policies into
    the relevant project activities. The Bank team will ensure that the Tenn of Reference
    (TOR) of various studies/analytical works and the products take into consideration the
    Bank safeguard policy requirements and environmental externalities. The said TORs
    and analytical pieces will be consistent with and guided by the Interim Guidelines on
    the Application ofSafeguard Policies to Technical Assistance Activities in Bank-
    Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank. The key TORs will be
    reviewed by the Bank.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
   activities in the project area:
   See sectio~ I .

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
   adverse impacts.
   See section I .

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
   Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
   described~

   The project is assigned as Category C as it will conduct studies that involve carbon
   pricing and MBIs for the design of pilot credited NAMA activities focusing on steel and
   solid waste sector in Vietnam. The World Bank safeguard policies will be taken into
   account in the studies and recommendations for criteria and policy setting. DHMCC has
   capacity on environment and social aspects in COM projects development and approval.
   However, it has limited experiences on the World Bank safeguard policies. DHMCC
   will assign a safeguard focal point to work with the Bank environmental and social
   safeguard specialist to ensure the adequate safeguard considerations are taken into
   account in preparing and implementing the project. A session on an overview of the
   Bank safeguard policies will be introduced to DHMCC prior to and during PMR
   implementation. The Bank will ensure when reviewing TOR that the adequate
   safeguards expertise is associated to activities and studies taking into account safeguard
   policy issues.

S. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
   disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                     Page 8of10
         Market-based carbon pricing approaches are an innovative concept in Vietnam both in
         the government and private sector. Ongoing stakeholder consultation workshops,
         seminars, dialogue, roundtables, etc. will be part of preparatory and implementation
         work to ensure all parties fully understand the planned project activities and
         appropriately benefit from the capacity building and technical assistance provided by
         the PMR. Stakeholders' perception of the project, their view on the design,
         implementation and operation of appropriate market-based carbon pricing approaches
         for Vietnam and proposed regulations and institutional structure will be gathered and
         taken into account in the oroiect desi1m as annrooriate.

B. Disclosure Requirements
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                   NIA
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                NIA
  For category A projects, date of distributing NIA
  the Executive Summary of the EA to the
  Executive Directors
  "In country" Disclosure                        NIA
  Comments:
  Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                   NIA
  Date of submission to lnfoShop                NIA
  For category A projects, date of distributing NIA
  the Executive Summary of the EA to the
  Executive Directors
  "In country" Disclosure                        NIA
  Comments:
  Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                    NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                 NIA
  "In country" Disclosure                        NIA
  Comments:
  Pets Management Plan
  Date of receipt by the Bank                    NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                 NIA                                     '

  "In country" Disclosure                        NIA
 Comments:


                                         Page 9of10
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP. NIA
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
  NIA



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 ..:. Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?     Yes [ ] No [X] NA [ ]
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  (SM) review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP/GP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes []No [ x] NA [ ]
  of critical habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
  mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
  OP/BP/GP 4.09 - Pest Management
  Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
  design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
  Specialist?
  OP/BP/GP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  property?
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  potential adverse imoacts on cultural orooertv?
  OP/BP/GP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as          Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
  Peoples?
  OP/BP/GP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process      Yes []No []NA [X]
  framework (as annrooriate) been oreoared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  Sector Mana~er review the plan?
                                         Page 10 of JO
OP/BP/GP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP/GP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the _independent Panel of     Yes []No []NA [X]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and aooroved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Yes []No []NA [X]
arramlements been made for public awareness and trainimt?
OP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes []No []NA []
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
OP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard. disclaimer referred to in       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
the OP?
World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World      Yes []No []NA [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public          Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes []No []NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeauard oolicies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safesruard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with         Yes []No[] NA [X]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
leaal documents?


                                        Page 11of10
ID.APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:    Name: Christophe Crepin


   Aooroved By:
                                                      Date:      _,
                         ~~z:
   Regional Safeguards
   Adviser:                'i ;Jl{_/)A~
                                    I
                                                       -) -OS:. JS.

                         ~
    Practice Manager:                                 Date:
                                                      ~11t,/1~




                                        Page 12of10
