                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

                                            APPRAISAL STAGE


                                                                                              Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 14, 2016                                                        104320

I.   BASIC INFORMATION
     1. Basic Project Data
          Country:                 Socialist   Republic    of Project ID:           P152797
                                   Vietnam
          Project Name:            Partnership for Market Readiness in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
          Task Team Leader:        Christophe Crepin
          Estimated Appraisal      May 11 , 2015                Estimated Bank June 15, 2016
          Date:                                                 Approval Date:
          Managing Unit:           GENDR                        Lending           Investment Project
                                                                Instrument:       Financing
          Sector:                  General Public Administration (50%), General Industry and Trade (25%),
                                   Solid Waste Management (25%)
          Theme:                   Climate change (100%)
          Is this project          No
          processed under OP
          8.50 (Emergency
          Recovery) or OP
          8.00 (Rapid
          Response to Crises
          and Emen?:encies)?
          Financin2 (In USD Million)
          Financin2 Source                                            Amount
          Borrower                                                    0.60
          Partnership for Market Readiness                            3.00
          Total                                                       3.60
          Environmental           C - Not Required
          Cate2ory:
          Is this a Repeater No
          project?
          Is this a Transferred No
          pro.iect?
     2. Current Project Development Objectives
     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the Government of Vietnam's capacity to
     develop market-based instruments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

     3.    Proj~ct   Description
     Background for the PMR. The PMR is a grant-based, multi-donor trust fund that provides capacity
     building, technical assistance and grant funding for innovating and piloting market-based instruments
     (MBis) to reduce GHG emissions. It provides a platform for technical discussions, policy exchange,
                                                   Page 1of10
and collective innovation on new market instruments, fostering North-South and South-South exchange
to facilitate financial flows that lead to scaled-up GHG mitigation actions. The PMR also creates and
shares knowledge products on market instruments and lessons learned.

Proposed PMR activities for implementation phase. The Project Development Objective (PDO) will
be achieved through three complementary components that will work towards developing the
Government's core technical, policy and institutional regulatory market readiness to reduce GHG
emissions in the country. This will be conducted through essential capacity development and improved
data management at the central level, sustained stakeholder engagement to ensure efficient and effective
leadership and implementation, and the design and preparation of MBis in selected sectors to inform
future carbon pricing approaches. The efforts towards preparing for and designing sector-specific MBis
in this project (Component 2) will work in parallel with the development of policy and management
tools for carbon pricing readiness (Component 1), both of which will prioritize "no-regret measures"
that would be beneficial irrespective of future policy decisions.

Given the above, the proposed project is designed to comprise three project components as follows:

Component 1: Strengthening capacity for developing carbon pricing approaches, including
through supporting priority building blocks for MBis (USD 1.05 million)

The first component will support the analytical works and institutional capacity building to facilitate
future development of carbon pricing policy approaches, including MBis. This component focuses on
evaluating carbon pricing options for Vietnam and assessing and developing the technical, policy and
management tools available to the Government for MBI implementation.

Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR support activities will include:

    1. Assessing the overall institutional, policy, and technical gaps and opportunities for designing
       and implementing carbon pricing approaches in Vietnam. This will be conducted through
       three main activities: i) analysis and evaluation of market-based carbon pricing approaches
       [including crediting Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), emissions trading,
       and carbon taxes] applicable in Vietnam and definition of relevant sectoral scopes for these
       approaches; i1) research and formulation of financial mechanisms and policies needed to
       mobilize support from private sector, bank and credit funds including international sources,
       such as the Green Climate Fund, to establish and implement carbon pricing approaches in
       accordance with instruments recommended in the preceding activity; and iii) preparation of a
       mid-term action plan to help the Government of Vietnam to a) prepare and establish policy,
       legal, institutional and administrative infrastructure and financial mechanisms to establish and
       implement the recommended market-based carbon pricing approaches; and b) establish
       pathways from piloting of crediting NAMAs in priority sectors to more comprehensive cross-
       sectoral market-based approaches, such as a domestic emission trading scheme (ETS).

    2. Development of the main building blocks for recommended market-based carbon pricing
       approaches at the national level, with focus on the data collection, MRV-related components
       and the crediting process. This sub-component includes four main activities that together will
       support the Government in developing the institutional and technical capacity to enhance the
       country's readiness for the implementation of MBis and for the development of measurement,
       reporting, and verification (MRV) activities. These include: i) supporting the development of
       the national systems for GHG emissions data collection, reporting and management through
       the improvement of the national GHG emissions inventory process to support the design and
       development of market-based carbon pricing approaches; ii) developing the guiding principles
                                          Page 2of10
        for the national MRV and registry systems to ensure transparent accounting and tracking use
        of emission reductions that could be achieved through implementation of market-based carbon
        pricing approaches, mainly the crediting NAMAs in Vietnam (e.g. in steel sector and solid
        waste sector); iii) supporting the development of national principles and criteria for credited
        NAMAs, including the participation requirements, approval processes, accreditation of
        independent verification entities, outline of quantification approaches (e.g. baseline setting and
        crediting thresholds where applicable) and general approach to net mitigation; and (iv)
        stakeholder training on carbon pricing approaches including organized training and capacity
        building workshops on requirements for credited NAMA, and dissemination, awareness raising
        for implementing GHG emission reduction and trading of carbon credits (at the central, sectoral
        and local levels).

Component 2: Readiness to pilot selected market-based instruments (USD 1.46 million)

Through this component, the GoV will lay the foundation for piloting and implementing market-based
instruments, through selected sectors. The selection of sectors and activities to be covered during the
implementation of the Project was primarily based on three criteria: competitiveness, cost-
effectiveness, and donor coordination and avoidance of overlap with existing initiatives. In additional
to these factors, the Government has also considered alignment with Vietnam' s climate change and
green growth strategies, interest of stakeholders in the sectors, sector experience with MBis, and
technical and MRV capacity. As a result, the Government has selected the steel and solid waste sectors
for this project.

Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR will support the following activities:

  1. Designing a pilot for selected elements of MBis in the steel sector. This sub-component will
     include four main activities that will develop the institutional and data structure for GHG
     emissions management and the design of a pilot credited NAMA for the steel industry. These
     include: i) designing and developing data collection and data management system and MRV in
     steel sector in accordance with a selected crediting instrument in the steel sector; ii) developing a
     credited NAMA for steel sector, including stocktaking of and further surveying of steel production
     enterprises; developing the selection criteria for participation, implementation modalities, and
     institutional and administrative arrangements; the selection of the crediting instrument and the
     main building blocks for the implementation of the selected instrument; ; and development of a
     concept of a representative pilot activity and relevant pilot design documents to prepare a full-
     fledge pilot of the crediting NAMA in the steel sector; iii) developing an action plan for mid- to
     long-term market-based carbon pricing approach in the steel industry (including participation in
     a potential domestic Emissions Trading Scheme) in coordination with the work on the national
     level Action Plan being developed under Component 1, activity 1 (iii); and (iv) capacity building
     for stakeholders involved in the implementation of MBI(s) in the steel industry.

  2. Designing of no-regret measures in solid waste sector with analysis of potential MB/s. This
     sub-component will include five main activities that will establish the core elements of data
     management and capacity building coupled with the design of a credited NAMA for the solid
     waste sector. These include : i) developing a GHG emissions data collection and management
     system and relevant reporting forms, as well as a MRV protocol for the targeted sub-sectors of
     the solid waste sector (in accordance with a recommended crediting instrument and to support
     design of piloting activities for the crediting NAMA in pilot cities); ii) defining the targeted sub-
     sector(s) and the choice of the crediting instrument (sectoral crediting or project/PoA-based
     implementation) and defining the outline of the required building blocks (crediting components)
     for a credited NAMA; iii) designing a concept for a representative piloting activities for the
                                             Page 3of10
       crediting NAMA in the solid waste sector to test data collection and management system and the
       outlined approaches forthe building blocks of the credited NAMA [defined under activity 2 (ii)];
       iv) conduct relevant capacity building focused on the pilot cities [data collection, reporting and
       testing of the approaches defined in the building blocks designed in activity 2 (ii)] and on the
       relevant sectoral institutions to facilitate future implementation of piloting activities; and (v)
       developing an action plan for mid- to long-term market based carbon pricing approaches in the
       solid waste sector (including participation in a domestic ETS, e.g., through offsetting) in
       coordination with the work on the national level Action Plan being developed under the
       Component 1, activity 1 (iii).

Component 3: Program management and stakeholder engagement facilitatfon (USD 0.49 million)

This component will support MONRE to guide the implementation of the proposed activities and other
MBI-related activities in Vietnam. This component would also support enhanced stakeholder
engagement and communication efforts, including the reporting of PMR project implementation
progress to the NCCC.

Proposed Support from PMR. The PMR supported activities are as follows:

  1.     Supporting project management with a dedicated project team to ensure an efficient and
         effective implementation. This primarily support project coordination, monitoring of progress
         and results, and management of fiduciary requirements. This will include quality control of
         reports, document reviews, clearances and publications (particularly strong editing, translation,
         and design -in both Vietnamese and English) as well as ensuring that documents go through
         the official reviews and clearance processes across relevant line ministries.

  2.     Supporting communication and stakeholder engagement including conducting a feedback
         and learning process with stakeholders to ensure awareness raising and dissemination of
         results. This primarily supports designing and implementing a strategy for stakeholder
         engagement, which includes elements on communication involving stakeholder meetings,
         workshops and seminars. This includes engaging stakeholders by sharing information on the
         objectives, basic elements and technical requirements associated to the design, implementation
         and operation. This will also support stakeholder consultations on proposed regulations with
         public and private sectors, as well as conducting workshops with representatives of countries
         that have already implemented comparable schemes. The institutionalization of a structured
         consultation process with stakeholders on carbon pricing and MBis will also be supported (e.g.
         a structured series of dissemination and knowledge-sharing activities, such as workshops,
         seminars and meetings aimed at raising awareness on climate change issues and the role of
         carbon pricing and MBis in the country). The content of this work will be propagated to line
         ministries, the private sector, and Provinces identified as having potential for steel and solid
         waste GHG emissions management in the form of a regularly undated website, newspaper, and
         brochure coupled with workshops and conferences.


4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguards Analysis (if
   known)
   The project does not finance any physical activity on the ground but rather consists solely of
   technical assistance activities. The project activities include analysis and evaluation of market
   based carbon pricing approaches applicable in Vietnam, research and formulation of financial
   mechanisms and policies needed to mobilize support from concerned stakeholders, preparation of
   a mid-term action plan to help Go V to establish policy, legal, institutional and administrative
                                          Page 4of10
   infrastructure and financial mechanisms for the establishment and implementation of the
   recommended market-based carbon pricing approaches, development of the national system for
   GHG emission data collection, reporting and management, development of national principles and
   criteria for credited NAMAs, designing and developing of data collection, data management system
   and MRV in steel and solid waste sector, developing a credited NAMA for steel sector and
   implementation of a pilot of a GHG emissions database and voluntary reporting system, and
   capacity building for concerned stakeholders. In addition, the project supports the establishment
   of core elements of data management and capacity building coupled with the design of a credited
   NAMA for solid waste sector. The technical assistance activities and capacity building will take
   place in various locations in Vietnam. The identification of potential sites for developing a credited
   NAMA in the solid waste sector will focus on surveying and researching large solid waste
   generators in three selected pilot cities.
   Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

      Warapom Hirunwatsiri                 - Senior Environmental Specialist


      Tuan Anh Le                          - Social Development Specialist

5. Safeguard policies
  Safe2uard Policies             Trh!eered?       Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment       No               The project will provide technical assistance
  OP/ BP 4.01                                     and capacity building to Vietnam to become
                                                  equipped with information, technical capacity,
                                                  policies and a mid-term action plan that will
                                                  facilitate future development of carbon pricing
                                                  policy approaches, including MBis and
                                                  enhance country's readiness for the
                                                  implementation ofMBis. Specifically, the
                                                  project support will be solely directed towards
                                                  technical assistance activities to support
                                                  capacity development, improved data
                                                  management and reporting, stakeholder
                                                  engagement and the design of selected
                                                  elements ofMBls in steel and solid waste
                                                  landfill sub-sector to inform the future
                                                  potential development of carbon pricing policy
                                                  approaches. It will not support preparation of
                                                  feasibility study, technical or engineering
                                                  designs or other activities in support of the
                                                  preparation for the construction of physical
                                                  infrastructure or a future investment project. It
                                                  is anticipated that the project will lead to long
                                                  term positive impacts to the environment
                                                  particularly on GHG emission reduction and
                                                  energy consumption reduction. The project

                                          Page 5of10
                                         activities are likely to no adverse impacts.
                                         Therefore the proposed project classification is
                                         Category C. No safeguard instrument is
                                         required. However, there is a possibility that
                                         the studies and recommendations may lead to
                                         legal, financial policy or institutional structure
                                         formulation or amendment of certain
                                         provisions of the existing law and policies in
                                         the next phases to provide an adequate
                                         platform in launching and implementing
                                         market-based carbon pricing approaches.
                                         Therefore, the TORs of these studies will
                                         embed the directions and principles of the
                                         safeguard policies.

Natural Habitats OP/BP        No         No negative impacts to natural resources are
4.04                                     anticipated since the project would not finance
                                         any physical investment. The project will focus
                                         on capacity building activities in the steel and
                                         solid waste landfill sub-sectors to lay the
                                         foundation for piloting selected MBis. In
                                         addition, it is expected that the project will
                                         lead to long term positive impacts to the
                                         environment particularly on GHG emission
                                         reduction and energy consumption reduction.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No         No negative impacts to forests are anticipated
                                         since the project would not finance any
                                         physical investment. It is expected that the
                                         project will lead to long term positive impacts
                                         to the environment particularly on GHG
                                         emission reduction and energy consumption
                                         reduction.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No         The project will not promote purchase/use
                                         /promote an increase use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources   No         The project will not involve civil work or
OP/ BP 4.11                              activity that potentially affects Physical
                                         Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No         The project supports will be solely on
4.10                                     provision of technical assistance to relevant
                                         agencies in Vietnam to enable the
                                         development of market-based instruments
                                         to reduce GHG emissions in the country.
                                         Thus, there is no adverse impacts anticipated
                                         on indigenous peoples.
                                   Page 6of10
    Involuntary Resettlement       No               The project activities will be primarily on
    OP/BP 4.12                                      technical support to reduce GHG emissions.
                                                    There are no physical activities under the
                                                    project that involve involuntary resettlement or
                                                    restricted of access to legally designated parks
                                                    and protected areas.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No               The project will not involve construction or
                                                    rehabilitation of dams nor investment, which
                                                    rely on the services of existing dams.
    Projects on International      No               The project will not involve any international
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas     No               The project supports will be implemented
    OP/BP 7.60                                      within Vietnam territory and will not involve
                                                    disputed areas.


II. KEY SAFEGUARDS POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
  A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues
       1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured
          project. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or
          irreversible impacts:

            The project is designed to assist Vietnam in preparing readiness for piloting data
            collection of GHG emission, data management system and voluntary reporting as well
            as MRV protocol in steel sector and solid waste sector with a view to developing
            market-based carbon pricing mechanisms in the future. PMR support will be directed
            solely to technical assistance activities that support capacity development, improved
            data management, stakeholder engagement and the design of selected elements of MB Is
            in steel and solid waste sector. It will not finance any activities such as feasibility
            studies; technical, engineering design studies; preparation of bid documents that would
            facilitate construction of physical infrastructure which may or may not be financed by
            the Bank. The project will conduct analytical works and studies of legal, financial
            policies and institutional framework that involve market-based carbon pricing
            approaches. It is anticipated that the project will lead to long term positive impacts to
            the environment particularly on GHG emission reduction and energy consumption
            reduction. The project activities are likely to have no environmental and social impact.
            The project is therefore categorized as Category C.

            No safeguards instrument is required for this TA project. However, since the PMR
            project focuses on capacity development and supporting communication and
            stakeholder engagement that include design of a strategy for stakeholder engagement
            (including a communication strategy and implementation of strategy involving
            stakeholder meetings, workshops and seminars), this provides an excellent opportunity
            to promote broad stakeholder engagement and participation through public information
            disclosure at all critical phases of the project. However, there is possibility that the

                                            Page 7of10
    studies and recommendations may lead to legal, financial policy or institutional
    structure formulation or amendment of certain provisions of the existing law and
    policies in the next phases to provide adequate platform in launching and implementing
    market-based carbon pricing approaches. Therefore, the counterpart will be asked to
    incorporate directly environmental and social safeguards policies into the TOR of
    relevant project activities. The Bank team will ensure that the Term of Reference (TOR)
    of various studies/analytical works and the products take into consideration the Bank
    safeguard policy requirements and environmental externalities. The said TORs and
    analytical pieces will be consistent with and guided by the Interim Guidelines on the
    Application ofSafeguard Policies to Technical Assistance Activities in Bank-Financed
    Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the .Bank. The key TORs will be reviewed
    by the Bank.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
   activities in the project area:
   See section 1.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
   adverse impacts.
   See section 1.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
   Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
   described.
   The project is assigned as Category C as it will conduct studies that involve carbon
   pricing and MBis for the design of pilot credited NAMA activities focusing on steel and
   solid waste sector in Vietnam. The World Bank safeguard policies will be taken into
   account in the TOR of studies and recommendations for criteria and policy setting that
   may cause environmental and social impact. The VNPMR PMU under DHMCC will
   assist in formulation of policies, plans, and strategies under the project, taking into
   account the environmental and social impacts in accordance with Vietnam
   Environmental Laws and Regulation. PMU will ensure that the environmental and social
   impact will be taken into consideration throughout the design and development process
   of the formulation of policies, plans, strategies or legal frameworks. PMU will draft TOR
   to incorporate environmental and social objectives into the proposed policies
   formulation. Some level of analysis of environmental and social issues related to the
   policies, plans and strategies etc. may be required in the TOR. For activities that are
   likely to have environmental and social impacts when implemented, TOR for future
   environmental and social studies to be carried out during the implementation of the
   policies, plans and strategies will be developed.
   DHMCC has capacity on environment and social aspects in CDM projects development
   and approval. However, it has limited experiences on the World Bank safeguard policies.
   DHMCC has assigned two safeguard focal points to work with the Bank environmental
   and social safeguard specialist to ensure the adequate safeguard considerations are taken
   into account in preparing and implementing the project. A session on an overview of the
   Bank safeguard policies was introduced to DHMCC prior to PMR implementation. The
                                    Page 8of10
         Bank will ensure when reviewing TOR that the adequate safeguards expertise 1s
         associated to activities and studies taking into account safeguard policy issues.

     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
        disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
         Market-based carbon pricing approaches are an innovative concept in Vietnam both in
         the government and private sector. Ongoing stakeholder consultation workshops,
         seminars, dialogue, roundtables, etc. was a part of preparatory work and will be
         continued for implementation work to ensure all parties fully understand the planned
         project activities and appropriately benefit from the capacity building and technical
         assistance provided by the PMR. VNPMR PMU will lead the organization of
         consultation workshops in coordination with participating line Ministries. These
         workshops will include sectoral consultations throughout the design and development
         process of the credited NAMAs for the steel and solid waste sectors, consultations
         across sectors and with localities and the private sector on the development of
         recommendations to prepare and establish institutional and administrative infrastructure
         for the recommended market-based carbon pricing approaches, and consultations to
         serve as a coordinating platform with other Government project-based NAMA
         initiatives in Vietnam. As appropriate, strategic planning initiatives could include focus
         groups, citizen consultations, expert panels, public hearings, etc. across all critical
         phases of the project. Stakeholders' perception of the project, their view on the design,
         implementation and operation of appropriate market-based carbon pricing approaches
         for Vietnam and proposed regulations and institutional structure was gathered and taken
         into account in the project design.

         PMU will document stakeholder participation and the agreed scope of work or actions
         to be undertaken during implementation and ensure that the consultant TOR will include
         communication strategies and public information disclosure as appropriate. PMU will
         also publicly disclose project information including project report and result of the
         stakeholder consultations.



B. Disclosure Requirements
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                     NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                NIA
  For category A projects, date of distributing NIA
  the Executive Summary of the EA to the
  Executive Directors
  "In country" Disclosure                         NIA
  Comments:
  Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                     NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                  NIA
                                          Page 9of10
  For category A projects, date of distributing   NIA
  the Executive Summary of the EA to the
  Executive Directors
  "In country" Disclosure                         NIA
  Comments:
  Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                     NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                  NIA
  "In country" Disclosure                         NIA
  Comments:
  Pets Management Plan
  Date of receipt by the Bank                     NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                  NIA
  "In country" Disclosure                         NIA
  Comments:
  If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
  Assessment/Audit/or EMP. NIA
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
  NIA



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?      Yes [ ] No [X] NA [ ]
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  (SM) review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP/GP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes[]No[x]NA[]
  of critical habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
  other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
  mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
  OP/BP/GP 4.09 - Pest Management
  Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes[]No[]NA[X]
                                         Page 10of10
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a_safeguards         Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP/GP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes[]No[]NA[X]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP/GP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as          Yes[]No[]NA[X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP/GP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP/GP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes []No []NA [X]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes[]No[]NA[X]
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP/GP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes[]No[]NA[X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of      Yes[]No[]NA[X]
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Yes []No []NA [X]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been not~fied of the project?                 Yes[]No[]NA[X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes[]No[]NA[]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes[]No[]NA[X]
OP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in        Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]

                                        Page 11 of 10
    the OP?
    World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World     Yes[]No[]NA[X]
    Bank's lnfoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public         Yes[]No[]NA[X]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeQ:Uard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes     Yes[]No[]NA[X]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:       Name: Christophe Crepin




    Practice Manager:                                                      Date:O




                                          Page 12of10
