                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                         UPDATED FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING

                                                                  Report No.: 103185

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         20-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Vietnam               Project ID:              P126507
 Project Name:                Ho Chi Minh City Green Transport Development (P126507)
 Task Team Leader(s):         Jung Eun Oh
 Estimated Board Date:        29-May-2015
 Managing Unit:               GTI02
 Sector(s):                   Urban Transport (96%), Public administration- Transportation (4%)
 Theme(s):                    City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       147.95                   Total Bank Financing:     124.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                        Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         13.45
      International Development Association (IDA)                                              124.00
      Co-financing (SECO)                                                                         10.5
      Total                                                                                    147.95
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The project development objective is to improve the performance and efficiency of public transport
 along a high priority corridor in Ho Chi Minh City.

 3. Project Description
 1.      COMPONENT 1: Bus Rapid Transit Corridor Development. Total cost: US$ 132.45 million;
IDA: US$ 119 million; Borrower: US$ 13.45 million. This component will finance goods, works, and
services for development of a BRT corridor between An Lac in the southwest and Rach Chiec in the
northeast, following the Vo Van Kiet and Mai Chi Tho Boulevards (approximately 23 km and 28
stations). The investments will include:

(a)     Construction and supervision of BRT infrastructure and facilities. This includes:

(i)              A dedicated and segregated bus transitway between An Lac and Rach Chiec including
the upgrading and expansion of a road section from Lo Gom Bridge to Thu Thiem tunnel.
(ii)     Median “signature? stations between An Lac and Rach Chiec, designed for the needs of the
local users and fully accessible by people with disabilities. The design of the stations will consider the
surrounding urban environment, will be tailored to the conditions of the corridor, and will take into
account the need to interchange with other modes as needed.
(iii)    A terminal at Rach Chiec and a turnaround area at An Lac.
(iv)     A technical facility at Thu Thiem including a control center building, bus depot, office space
for UCCI and MOCPT, rest facilities for crews, a daycare, parking areas for buses to accommodate the
forecasted BRT vehicle fleet, and places for CNG re-fuelling and fuel storage.
(v)      Reconstructed sidewalks around stations (which will remove the majority of current obstacles)
combined with walkways to interchange points, thus contributing to a more accessible environment for
pedestrians in Ho Chi Minh City.
(vi)     New pedestrian-over bridges connecting stations to surrounding areas, including connections
to the other side of the canal that runs parallel to the BRT corridor.
(vii)    Parking for motorcycles at selected stations, and
(viii) Landscaping and open-space improvements along the corridor.

(b)     Traffic management improvements, intersection control, and Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS). This includes:

(i)     Reconfigured and revised intersection design and control between An Lac and Rach Chiec,
including traffic signals giving priority to BRT vehicles and pedestrians.
(ii)    Implementation of a broad range of ITS, including advanced traffic management systems
(such as smart traffic signals, cameras, and e-police), advanced bus operation management systems
(including global positioning systems, communication equipment, and dispatching), and a passenger
information system.

(c)      Fare collection system and smart cards. This includes fare collection facilities (e.g., electronic
turnstiles) at each station, as well as sufficient smart cards and servers.

(d)     BRT Vehicles. The project will finance at least 28 CNG buses.

(e)    Planning integration and urban development. The objectives of this subcomponent would be to
improve the environment surrounding the BRT stations; improve accessibility and amenities to
maximize BRT effectiveness; provide universal accessibility; and promote transit oriented
development and greening of the corridor. Specific measures include:

(i)            Sidewalk improvements along the BRT route.
(ii)   Improvements within a 400 meter access radius around the stations, along roads penetrating
surrounding residential and commercial areas.
(iii)  Greening of the corridor through urban design, street and landscaping.
(iv)   Safety enhancement measures, including signage and barriers.
(v)     Pedestrian facilities, including rest areas, information centers, and rest rooms.
(f)     Marketing and public communication. This includes the design and implementation of a
comprehensive communications and outreach program (covering also grievance and redress
mechanisms) for providing information to all stakeholders throughout the construction phases. These
studies will include gender considerations.
(g)     Project management. This subcomponent will finance goods (office equipment, and vehicles)
and services to support project management, annual audits, and supervision/monitoring support for
environmental and resettlement activities.
(h)     Land acquisition and resettlement. The total cost of land acquisition and resettlement will be
financed by the government.

2. COMPONENT 2: Institutional Strengthening. Total cost: US$ 5.0 million; IDA: US$ 5.0 million.
Implementation of the BRT introduces a new mode of transport to Ho Chi Minh City; it marks the
beginning of a new era of multi-modal urban passenger transport in which a number of MRT lines will
commence operation and more BRT lines are expected. This change will require institutional
strengthening: first of the existing institutions and later of an overall passenger transport authority. It
will also require the knowledge and capacity to restructure and integrate the network, transport
services, and customer services when BRT and MRT lines are introduced. Component 2 will finance
the goods and services to support:

(a)     Equipment, vehicles, office facilities upgrading, and other operational support for managing
the implementation of the BRT and related measures by the PMU throughout the design, construction,
and implementation phases;

(b)      Monitoring and evaluation. This subcomponent intends to assess whether the BRT has been
successfully implemented as designed, whether it is really achieving the desired impacts, what
post-implementation adjustments are required (if any), and what policy and design lessons might be
derived from the project. Annual monitoring surveys and analysis will be conducted during project
implementation covering transport system supply, demand, and performance. Ongoing monitoring
activities will include household interviews, assessment of real estate prices, and assessment of
building permit applications, visual surveys, mystery traveler surveys, car journey time surveys, focus
groups, satisfaction surveys, air/noise and emissions surveys, traffic counts, and accident data analysis.
Particular attention will be paid to the attitudes and willingness of current motorcycle users to use
BRT, to identify their potential for mode shift, factors of resistance, and critical features for the
(re)design of BRT lines to achieve higher levels of mode shift.

(c)     Feasibility and design studies for: a) maximizing connectivity and ridership of BRT line 1, and
b) continued development of the BRT Network. These studies will be in line with the Master Plan for
Public Transport, including integration considerations with the bus network and the overall
multimodal passenger transport network;

(d)     Study to develop the optimal fare structure and fare product range for the public transportation
system (for implementation through the new ticketing system).

Scope of the Additional Financing

Component A: Integrated Urban Development (estimated cost of US$5 million). This component
would aim to enable integrated and transit-oriented urban development around the BRT corridor. It
consists of three sub-components: (i) Creating Foundation for TOD, through amending the existing
urban design and district zoning plans, based on which construction permits are granted, to fully
incorporate TOD principles, and strengthening the institutional foundation for implementation of TOD
in HCMC, including legal and regulatory framework and operational guide, (ii) Leveraging the Private
Sector for TOD, by developing a legal, regulatory and financial mechanism for the city’s regulatory
entities to involve the private sector in development along the corridor, such as through land
value-capturing (LVC) and public-private partnership (PPP), and identifying options and opportunities
for applying such mechanisms, and (iii) Public Space Pilot Project, to be designed and implemented on
existing public space in accordance with the amended urban design, that would enhance the
attractiveness of the BRT corridor and adjacent urban space.

Component B: Transport Planning for Enhanced Connectivity (estimated cost of US$4 million).
This component would support integration of the BRT system with other transport modes, and consists
of the following two sub-components: (i) Improving the BRT Connectivity, which would propose
measures to maximize connectivity and ridership of the BRT Line 1, including re-organization of
feeder bus routes and improvement of non-motorized transport (NMT) connections, and (ii)
Connectivity Pilot Project, to be designed and implemented to provide NMT-based last-kilometer
connectivity solutions to/from BRT stations.

Component C: Capacity Strengthening (estimated cost of US$1.5 million). This component would
strengthen (i) the project management capacity of the UCCI for implementation of the GTD Project as
well as the AF activities and (ii) the corporate and business capacity of modal authorities including the
Department of Transport (DOT) and Management and Operation Centre of Public Transport
(MOCPT).

It is expected that the above proposed AF activities will be completed by or before the current closing
date of the GTD Project, which is December 31, 2020.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The BRT line proposed for financing will be located on the existing Vo Van Kiet – Mai Chi Tho
Boulevard and in parallel to the Tau Hu-Ben Nghe canal cutting across HCMC. The project will be
implemented in an urban setting of HCMC which is located on the banks of the Saigon River, 60 km
away from the coast of the East Sea and 1,760 km south of Hanoi. HCMC is the most populous city in
Vietnam, with over 7.3 million inhabitants in the city proper, and over 9 million habitants in the
metropolitan area. HCMC is also the largest economic development pole in the country, generating
roughly 20% of the national gross domestic product.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Son Van Nguyen ( GENDR )
Tuan Anh Le ( GSURR )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              The project will have some potential
                                                               negative environmental and social
                                                               impacts associated with the construction
                                                               of the physical structures to support BRT
                                                               operations and other non-motorized
                                                               transport infrastructure to facilitate
                                                               access to the BRT services under
                                               Component 1 of the project. This
                                               requires the identification, mitigation,
                                               and monitoring of potential adverse
                                               environmental and social impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No    The project is located in an existing
                                               urban area, and along an existing road. It
                                               will not cause degradation or conversion
                                               of any known natural habitats or impact
                                               any watersheds.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    The project area is in a highly developed
                                               urban area, and will not affect any
                                               forests of forested areas. Therefore, this
                                               policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    The project will not involve any
                                               investment that would result in
                                               procurement of pesticides or any
                                               increase in the use of pesticides as a
                                               result of project activities. Therefore,
                                               this policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No    Neither the existing road and along
                                               which this project is being considered,
                                               nor the location of the proposed
                                               Technical Facility is located in the
                                               vicinity of physical cultural resources
                                               such as monuments, temples, churches,
                                               religious/ spiritual, and cultural sites. A
                                               “chance finds? clause will be included in
                                               contracts, Operational Manual, and
                                               included as part of the EMP and/or
                                               ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    There are no ethnic minority peoples (as
                                               defined by OP 4.10) present in the
                                               project area. Thus, this policy is not
                                               triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The project will require land acquisition,
                                               both permanently and temporarily, to
                                               construct the Technical Facility (1.8ha),
                                               End of BRT Route Terminal (0.6ha), and
                                               bus stops/access road across the BRT
                                               route. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                               (RPF) has been prepared, on the basis of
                                               the Feasibility Study, and the social
                                               assessment (SA). A gender consultation
                                               was done, as part of the SA, to inform
                                               gender action and gender monitoring and
                                               evaluation plan. A social due diligence
                                               (DD) – done for Vo Van Kiet highway,
                                               was also done. An abbreviated
                                 Resettlement Action Plan (prepared for
                                 the land acquisition for the Technical
                                 Facility in Thu Thiem area of district 2)
                                 was also prepared given the site was
                                 identified during project preparation.
                                 Key social safeguards policy
                                 requirements have been addressed in the
                                 RPF and RAP to ensure the resettlement
                                 works under the project is implemented
                                 as per Bank’s OP 4.12, including
                                 compensation payment, monitoring of
                                 the resettlement process (both internal
                                 and independent), consultation, and
                                 grievance redress mechanism, and
                                 implementation of livelihood restoration
                                 measures. Minor pending issues from the
                                 due diligence exercises are included in
                                 the RAP to ensure Client’s actions, and
                                 Bank’s monitoring. All the above four
                                 social documents, including SA, RPF,
                                 abbreviated RAP, and DD were
                                 disclosed in Vietnamese at VDIC on 18
                                 December 2014, and in English at
                                 Infoshop on 17 December 2014. The
                                 disclosure of the Vietnamese documents
                                 were also disclosed locally on 23
                                 January 2015. The revised RPF, done by
                                 HCMC PC, which the Bank has
                                 accepted, was re-disclosed on the Bank’s
                                 Infoshop on 5 March 2015, and in
                                 Vietnamese at VDIC in Hanoi on 9
                                 March 2015. The revised RPF was also
                                 re-disclosed in Vietnamese at project
                                 level on 24 March 2015. For the
                                 Additional Financing, the same RPF
                                 (prepared for the parent project) is
                                 applied. During project implementation,
                                 local population in this AF project area
                                 will be consulted for the potential impact
                                 of the AF investments. Beneficiary
                                 households, including those adversely
                                 affected, if any, will be consulted during
                                 AF design and construction stages, to
                                 ensure their feedback are incorporated
                                 into the project design and implantation
                                 plan, and impact are timely and
                                 appropriately addressed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No   The project activities will not affect the
                                 safety of any dam, or depend on the
                                 safety of any existing dam.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                    The project will not affect any
7.50                                                            international waterway. While the
                                                                existing road cuts across the Saigon
                                                                River (an international waterway), there
                                                                is an existing tunnel (Thu Thiem tunnel)
                                                                that is already in place. The project
                                                                activities will not impact the Saigon
                                                                River in any manner.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project is not located in any disputed
                                                                area.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Overall, the proposed project will bring about long-term
environmental benefits and positive impacts to the lives of the people in Ho Chi Minh City, reduce
traffic safety risks and emissions from private vehicles. The city’s urban landscape will also be
improved by “greening? investments provided by the project. The project will have some potential
negative socio-environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation and improvement of existing
road infrastructure to support BRT operations, the construction of BRT infrastructure and other
non-motorized transport infrastructure to facilitate access to the BRT services under Component 1 of
the proposed project.

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) prepared by the client confirmed that the adverse
environmental impacts are expected to result mainly from the construction activities. Potential adverse
impacts of the project during site preparation and construction include: those related to land
acquisition and resettlement for construction of the depot and terminal; noise, dust, vibration, fumes
from asphalting and transportation of materials; disruption to traffic, and access to roadside activities;
interruption of local household businesses and utility services; potential contamination of soil and
water from disposal of waste materials and fueling equipment; and worker safety. Direct impacts from
operation potentially include increased noise and vibration level, domestic waste generation at bus
stop and depot, traffic safety risks, air pollution from vehicle exhaust, and fuel and lubricants spills.
No physical cultural resources are impacted by the project. However, these environment impacts are
likely to be small to moderate, short term, site-specific, non-sensitive or irreversible, and in every case,
mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts. Therefore, the project is
categorized as an Environmental Category B project.

OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. To establish the planned BRT, the project will build various
infrastructure, including the Technical Facility (about 12.77ha5ha) in Thu Thiem ward (District 2) for
the bus routine maintenance/repair, and the End of the BRT Route Terminal (about 0.6ha) in Rach
Chiec area (District 2). Most land permanently affected at these two locations is agricultural land. A
total of 15 households are potentially affected at these two locations, of which eight households are
expected to resettle, twelve to lose more than 20% of their total productive land, and six will have their
businesses affected. Two companies who own agricultural land at the Technical Facility in Thu Thiem
area would also be affected. The construction of the bus stops, and their access ways would not require
the permanent acquisition of land, since these stations would be located within the right of the way,
and most would be located at the road median. Some temporary land impact may result, primarily
during the construction, and which would be minimized through appropriate construction measures.
Where temporary land impact is not avoidable and this affects local households, compensation
payments will be paid to the affected households as per the project’s Resettlement Policy Framework.
There are no potential large-scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts envisaged at this stage.

A social assessment (SA) was done to assess the overall project social impact. As an integral part of
the SA, gender consultation was conducted with people potentially affected peoples (as a result of land
acquisition), and potential BRT users, to inform the design of the gender mainstreaming action and
gender monitoring and evaluation plan. This project is gender- informed on three dimensions – as per
East Asia and Pacific (EAP) gender target for FY15.

Additional Financing (AF). The AF does not result in triggering new safeguards policies or in
changing the environmental category of the project (Category B). The type and location of investments
proposed under the AF are the two small-scale pilot subprojects focusing on small scale transport
corridor landscaping and small parking lots for bicycle riders along the BRT route. At this stage, there
is no land acquisition anticipated as a result of the implementation of these two small-scale pilot
projects. However, in case there is any, when the detailed design is available, such land impact (both
permanent and temporary) will be addressed in accordance with the project’s Resettlement Policy
Framework. Gender mainstreaming will be applied under the AF in the same manner as that proposed
under the parent project. The small interventions are anticipated to have small, short-term, and
localized environmental impacts such as dust, noise, and pollution by construction wastes, and small
disturbances to the pedestrian area and utilities services. These impacts, however, can easily be
mitigated by implementing the Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) developed and included in
the EMP of the parent project. The ECOP will be included in the bidding documents for construction
contractors to ensure measures are taken during the construction to minimize environmental impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The potential impacts related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described in previous
section. No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts due to
future activities are anticipated in the project areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During preparation of the project, screening has was been carried out to exclude activities that would
go against the project’s development objective. The BRT has been chosen to go along the existing
road, and the Technical Facility (in Thu Thiem ward) and Terminal (in Rach Chiec area) have been
intended to be located in less populated areas to minimize the magnitude of social impact due to land
acquisition/ resettlement. Bus stops/access roads located along the BRT route (across six districts) are
also planned to be located within the right of the way of the BRT route’s right of the way, so as to
avoid the need for permanent land acquisition from local residents. Options for fuel use were
considered, and a cleaner fuel, CNG, has been selected for BRT bus operation to reduce greenhouse
gas (GHG) emission.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address the project’s negative social and environmental impacts, the following safeguard
documents have been prepared by the PMU, reviewed by the Bank’s environmental and social
specialists, and found to be satisfactory.

Environment:
The Government’s regulations on EIA require the preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment
for this investment project. Accordingly, an EIA was prepared and approved by the HCMC
Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE) in December 2014. An Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) was also prepared, reviewed by the Bank, and found satisfactory. The EMP
details: a) all anticipated adverse environmental impacts; b) the mitigation measures to be taken during
the project implementation and operation, of a project to eliminate or offset adverse environmental
impacts, or to reduce them to acceptable levels; c) monitoring objectives and type of monitoring with
linkages to the impacts assessed in the EIA report and the mitigation measures described in the EMP;
d) the actions needed, including institutional arrangements to implement these measures; e) capacity
development and training to support the timely and effective implementation of environmental project
components and mitigation measures; f) implementation schedule and cost estimates for implementing
the EMP; and g) integration of the EMP with the project.

The EMP also includes an environmental codes of practice (ECOP) for addressing generic
construction- related impacts and a set of appropriate and site-specific mitigation measures, and as
well as a chance finds procedure. The EMP will be included in the bidding and contractual documents.
They will be implemented through civil works for component 1. Implementation of the EMP will be
monitored and supervised by the Project Management Unit, the construction supervision consultant,
the independent environmental monitoring consultant, and will be supported by capacity building for
PMU, supervision consultants, contactors, and local authorities and communities.
Since the project will be implemented on the existing Vo Van Kiet – Mai chi Tho Boulevard, a project
financed by the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and completed in 2011, an
environmental due diligence has also been conducted. The EIA for the Vo Van Kiet – Mai chi Tho
Boulevard project was developed and approved by the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Environment on 25 October 1999. The EIA report was developed to meet all the requirements of
Vietnamese laws and JICA’s social and environmental policies of JICA. Proper stakeholder
consultations were conducted during EIA preparation, and the EIA was disclosed as required by the
government regulation. Review of this project’s environmental documentation indicates that the
project owner fully complied with all environmental protection requirements of Vietnam’s government
and JICA during the project’s preparation, construction, and operation phases. There are no
outstanding environmental issues.

Component 1 of the project involves technical assistance (TA) for the preparation of prefeasibility
analysis analyses of additional BRT lines and/or other follow-up investments. Although the TA
activities themselves do not have direct adverse environmental or social impacts, the outcomes of TA
support may have significant environmental and social implications going forward, entailing risks and
potentially inducing adverse impacts. Therefore, implementation of these TA activities must comply
with applicable Bank safeguards policies. The PMU will follow the Interim Guidelines on the
Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects
and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank, and seek guidance from the Bank’s safeguards specialists
early in the process.

Social:

To address the land acquisition issue (as mentioned above), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
has been prepared to guide the preparation of subproject Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that will be
identified during project implementation. For civil works, such as construction of the Technical
Facility in Thu Thiem area of which the location has been determined, an abbreviated RAP has been
prepared in accordance with the RPF. This abbreviated RAP will be updated on the basis of the
detailed measurement survey, consultation with affected households, replacement costs survey, and
will be disclosed to the affected community prior to implementation. The abbreviated RAP also
includes actions that need to be taken by UCCI (project owner) with the 19 pending cases as a result of
the due diligence review of the land acquisition/resettlement for Vo Van Kiet Highway (which is used
as the BRT route). Once the location for the End of the BRT Terminal (about 0.58ha, Rach Chiec area)
was determined by HCMC People’s Committee, the compensation/support/resettlement package for
the this Terminal will be developed into a RAP in accordance with the project’ RPF. This RAP will be
reviewed by the Bank prior to implementation.

Safeguard implementation and capacity building:

The project will be implemented by a Project Management Unit (PMU) under of the UCCI as the
Implementing Agency, which has whose staff have very limited experienced staff and experiences in
implementation of several projects funded by the Bank and other donors. PMU staff attended training
on the WB safeguards policies in on December 4-5, 2014. With additional training and capacity
building activities on environmental monitoring and supervision to be implemented during project
implementation, the PMU will be in a good position to take the responsibility for this project.

Environment:

PMU will be responsible for monitoring the overall project implementation, including environmental
compliance of the project. It will have the final responsibility for environmental performance of the
project. The construction supervision consultant will take the lead in ensuring contractor compliance
with the EMP. Furthermore, PMU will also be responsible for overall supervising the implementation
of the EMP, reviewing project monitoring reports, and implementing regular/ad hoc monitoring, and
requesting further mitigation measures based on their own environmental management jurisdiction. A
safeguard unit under PMU will be established with at least one environmental management staff
member to help with environmental management of the project. PMU will contract experienced
independent environmental monitoring services for external monitoring of compliance with the EMP.
The independent environmental monitoring consultant will carry out the environmental monitoring
program as designed in the EMP, and advise on additional monitoring of mitigation measures to be
implemented by the contractors. The consultant will submit bi-annually monitoring reports bi-annually
to the PMU and to the Bank.

Social:

PMU (established under UCCI) will directly implement the abbreviated RAP, as well as prepare new
subproject RAP(s) that will be determined during project implementation. Since PMU staff members
are still quite new to the requirements of the World Bank’s OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), a
training will be provided to the PMU’s social staff, including counterpart staff who are directly
involved in RAP updating and implementation. Technical support will be regularly provided by the
Bank’s project task team, to ensure that the approved RAP is implemented properly and in accordance
with the planned construction schedule.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment:

In addition to the UCCI and project PMU responsible for the implementation of the project, other key
stakeholders are district people’s committees, the city DOT, Saigon Bus Company, the city
Transportation Policy , local communities, mass organizations, and general public. Public
consultations on the project EIA and EMP were carried during project preparation with the DOT, the
Transport Policy, the affected people, local authorities, and mass organizations. Feedbacks from all the
consultations were taken into account in the preparation of the final documents and for project’s
design.

Prior to project appraisal, all the draft environmental safeguard documents (EIA, EMP) were disclosed
in Vietnamese at the Vietnam Development Information Center, the PMU office, DONRE, and the
project sites on October 27, 2014. They were also been disclosed at the Bank’s InfoShop in
Washington DC on October 22, 2014. The final EIA and EMP were disclosed at the project sites on
January 16, 2015, and at the InfoShop on February 3, 2015.

Social:

During project preparation, consultation has was been conducted with various stakeholders, including
potentially affected households, potential BRT users, local people along the BRT route (particularly at
bus stop locations), staff members from UCCI, PMU, HCMC DOT, environmental and Feasibility
Study Consultant. Gender perspective was integrated into the consultation process to ensure that are
both men and women participating in the consultation, and their feedback were sought. Feedback from
people consulted have been reflected in the Social Assessment, Resettlement Policy Framework,
abbreviated RAP, and the Feasibility Study. Affected households under the Vo Van Kiet highway
project (formerly referred to as Dong Tay highway) were also consulted on a representative basis as
part of the social due diligence. Pending cases under the Vo Van Kiet highway project have been
reflected in the abbreviated RAP of the project (for the Thu Thiem Technical Facility) for UCCI and
PMUs’ follow-up action to solve these cases to the satisfaction of the affected households.

All the agreed social safeguard documents, including SA, RPF, abbreviated RAP (for the Technical
Facility in Thu Thiem area), and Due Diligence were disclosed in Vietnamese at the Vietnam
Development Information Center in Hanoi on 18 December 2014, and locally at the offices of project
districts’ People’s Committees, and on the website of the UCCI on 23 January 2015. The English
version of the above documents were disclosed at Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC on 17
December 2014 before the Bank commences the project appraisal. The revised RPF, done by HCMC
PC, which the Bank has accepted, was re-disclosed on the Bank’s Infoshop on 5 March 2015, and in
Vietnamese at VDIC in Hanoi on 9 March 2015. The revised RPF is also in the process of being
disclosed in Vietnamese at project level.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   20-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                22-Oct-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                                       27-Oct-2014
Comments: The Environmental Safeguards documents have been disclosed at Infoshop and in country
          prior to appraisal.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 12-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              17-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                                     18-Dec-2014
Comments: The Social Safeguards documents have been disclosed at Infoshop and in country prior to
          appraisal.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]         No [   ]    NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X ]        No [   ]    NA [   ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in   Yes [ X ]       No [   ]    NA [   ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]         No [   ]    NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ X ]       No [   ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [       ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to     Yes [       ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]         No [   ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]       No [   ]    NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [ X ]       No [   ]    NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Jung Eun Oh
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Michel Kerf                          Date: January 24, 2016
