Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1747 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/01/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P088759 
Project Name: Financial Sector Modernization and Information System 
Task Team Leader: Xiaofeng Hua 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Standards and financial reporting (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.01 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
0.83 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.99
11.83 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Vietnamese financial sector as a whole and more importantly given the dominant role of 
banks, the banking sector has suffered from weaknesses in regulation and supervision of the 
sector. Evidence of other countries establishes a clear link between weak bank supervision and 
increased losses in the sector.  The proposed project will provide the regulator/supervisor with 
greater information permitting them to make informed decisions concerning the condition of the 
banking sector.  This should result in stronger bank supervision and permit better compliance 
with the Basel Core Principles.  The weakness of data collection should be addressed through 
improvements in efficiency, accountability and transparency of data collection and use.  This 
will require some changes to current structures and will permit greater public awareness of the 
banking sector through information and public awareness campaigns. All of the mentioned items 
will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the banking sector and the financial sector as a 
whole.  The Development Objective of the project is to improve the effectiveness of banking 
supervision and monetary policy execution through improved decision making based upon better 
data quality, consolidated flows of information and enhanced analytical capacity.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Government has requested World Bank financing for modernization needs at the SBV 
including CIC.  In addition, the Government
 has asked that we consider including the DIV’s 
modernization needs in this proposed project.  As these needs are extensive, the Bank’s approach 
aims to proceed with appropriate sequencing ofthe reform activities in this sector.  Through the 
first and second PSBM, the scope of the banking IT modernization has been widened, and the 
need for the central bank to build and manage efficiently the financial data base is 
correspondingly greater, both in monitoring banking activities and enforcing banking 
regulations.  The proposed project would be a logical step in the support for the SBV to develop 
a
modern data management system which would include a follow up data needs assessment of its 
departments in comparison to other central banks and bank supervisors/regulators, data 
collection process (including report format), security of the data collected, backup and retrieval 
and process for analysis.  It is envisioned to be an “Investment Operation”.  The project in 
addition would provide funding for hardware and software. Bilateral support will be sought for 
the much needed technical assistance necessary to implement the new system at the SBV and 
CIC headquarters and branches as appropriate.  Similar support will be sought for DIV if it is 
included in the loan.  It is envisioned that existing commercial software should be available, but 
the implications of which in the context of international standards will have to be explained.  The 
project consists of two components:  Component 1 will provide assistance to the SBV's financial 
data base development and management, including the AML Information Center and Component 
2
will support the CIC and its system of database development, management and maintenance.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
State Bank of Vietnam (SBV)  
 
Credit Information Center (CIC)  
 
Anti-Money Laundering Information Center   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/20/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not Applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas A. Rose 
09/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wilfrid Bernard Drum 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
