                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)

                                     Section I ­ Basic Information

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 4, 2005                                     Report No.:AC1169
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Vietnam                                     Project ID: P073361
Project: Natural Disasters Mitigation                TTL: Laurent Msellati
Project
Total project cost (by component):

Component 1: Prevention and Mitigation Investments (US$138 million)
Component 2: Community-based Disaster Risk Management (US$18 million)
Component 3: Post-disaster Reconstruction Support (US$20 million)
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$6 million)


Appraisal Date: April 15, 2005                       Loan/Credit amount($m): IDA: 150
Board Date: June 16, 2005

Other financing amounts by source:                   ($m.): 1.5 million JSDF Grant
                                                             Other ­ TBD
Managing Unit: EASRD                                 Sector: General water, sanitation and flood
                                                     protection sector (100%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment
Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                Yes? [ ]         No? [X]
recovery?
Environmental Category: A

A.2. Project Objectives


The proposed project is the first step in assisting the Government of Vietnam (GoV) to
implement its Second National Strategy in order to reduce Vietnam's vulnerability to
frequently occurring natural disasters. The NDMP supports a conceptual shift from disaster
response to disaster-risk management.

The overriding goal of the proposed project is to save lives, reduce vulnerability, protect
economic assets, and ensure rapid recovery of poor communities living in hazard prone areas.
To this end, the proposed project would have the following specific objectives:

    ·   Reduced vulnerability to flood and storm hazards in project areas;
    ·   More efficient recovery and reconstruction efforts; and
    ·   Stronger national and local disaster risk-management institutions.

These would be achieved through the provision of funding for (a) structural and non-structural
investments to mitigate the impact of recurring natural disasters; (b) rehabilitation and
reconstruction of essential public infrastructure in the aftermath of natural disasters; and (c)
capacity building for national and local institutions in the areas of preparedness, response, and
long-term recovery.

A.3. Project Description

Component 1. Prevention and Mitigation Investments (US$138 million). This component
would support a range of priority structural and non-structural prevention and mitigation sub-
projects of medium-scale investment.

·   Structural sub-projects. Structural investments will center on planning, construction and
    rehabilitation of flood and storm-control infrastructure. Included in this category are
    rehabilitation of weirs, irrigation and drainage pumping stations, stabilization of river
    banks, strengthening of river and sea dyke systems, river training structures, improvement
    of river-flow capacity (e.g. dredging, flow-diversion weirs), construction of diversion
    channels, construction of safe harbors for small fishing boats, improvement of water flow
    along main highway and railway systems, strengthening of bridges in critical areas,
    construction of elevated earth pads for resettling people. Rehabilitation of existing
    reservoirs could be added to this list for the Central Region, provided it meets the
    "mitigation" and "integration" selection criteria.

·   Non-structural sub-projects. The objective of the non-structural investments is to set up the
    basis for a system of flood and storm risk-management in priority disaster-prone areas.
    These sub-projects would include flood plain and hazard mapping, flood forecasting and
    modeling systems, restoration of environment and ecological systems, review of building
    codes and design standards, weather forecasting, early warning and response systems.
    While non-structural investments may potentially be applied nationwide, limited resources
    require prioritization and focus on specific areas to achieve maximum benefits.

Two structural and one non-structural sub-projects have been included in the project's first
year implementation program: (a) Vuc Mau reservoir rehabilitation in Nghe An Province
(North Central Region); (b) Ba Tri sea dyke construction in Ben Tre Province (Mekong Delta
Region); and (c) the Mekong River Delta Flood Warning and Monitoring System. A list of 31
potential sub-projects posterior to year 1 has also been prepared and is included in the PAD

Component 2 ­ Community-based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) ($18 million).
The CBDRM program would integrate development of the most disaster-affected populations
with other project components. This component has three objectives: (a) to reduce
vulnerability of people and assets in disaster-prone communes; (b) to develop and implement
risk reduction strategies to local hazards and conditions; and (c) to integrate disaster-risk
management strategies into local development planning. The following three types of
activities would be financed by non-IDA Credit funds:

 ·   Village and commune level capacity building to support development of Safer Village and
     Safer Commune Plans using participatory planning. Participatory planning to produce the
     safer commune plans in the 100 target communes will be undertaken prior to
     implementing structural and non-structural risk mitigation measures.

 ·   Structural CBDRM sub-projects would include the construction of safe water systems,
     multi-purpose evacuation centers, health posts, canals for drainage, protection dykes, and
     improved roads for evacuation and access to humanitarian relief; and

 ·   Non-structural CBDRM sub-projects would include safer commune planning for disaster
     preparedness and response, improved early warning and communications systems,

     evacuations plan and demonstration, food and water storage containers, first aid training
     and equipment (e.g. aluminum boats and engine, life jackets, tents, megaphones,
     generators).

The activities have been developed through participatory disaster-management planning at the
commune level, in order to reduce the vulnerability of people and assets in approximately 100
disaster-prone communes. A list of 83 vulnerable communes has been established, based upon
the following criteria: disaster risk, overall linkages with other components of the project, their
importance in the reduction of disaster risk in the entire watershed area and the commitment of
the community to reduce the disaster risk. These communes are not included in the GoV's
Poverty Targeted Programs.

Component 3 ­ Post-Disaster Reconstruction Support ($20 million). This component aims
to provide a rapid disbursement facility to fund post-disaster reconstruction of essential
government infrastructure and thereby support fast recovery. It has three specific objectives:
(a) to ensure more rapid post-disaster reconstruction, limiting poverty-exacerbating and
economic growth-dampening impacts of disasters; (b) to strengthen government capacity to
undertake post-disaster damage assessments; and (c) to strengthen government speed and
efficiency in the allocation and disbursement of disaster assistance.

Component 4 ­ Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building ($6 million). This
component would strengthen government institutions to ensure better coordination and
integration among the various agencies and different levels responsible for prevention,
response and recovery. Institutional strengthening and capacity building at the central
government level would focus initially on strengthening the Disaster Management Center
(DMC), which acts as the Standing Office of the Central Committee for Flood and Storm
Control, situated in MARD, and the General Department of Hydro-Meteorological Services
situated in Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE), amongst many other
important agencies and departments. At the provincial government level, the focus would be
on the Provincial Flood and Storm Control Committees, with an emphasis on inter-Provincial
cooperation mechanisms, as well as on multi-sectoral planning involving all ministries.

A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis:

The project will be implemented in eleven Central and Northern Provinces and six Provinces
in the Mekong region (namely Thanh Hoa, Nghe An Ha Tinh, Quang Binh, Quang Tri, Thu-
Thien Hue, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Binh Dinh, Phu Yen, Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan, Binh
Thuan, Long An, An Giang, Dong Thap and Ben Tre Provinces)

The project's larger investments (on average <US$ 10M) in disaster mitigation infrastructure
would be mainly in coastal areas in southern and central Vietnam. The small scale investments
through the Community Based Natural Disaster Mitigation component are located in both
coastal plain areas and in mountainous inland areas (but still in coastal provinces).

Environmental. Key environmental issues for large structural sub-projects under Component
1 are water resources management and conservation of sensitive ecosystems (aquatic and

terrestrial).

Social. Many of the project areas have high population densities, although the project will not
have large resettlement requirements. Some project provinces have large populations of ethnic
minorities, and it will therefore be important to ensure their participation in project activities,
including as beneficiaries.


B. Check Environmental Category A [X], B [ ], C [ ], FI [ ]

Comments: The project is rated Category A based on the potential size of the civil works under
Component 1, the national scope of the project and the potential affect on water resources.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
                                                                      Yes                        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                              [X]                        [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         [X]                        []
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              [ ]                      [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN
                                                                       [ ]                      [X]
11.03-)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 [X]                        [ ]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                          [X]                        [ ]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   [ ]                      [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           [X]                        [ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                            [ ]                      [X]
Projects on International Waterways
                                                                       [ ]                      [X]
(OP/BP/GP 7.50)


                     Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management

D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment. The project would have positive environmental and
social impacts by mitigating flood disasters. The Phase I investments in infrastructure have the
potential for adverse impacts on water resources and coastal ecosystems. The Environmental
Assessments for the subprojects identified for the first year of the project satisfy the Bank's
requirements for OP 4.01.

OP 4.04, Natural Habitats. The majority of investments under the first year program would
have no impacts on natural habitats The Bac Tri sea dyke triggers the Bank's OP on Natural
Habitats. Eight species of birds that are considered either threatened or nearly so were
observed in the salt pans and intertidal mud flats around the project area in 2000 (Birdlife
International, 2003). Although the project would not directly impact all of these habitats, it

 *
  By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
 claims on the disputed areas

would result in the loss of 15 hectares of mangrove forest. This can be mitigated by planting
an equivalent or larger area of mangroves. Additional studies are needed to analyze the
potential impacts to the remaining habitats within the Important Bird Area, and how the
potential impacts on the migratory bird species that use these habitats would be mitigated. For
two components ­ the Community-based Disaster Risk Management and Contingency Funding
Mechanism ­ environmental screening procedures have been developed that will, inter alia,
ensure that natural habitats are not significantly impacted.

OP 4.37, Safety of Dams. The project would repair and upgrade Vuc Mau dam to ensure
safety of the reservoir during a catastrophic flood event. This is a 34 meter earth fill dam with
a maximum reservoir capacity of about 75 million m3. The reservoir is experiencing losses
through seepage, which is preventing the use of the reservoir at its design capacity. The
project would finance earth works to bank protection, construction of a second spillway, and
upgrading the emergency service roadway. The Vuc Mau sub-project triggers the Bank's
safeguard policy on Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The Bank's safeguard requirements for the Vuc
Mau dam will be met through the Dam Safety Unit (DMU) established within MARD for the
Vietnam Water Resources Assistance Project (VWRAP). The DMU will prepare dam safety
and emergency management plans, undertake dam safety inspections, and formulate and
enforce laws and regulations. There are no dam safety sub-projects other than Vuc Mau in the
list of 31 potential sub-projects posterior to Year 1. However, procedures and guidelines for
preparing Dam Safety Reports will be included in the EA.

OP 4.11, Cultural Property. The environmental and social reviews carried out on the first `s
subprojects have not identified any assets covered under this OP that would be adversely
affected by the project. For sub-projects in years 2 and beyond, the environmental screening
procedure addresses cultural property, and if it is triggered appropriate impact analysis and
mitigation (including choosing alternatives that avoid impacts) will be applied.

OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement


Since all sub-projects will not be identified by appraisal, but selected on a yearly basis, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to provide the policies and
provisions that will govern mitigation measures of any negative impacts caused by land
acquisition or change in land use by the project. Preparation of Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) that will provide relevant details (census surveys, asset valuation, description of
compensation and other resettlement assistance, consultations, and institutional responsibility
for implementation arrangements) are underway.

Sub-projects: During the first year of implementation, there will be three sub-projects (two
structural and one non-structural): (a) Vuc Mau reservoir rehabilitation; (b) Be Tri sea dyke
construction; and (c) the Mekong River Delta Flood Warning and Monitoring System
(MRDFWMS).

These sub-projects will cause impacts on the land, environment and socio-economic activities
within the project area. Impacts will include acquisition of non-public lands, potential
negative effects on livelihoods, and the displacement of households. Of the three sub-projects
Vuc Mau will entail land acquisition estimated at US$ 30,000; Ba Tri Sea Dyke entails land

acquisition (aquaculture areas, salt marshes, forests & farm land, houses) and the resettlement
of 70 households. The Ba Tre land compensation and resettlement is 6 percent of the total
investment in this project (US$900,000). While MRDFWMS is a non-structural sub-project, it
will entail significant land acquisition for the construction of 132 hydro meteorological stations
in the flood area. The compensation cost for each station is estimated at US$13,000, or about
30 percent of total cost for station construction.

Under component B, Community-based Disaster Risk Management, some small projects may require land. For
projects causing marginal impacts, a provision for voluntary land and asset donation may be adopted.

Since the OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement differs from the regulations governing resettlement and
compensation in Vietnam, relevant waivers will be obtained from the Prime Minister's Office.


OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10), Indigenous Peoples (IP)

A draft Ethnic Minority Development Strategy has been prepared. Preparation of Ethnic
Minority Development Plans (EMDP) are underway. While data on numbers, socio-economic
profiles, livelihood impacts, and location of ethnic minorities in the project area are absent at
present, it is likely that the project will affect up to 30 of the 53 officially recognized ethnic
minority groups who live in the project areas. These groups reside mainly in uplands and
central coastal regions, and three minority groups in the Mekong Delta plains.

The most significant negative impact will likely be in Component 1 (Prevention and
mitigation investments) which has structural investments likely to result in resettlement,
including among ethnic minorities. The RAP and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP)
will provide details on this. Special attention will be given in this component to ensure that
these groups are informed and consulted about the specific proposed infrastructure
developments in ways that are meaningful and culturally appropriate.

For Component 2 (Community-based disaster risk management), eliciting localized solutions
to problems posed by natural disasters will be a key step towards ensuring that ethnic minority
needs, institutions, and customs are accounted for to adapt responses which may be best known
to these communities themselves.

The Post Disaster reconstruction support in Component 3 (the repair of roads, schools, health
clinics, bridges) is particularly pressing where ethnic minorities are concerned. As upland
minorities often reside in remote and isolated areas with limited road access, they are more
susceptible to being cut-off from the outside, receiving aid at a later stage, including having
basic infrastructure (in health, education, communication, water supply) repaired at later
stages compared to the majority populations. Here, stakeholder participation in all aspects of
disaster recovery will be one of the means to mitigate adverse effects in this area.

For Component 4 (Institutional Strengthening), possible impacts include the exclusion of
ethnic minorities from the recruiting, hiring, training and skills development opportunities.
Attention to their capacity building in these areas is an integral step towards their
empowerment by enhancing their ability to better manage disasters.

BP 17.50, Public Disclosure. The Bank's disclosure requirements (effective January 1, 2002)
will be followed. The environment and social documents will be individually disclosed locally
and in the InfoShop prior to departure of the appraisal mission.

D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area.

The single potentially long term impact is to the Binh Dai Important Bird Area (IBA) that
covers the Ba Lai estuary and the immediate coastal area within the northeastern margin of the
proposed Bac Tri sea dyke, including the mangrove forest. Detailed studies are underway to
analyze the impacts to the remaining habitats within the IBA, and how the potential impacts on
the migratory bird species that use these habitats would be mitigated. For other project
impacts, the mitigation measures contained within the draft Environmental Management Plan
are adequate.



D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)

The EAs for the two main structural investments under component 1 (Bac Tri and Vuc Mau) cover an adequate
range of feasible alternatives. For the Vuc Mau Reservoir subproject, four alternatives were considered, and for
the Bac tri sea dyke, two alternatives were analyzed.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Environment. An independent environmental consultant prepared five documents as part of
the environmental review: (a) a general EA for the entire project; (b) specific EAs for the three
sub-projects in Phase I; and (c) an environmental review procedure for investments under the
CBDRM component. A separate environmental review procedure has also been developed for
investments under Component 3 (Post-Disaster Reconstruction Support).

Social. Both the resettlement and ethnic minorities strategies are described in the respective
resettlement Policy Framework and the Ethnic Minority Development Framework which have
been prepared for the project in accordance with World Bank Operational Policy 4.12 and
Operational Directive 4.20. The involuntary resettlement policy framework covers all possible
adverse impacts caused by the taking of land (acquisition) for the project. The Ethnic Minority
Strategy ensures that in the project design:(a) that ethnic minorities benefit from development
projects, and (b) that the project avoids or mitigates potentially adverse effects on ethnic
minorities caused by the project. Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Plans for sub-projects
where land acquisition is known to take place for the first year investments have also been
prepared in accordance with World Bank safeguard policies.

Implementation arrangements. The PMU within the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development (MARD) will establish an office with social and environmental specialists to
manage and supervise safeguard implementation (for phase I investments) and preparation (for
later phases). An independent agency will monitor compliance throughout project
implementation

Capacity. The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the project's
environmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures for these. The EA
identifies the training needs for implementing the Environmental Management Plans, which
should be included in the project costs.

D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The main stakeholders are the beneficiaries of the disaster mitigation investments ­ households
and communities in the 18 provinces that benefit from the structural and non-structural
investments under Component 1 or assist in the design of community-based investments under
Component 2. Stakeholders also include Women's Unions, Farmers Unions/Associations and
Veteran Associations as the most important local political-social organizations, Water User
Groups (WUGs) or Irrigation Cooperative Groups. Public-sector stakeholders include the
Provincial, District and Commune People's Committees (PPCs, DPCs and CPCs), Natural
Resources and Environment offices at the provincial and district levels, and the Department
Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs (DoLISA).

Extensive consultations were held with public and private sector stakeholders on the
environmental and social impacts of the Bac Tri and Vuc Mau subprojects, the only two large
structural investments in the first year of the project. For the smaller community-based
investments under Component 2, the consultations on potential impacts were integrated with
the community discussions on investment priorities.

Summaries of the safeguard documents (EA/EMPs/RPF/RPs/EMDS) in Vietnamese were
displayed in each of the district towns at a public place. The full safeguard documents were
disclosed at the WB Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi and through the
InfoShop in Washington DC (disclosure of documents to be confirmed).


F. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     12/07/04
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 2/16/05
Date of submission to InfoShop                  2/16/05
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
Executive Directors                             02/15/05
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     11/12/04
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 2/16/05
Date of submission to InfoShop                  2/16/05
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     11/12/04
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 2/16/05
Date of submission to InfoShop                  2/16/05

 Pest Management Plan:
 Date of receipt by the Bank                    .../.../...  or Not Applicable
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                .../.../...   or Not Applicable
 Date of submission to InfoShop                 .../.../...   or Not Applicable
 Dam Safety Management Plan:
 Date of receipt by the Bank                    .../.../... TBD
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                .../.../... TBD
 Date of submission to InfoShop                 .../.../... TBD
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
 N/A


            Section III ­ Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
          (To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                        Yes         No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve
                                                                            TBD
the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                            TBD
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                              Yes         No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation
                                                                              X
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include             TBD
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                  Yes         No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                             N/A
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) ­ Cultural Property:                              Yes         No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                 N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                               Yes         No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in
                                                                              X
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and
                                                                              X
approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been
                                                                              X
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                      Yes         No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process
                                                                              X
been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and
                                                                              X
approve the plan / policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                                       Yes         No

Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
                                                                                N/A
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                            Yes     No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   TBD
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
                                                                       TBD
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
                                                                       TBD
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                          Yes     No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                          N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department,
and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
    Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                   Yes     No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
                                                                                N/A
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the
OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                           Yes     No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World
                                                                        X
Bank' s Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to       TBD
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                 Yes     No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of the            X
safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?            X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project
                                                                        X
implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                       TBD
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal   TBD
documents?
Signed and submitted by:                            Name                    Date

Task Team Leader:                          Laurent Msellati
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:           Lars Lund
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:           Vinh Duong
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:           Phillip Brylski
Approved by:                                                 Name    Date
Regional Safeguards
                                           Glenn Morgan
Coordinator:
Comments:
Sector Manager:                            Hoonae Kim
Comments:



  Minhnguyet Khorami
  C:\Documents and Settings\wb16201\My Documents\ISDSMarch4.doc
  03/04/2005 10:47:00 AM

