Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/23/2005 
Report No.:  AC1408
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P065920 
Project Name:  GZ-GAZA II EMERGENCY WATER 
Task Team Leader:  Suhail J. S. Jme'An 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (67%);Water supply (15%);Sanitation 
(12%);Sewerage (6%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Pollution management and environmental health 
(P);Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S);Other human development 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.90 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
20.00
22.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is a follow-up to the ongoing Water and Sanitation Services 
Improvement Project (WSSIP) in Gaza. The objectives of the WSSIP were: to rapidly 
improve the quality, quantity and management of water and sanitation services in Gaza 
through a performance-based private sector management contract; to strengthen and 
restructure the institutional framework for both service delivery and governance 
functions; and create the operational, institutional and managerial conditions for priority 
investments to be financed by other donors.  
 
Like the WSSIP, this project is part of a larger investment program to improve water 
and sanitation services in the Gaza Strip. The program includes substantial investments in 
the in the sewerage network; wastewater treatment plants; and in a bulk water supply 
network connecting the various municipalities in the Gaza Strip. These investments, 
totaling about US$ 340 million, will be financed by soft loans and grants from EIB, 
USAID, KfW, AFD, SIDA and other donors.  
 
Page  2
The development objectives of the proposed project are:  
 
The primary objectives of the proposed project are to improve the provision of adequate 
water and wastewater services in Gaza, and functionally establish the Coastal 
Municipalities Water Utility as independent well-run modern utility.  In addition, the 
project has a secondary objective to strengthen the PWA?s capacity to assume sector 
regulatory functions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has two main components: (1) Improved Water and Sanitation Services - 
includes a private sector contract (US$ 7.7m) and (2) a capital and operating investment 
fund (US$ 10.4m) for three years. The second component: Institutional Reform and 
Capacity Building - includes support to functionally establish the CMWU as well as to 
strengthen the PWA in its function as sector regulator (US$ 1.9m).  
 
Component 
                                  US$ (million)  
 
1.1
Private Sector Contract                           7.7  
 
1.2
Operating Investment Fund 
                        10.4  
 
2.1
Institutional Reform and Capacity Building for CWU   1.0  
 
2.2
Institutional Reform and Capacity Building for PWA   0.9  
 
Total Project Costs 
                                20.0  
 
Total Financing Required 
                        20.0  
 
Key policy and institutional reforms to be sought:  
 
Support the overall water and wastewater strategy of the PWA and build technical and 
managerial capacity;  
 
Creation and functional establishment of the Coastal Water Utility;  
 
Renewed and enhanced private sector participation to manage, operate and maintain the 
water and wastewater services.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will work in all municipalities and village councils of Gaza.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will mainly rehabilitate existing facilities and provide improved and 
systematic operational and maintenance systems. Potential negative impacts that are 
localized and limited in nature will be avoided by providing instructions in the contract 
document which specifically address environmental issues in a manner acceptable to the 
Bank, as well as following Good Management Practices during construction.  
Construction activities will be supervised by an Environmental Specialist.  
 
There are no major environmental issues directly associated with the project.  There are 
a
few environmental issues associated with the project baseline and include:  (a) the 
abstraction of water from the aquifer; (b) overloading of existing wastewater treatment 
plants; (c) improper disposal of treated effluent & sludge; and (d) pollution of coastal 
areas through direct discharge of wastewater.  The technical assistance component of the 
project will include provisions for a sanitary engineer in the Management Contract 
operator?s team.  The sanitary engineer will be proficient in addressing environmental 
issues including those related to abstraction of water from the seriously overdrawn and 
contaminated Gaza aquifer; regulation of industrial discharges; wastewater treatment; and 
reuse of the treated effluent (if needed).  The operator will also ensure that wastewater 
collection does not result in overloading of the treatment facilities and acceptable 
retention time is provided at these facilities to ensure effective treatment.   ISO 14000 
certification was one of the criteria for operator selection.   Implementation of the project 
would result in significant improvement of water and wastewater services in Gaza and 
the regulation of abstractions from the Gaza aquifer.  
 
Currently, there are no known sub-project proposals whose implementation would 
involve land acquisition or result in involuntary settlement.  Implementation of the 
project would not endanger archaeological sites, or raise international water issues.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EIA and EMP were completed in March 2001 and remain germane to the planned 
project.  They will be assessed during appraisal to ensure that, in fact, they remain fully 
relevant.  
 
While the borrower has limited institutional capacity for implementing the safeguard 
policies, the CMWU is awarding a Management Contract to Messrs Inframan (Astria), 
which has extensive experience in water and sanitation, including the implementation of 
environmental impact assessments and environmental management plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Significant benefits would accrue to the population of the Gaza Strip. Women would 
benefit in particular, as their household chores will be easier to plan and thus less onerous 
with a more continuous water supply, and as they bear the main burden of caring for sick 
children who will be better protected through improved water quality. Benefits would 
include:  
 
Improved efficiency of the distribution system through leakage management and 
network rehabilitation.  
 
Improved operational and distribution efficiency will result in higher revenue generation 
and greater cost recovery.  
 
Improved water quality and more regular supply to customers with fewer breaks in 
service.  
 
Enhanced private sector participation in the delivery of water and wastewater services.  
 
Improved planning, project design, procurement and implementation through the 
functional establishment of the CMWU.  
 
Target Population:  the entire population of Gaza is within the service areas under the 
project (estimated at around 1.2 million) will benefit from this project.  Low income 
households especially will benefit from access to reliable piped water supplies at much 
lower prices than charged by vendors.  These households will also experience health and 
environmental benefits from improved access to water and wastewater services.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/24/2001 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/21/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/09/2001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Suhail J. S. Jme'An 
03/30/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Allan Rotman 
03/30/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
03/30/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
 
Comments:   
