                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: March 7, 2015                                      Report No.: 95228
1. Basic Project Data
Country: West Bank and Gaza                  Project ID: P154102
Project Name: GZ-SOUTHERN WEST BANK SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT –
ADDITIONAL FINANCING (AF)
Task Team Leader: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2015 Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2015
Managing Unit: GSURR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Grant
Sector: Solid waste management (100%);
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Municipal governance and
institution building (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Special Financing (through MDTF)                             1.50
         Financing Gap                                                0.00
                                                                      1.50
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]         Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original / parent Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management Project’s (SWMP)
objectives are to support about 33 municipalities and joint services council’s members of
the HJSC for Bethlehem and Hebron governorates in improving their solid waste disposal
services through provision of a socially acceptable and environmentally friendly system.
Since the PA is in process of considering the amalgamation of local governments into
JSC or larger municipalities, the coverage of the SWMP would not be affected.

The project development objective would be accomplished through (i) strengthening the
joint services council administrative and technical capabilities for a cost-effective
management of the waste disposal services, (ii) improving the wastes disposal services
through provision of a transfer station and a sanitary landfill facility, and (iii) a public
awareness campaign for promoting waste minimization, resource recovery and cost
recovery for financial viability.
The objective of this Additional Financing (AF) is to provide additional funding towards
achieving the same objectives of the Parent project.

The key performance indicator for the AF would be measured by the final sanitary
closure of the Yatta dumpsite.

3. Project Description
The AF contributes to one specific activity identified by parent project scope’s related to
subcomponent (2.e) Civil Works: towards clean-up and rehabilitation of Yatta dump site.
Now that the new sanitary landfill is constructed and operational. The proposed AF will
finance the sanitary closure of the last remaining dumpsite at Yatta.

The following is the description of the parent project:
Component 1. This Component consists of three parts as described below:
   a. Capacity Building for the HJSC. The HJSC and its TOU is a new organization
      and its members need to develop: an understanding of the solid waste services and
      administration including definition and accountability of roles and responsibilities
      of the Council and the TOU; basic skills on the management functions of solid
      waste such as administration and finance, planning, environmental and social
      aspects, and setting policy for efficient, effective and sustainable service; and on
      public awareness and consultation to seek the cooperation of the beneficiary
      population in the making and application of policy decisions. The TOU will also
      need training primarily on the job and technical assistance on some specific
      aspects of the management functions entrusted to it. The capacity building would
      be implemented with the assistance of individual consultants who will be hired as
      advisors to the Council and TOU as described in the attached Scope of Services.
      The capacity building in addition to on-the-job training would include workshops
      and study tours to nearby countries. The consultants would arrange, plan and
      launch study tours within the West Bank and to a nearby country such as Jordan
      for council members and senior TOU management staff.
       This component would finance: (i) a consultant to provide technical support and
       training on management and financial aspects to the HJSC members and TOU
       managers; (ii) a consultant to support the TOU on project management and
       procurement; and a consultant to build TOU capacity and municipalities on SWM
       financial management; and study tours within the West Bank (Jenin SWM
       system), Jordan and possibly Izmir, Turkey.
   b. Capacity Building for EQA: Technical staff of EQA would need training on
      environmental monitoring planning, field inspection and testing, analysis and
      reporting on solid waste operations (landfill and transfer stations) including the
      monitoring of dump sites closures. The training would be provided by consultants
      contracted under the project (see component 2) for environmental monitoring.
       The services of the EMP monitoring consultant would include the training of
       EQA designated technical staff as follows: (i) classroom courses to explain and
       discuss the planning of monitoring, the preparation of monitoring forms on what
       will be monitored and requirements for inspection, sampling, testing and analysis
       of results for compliance with laws and regulations; (ii) participate in the field
       inspections, sampling and testing, and analysis and evaluation of findings with
       recommendations on actions to be taken; and (iii) preparation of reports by the
       monitoring organization. This component would finance the local transport of
       trainees participating in the capacity building program which may be included in
       the EMP consultant contract as reimbursable expense. Additional training costs
       are included in the budget for the EMP consultancy services described in
       Component 2 below.
   c. Public Awareness Campaign. The proposed project will benefit from the material
      already prepared for and experience gained in the public awareness campaign
      designed and delivered for the Northern West Bank Solid Waste Environmental
      Management Project (SWEMP) currently in operation. This component includes
      the cost of reproducing such material and the cost of disseminating it. This
      component would finance consultants, workshops, training and launching
      awareness campaigns including dissemination through various media. A
      consultant firm would be hired to plan, organize and deliver public awareness
      campaigns to make the beneficiary communities aware (including businesses and
      institutions) of solid waste management policies and procedures and seek their
      cooperation in service efficiency improvements, compliance with regulations and
      timely payments for services. The consultant(s) would design and deliver training
      programs to build capacity at the HJSC, TOU and EQA on client-oriented
      customer service to strengthen relations with beneficiary communities.
Component 2. This component would support construction of a new sanitary landfill
facility and a transfer station, the closure of 17 dump sites plus several small sites
scattered randomly in Hebron and Bethlehem governorates, and the implementation of
the EMP. A detailed description is given below:
   a. Civil works: for the construction of a sanitary landfill facility located at Al-Minya
      site and consisting of construction of two out of four cells with a sealed bottom
      consisting of multi-barrier layers and leachate drainage system and treatment
      facility including a return pumping station and piping with spray discharge to the
      landfill cells, site fencing and main entrance gate and sign, on-site paved service
      roads, surface drainage system and site lighting, weight bridge station including a
      control room, administration building, paved parking areas, storage and
      maintenance workshop, stand-by power generator and electrical switch gear, a
      water storage tank, a gas station including an underground fuel storage tank, a
      paved container parking area, vehicle wheels cleaning area, on-site wastewater
      septic tank disposal system, and related off-site infrastructure (rehabilitation of
      existing access road and construction of a new section of by-pass road, power
      and water supply, and telecommunication service line as required;
   b. Civil works: for the construction and installation of waste compactors for Hebron
      Transfer Station;
   c. Civil works: for the construction and installation of an existing waste recycling
      plant (owner-supplied equipment) at Al-Minya landfill;
   d. Equipment: i) supply of operational equipment for the landfill (bulldozers,
      compactors and loaders); ii) supply of transfer station waste containers and waste
      container hauling vehicles;
   e. Civil Works : towards clean-up and rehabilitation of Yatta dump site for use
      during construction and closure of all 17 dump sites by end of construction
      period;
   f. Technical Assistance: towards operational management contract for the landfill
      and transfer station; and
   g. EMP/ARAP implementation. Please note (below) that the additional finance
      project does not trigger OP 4.12, thus this refers to the parent project only.
      ARAPs prepared under the parent project have delivered agreed upon
      compensation and mitigation to project affected people.
Component 3. This component would support studies and implementation of small-scale
recycle projects:
   a. A study of waste collection optimization at local government level and the
      feasibility and design of small-scale projects for waste reduction, waste recovery
      for recycling and composting; and
   b. Implement small-scale recycle and composting projects. This would consist of :
      (i) technical assistance to plan and organize waste pickers into commercially-
      viable service organizations including launching such operations for a period of at
      least one year, which would be extendable as needed; and (ii) investments
      required to launch such small businesses including the cost of goods, salaries of
      waste pickers, transport and administrative expenses (rent of office space, office
      equipment, communication and supplies)for a period of one year, which would be
      extendable as needed. The total cost for this component is estimated at about.
Component 4. This component includes project management consisting of:
   a. the incremental operation costs (on a declining rate from 100% in Year 1 to 50%
      in Year 5) of the HJSC Technical Operations Unit (TOU) to enable project
      implementation such as: salaries of contracted TOU staff, office rental and
      utilities, communication, procurement related expenditures, printing and supplies,
      maintenance of office equipment, training of TOU staff and travel cost associated
      with project implementation and training; and
   b. A contract with a reputable international consulting firm for supervision of
      construction of the landfill and transfer station has already been satisfactorily
      completed.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The location of the Yatta dumpsite is outside the populated area in the southeast of
Hebron Governorate, Southern West Bank. It is located at least 8.5 kilometers from the
center of Yatta municipalities and at least 1.4 kilometers (aerial distance) from the closest
housing cluster.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr. John Butler, Lead Social Development Specialist (GSURR)
   Mr. Dariusz Kobus, Environmental Safeguards Consultant (GTIDR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                            X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                       X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                X
Please note that OP 4.12 was only triggered for the parent project. The ARAPs
produced under the parent project have already delivered agreed upon mitigation and
compensation to project affected people.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Update on OP 4.01: Environment Protection Impacts: the project aims at sanitary
closing of the Yatta dumpsite. This would include the excavations and backfilling in the
waste body to reduce the slopes and provide access to all parts of the site. A 6 meter wide
internal site parameter road will be constructed to add more stability to the dumpsite and
enable access to the different parts during monitoring and emergencies; cleaning of the
valley from all waste and building stone blocks retaining walls along the valley
abutments to prevent waste sliding into the valley. The design includes capping of the
waste by two layers of compacted soil and clay (compacted clay in the bottom layer, and
lightly compacted soil supporting vegetation growth in the top layer) of not less than 50
centimeters in depth; installing reinforced concrete ditches to divert rainwater from the
site into the valley to prevent soil erosion; and installing gas venting system for safe
release of the gas. These measures will prevent percolation of rainwater into the waste
body, minimize generation of leachate, minimize contamination of stream that runs
through the valley during winter, and prevent the risk of gas accumulation and migration
in the waste body and beyond.

Update on OP 4.11: During the preparation of the ESIA, a small archaeological place
at the north side of the Yatta site was identified that is surrounded by waste body site.
During appraisal of the parent project, officials from the Palestinian Ministry of Tourism
and Antiquities (MOTA) visited the site but did not report any significant value of the
site. Still, the JSC-H&B has delineated this site and in case of any accidental findings of
any antiquities or physical cultural resources that might occur during the implementation
of the projects, the contractor must notify the JSC-H&B and thereby notifying the MOTA
for immediate action.

Update on OP 4.12: The proposed activities to be funded by this AF do not trigger OP
4.12. The parent Project had triggered this OP due to the presence of waste-pickers at the
project site, the acquisition of land for the new landfill site as well as the presence of
herdsmen there. ARAPs for waste-pickers, landowners and herdsmen were prepared in
accordance with the relevant policies and the client has adhered to them during project
implementation. All waste pickers agreed to mitigation packages which have been
implemented or are in the process of being implemented, land owners have received their
compensation and herdsmen have received animal feed and sheep as compensation. The
policy is not triggered for this AF because the Yatta dumpsite is officially closed, all have
been notified of this and a gate with a guard and a sign have been established. No new
land will be acquired as part of the proposed activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The project will have primarily positive impacts by rehabilitating and closing the Yatta
dumpsite, which was generating leachate posing risk to ground and surface water, and
where landfill gas supported waste burning was causing significant harm to the
environment.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The parent project has financed the construction of a new sanitary landfill built and
currently operated by international operator based on international standards and
International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) technical assistance. The closure of this
dumpsite as well as 18 other ones (much smaller in size and already closed and
rehabilitated by the Parent Project) would prevent further use of the dumpsites and illegal
dumping and burning of waste. It would also reduce odors releases, flies and wind-blown
plastic bags littering that were affecting the livestock in neighboring farms. Several
additional options for waste management were considered by the stakeholders including
constructing a public garden or developing gas collection system and power generation.
These options would be considered at later stage and once the technical studies have been
done and proven economically and financially feasible.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
This AF builds on the successful compliance of the client with the safeguards policies
under the parent project. Furthermore, the Environment Quality Authority has been
monitoring the performance of the client and its private operators and compliance with
the national environmental regulations. The Client has committed to continue its
compliance and implementation of all measures related to safeguards.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include:

a. Hebron and Yatta municipalities who own the land and the dumpsite; Yatta
municipality who has administrative jurisdiction over the land; and farmers and land
owners surrounding the dumpsite. Considering that this dumpsite is also located in Area
C of the West Bank that is still under Israeli Civil Administration and Military control is
also considered a stakeholder. All parties have expressed interest and demand for the
sanitary closure of Yatta dumpsite.

The Addendum to the ESIA, has been disclosed locally on the websites of the Joint
Services Council for Southern West Bank and Hebron and Bethlehem (JSC-H&B) as
well as in the Bank InfoShop on February 18 and 20, 2015, respectively.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
                                                             Yes –
                                                             addendum
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                                                             to the parent
                                                             ESIA
                                                             February
 Date of receipt by the Bank
                                                             18, 2015
                                                             February
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
                                                             18, 2015
                                                             February
 Date of submission to InfoShop
                                                             20, 2015
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive NA
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
                                                             OP. 4.12
                                                             was Not
                                                             Triggered
                                                             for the AF
                                                             project
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              (Parent
                                                             ARAP
                                                             disclosed
                                                             on
                                                             November
                                                             25, 2009)
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not
                                                             triggered
                                                             for AF
                                                             project
                                                             (Parent
                                                             ARAP
                                                             received on
                                                             November
                                                             25, 2009)
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not
                                                             triggered
                                                             for AF
                                                             project
                                                             (Parent
                                                             ARAP
                                                             disclosed
                                                             on
                                                             November
                                                             25, 2009)
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              not
                                                             triggered
                                                             for AF
                                                             project
                                                             (Parent
                                                             ARAP
                                                             disclosed
                                                             on
                                                             December
                                                             1, 2009)
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           Yes –
                                                                               addendum
                                                                               to the
                                                                               parent
                                                                               ESIA
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes, the
Infoshop?                                                                      addendum
                                                                               to the
                                                                               parent
                                                                               ESIA
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes, the
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected   addendum
groups and local NGOs?                                                         to the
                                                                               parent
                                                                               ESIA
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name        Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr. Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
Environmental Specialist:           Mr. Dariusz Kobus
Social Development Specialist       Mr. John Butler
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr. Africa Eshogba Olojoba
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms. Nina Chee
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms. Nina Bhatt
  Comments:
