                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1183

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza               Project ID:      P148600
                            Project Name:      GZ: Electricity Sector Performance Improvement Project (P148600)
                            Task Team          Roger Coma Cunill
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          10-Mar-2017                      Estimated        23-May-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE05                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     12.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           6.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Special Financing                                                            6.00
                              Total                                                                        6.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the monitoring of electricity payments, to reduce
                           energy losses and to increase bill collection rates.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project concept benefits from strong buy-in and ownership from the PA counterparts.

                           The proposed operation builds on the ongoing Electricity Utility Management project (EUMP).
                           The EUMP was approved in 2008 for US$12m, with additional financing of US$2.5m approved in
                           2012 for a total amount of US$14.5m. The original objective was to reduce the fiscal burden of the
                           electricity sector on the Palestinian Authority?s budgetary resources through lower deductions from
                         clearance revenues for arrears owed to the IEC. The project leveraged World Bank resources with
                         parallel resources from a number of donors. After several years of implementation, the pace of
                         activities financed by other donors was delayed, and, as a result, the original objective was judged to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be too ambitious. The EUMP went through a Level I restructuring in September 2013, which
                         included a revision of its PDO and changes to the results framework. PENRA continued the
                         consolidation of power supply and improvement of electricity system efficiency.

                         In light of the deterioration of Palestinian utility performance, e.g. total losses, and an increase of
                         non-payment for electricity imported from IEC, the World Bank undertook the ?Assessment and
                         Action Plan to improve payment for electricity services in the Palestinian Territories? or the so-
                         called ?Net Lending? study to better understand the sources and causes of non-payment and proposed
                         targeted actions. The study provides the additional analytical underpinnings for the proposed
                         operation to focus on the following: (i) improving governance and efficiency of the energy sector, e.
                         g. web database for transparency and accountability, prepaid and smart meters; (ii) consolidation of
                         power supply (outgoing feeders for EIB-financed substations); and (iii) enhancing energy security
                         (renewable energy and energy efficiency).

                         The project will also work on implementing the recommendations of the 2013 Renewable Energy
                         Pilot, carried out under the Municipal Development Program, also led by the World Bank. The
                         project will also promote renewable energy knowledge and application in the West Bank in selected
                         pilot areas. The energy efficiency component in this project will be based on the recommendations
                         of the ongoing World Bank-financed Energy Efficiency Action Plan (to be completed by June 2015).
                         This action plan is to identify the most feasible energy efficiency measures in the short to long term
                         to saving energy and reduce CO2 emissions.

                         The proposed project components are planned as follows:

                         Component 1: Enhanced monitoring capacity and accountability for electricity payments (US$ 1.0
                         m).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on the recommendations of the 2014 ?Net lending study?, this component will focus on
                         improving the transparency and accountability of the electricity payment cycle, which was a major
                         obstacle for keeping electricity non-payers accountable. A web database will be established to track
                         timely transfer of invoices and payments to IEC by relevant Palestinian stakeholders, i.e. Distribution
                         Companies (DISCOs) and Municipalities. The web database will be managed by PETL in
                         coordination with the IEC. This online database is critical for monitoring payments (and non-
                         payments) from all Palestinian stakeholders, particularly as negotiations on a legally binding Power
                         Purchase Agreement are ongoing between PETL and the IEC. This component will include a
                         technical assistance sub-component to develop awareness campaigns to address the culture of non-
                         payment for electricity services in targeted populations, e.g. refugee camps. The outcome of this
                         component is to increase transparency and accountability of the electricity payment cycle in order to
                         increase payments for electricity service.

                         Component 2: Reduction of Distribution Losses and Power Supply Consolidation (US$ 4.5 m).
                         Network losses, technical and non-technical, are above 20% and higher than regional benchmarks.
                         The second component will focus on reducing non-technical losses, i.e. thefts, and increasing bill
                         collections by deploying smart meters and related Advanced Metering Infrastructure as well as
                         monitoring meters to selected DISCOs. The introduction of smart metering along with data tracking
                         software and mobile applications would also enable households and other customers to have greater
                         control over their consumption. This component will include a second sub-component to finance
                           materials, tools and civil works for the installation of the out-going feeders (purchased with the
                           support of Norway Cooperation) of the new Jenin and Nablus 161/33 kV substations (financed by the
                           European Investment Bank). This sub-component would contribute to the Palestinian power supply
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consolidation process while reducing technical losses.

                           Component 3: Technical assistance to PETL and PERC (US$1.0m). This component will provide
                           technical assistance to PETL to enhance its technical expertise for the completion of the contractual
                           arrangements related to the planned200 MW gas-fired power plant. PETL is expected to purchase
                           the entire output of the Jenin power plant under a 23-year power purchase agreement. The
                           component will also provide initial technical assistance to the nascent Palestinian petroleum sector
                           governance, including conducting an institutional assessment of PENRA?s ability to regulate the
                           petroleum sector and an institutional staffing plan. Legal and regulatory support in managing the
                           petroleum sector may be considered following the completion of the Energy Sector Review update,
                           planned for mid-FY16.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project activities will be conducted entirely in selected municipalities of the West Bank and
                           Gaza. The targeted municipalities for the installation of smart meters, pilot roof top solar panels will
                           be identified further by project appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           PENRA has attained adequate knowledge for environmental and social management (ESM) through
                           the ongoing Bank operations of EUMP and GENRP projects. However, there is a need for
                           consolidating this capacity within PENRA and building in-house capacity/staffing for ESM. In the
                           past operations PENRA relied on a consultant for preparing the safeguards instruments and
                           monitoring the compliance on safeguards. For this operation, PENRA will be requested to assign
                           environmental and social safeguards staff to manage the safeguards aspects of the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU05)
                           Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (GEN05)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            Component 2 involves the purchase of materials,
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       tools, and civil works for the installation of the out-
                                                                            going feeders (purchased with the support of Norway
                                                                            Cooperation) of the new Jenin and Nablus 161/33 kV
                                                                            substations. The feeders will be overhead lines
                                                                            expected along existing right-of-way of roads to
                                                                            supply power to nearby villages and urban areas. The
                                                                            Environmental risk of this component is moderate
                                                                            and localized and the. Project environmental
                                                                            category is B. Since the routing of the lines is not yet
                                                                            fully identified, the proper OP 4.01 instrument to be
                                                                            used is an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 TBD
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                         The installations and construction works are
                                                                                                                        expected in urbanized areas and no Natural Habitat is
                                                                                                                        expected to be impacted by project activities.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 TBD
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                TBD                        As the exact routing and land requirements for the
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                construction of feeder lines for component 2 are
                                                                                                                        currently unknown, we cannot determine if the Bank
                                                                                                                        Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12, will be
                                                                                                                        triggered. In other words, it is unclear whether the
                                                                                                                        construction of the feeder lines will involve
                                                                                                                        relocation of households, temporary or permanent
                                                                                                                        land take, impacts on livelihoods, including those
                                                                                                                        that may occur through restriction of access to
                                                                                                                        resources. If the exact routing and land requirements
                                                                                                                        for the feeder lines are determined before appraisal, a
                                                                                                                        RAP will be prepared. If not, but there is still a
                                                                                                                        possibility of land acquisition/involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement, then an RPF will be prepared prior to
                                                                                                                        appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Feb-2017
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF will be conducted, reviewed, and disclosed in January, 2017.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Roger Coma Cunill
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                                                                                          Date: 27-Jan-2017




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Paul Baringanire (PMGR)   Date: 27-Jan-2017
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
