                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA21285
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 29-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               30-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          West Bank and Gaza            Project ID:              P148600
    Project Name:                     West Bank and Gaza Electricity Sector Performance Improvement Project
                                      (P148600)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Roger Coma Cunill
    Estimated Appraisal               20-Mar-2017                   Estimated Board          20-Jul-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GEE05                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                        Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           8.00                           Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    State and Peace Building Fund                                                                                 2.00
    Special Financing                                                                                             6.00
    Total                                                                                                         8.00
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective is to enhance the energy sector’s institutional capacity, improve efficiency
    of the distribution system in targeted areas, and pilot a new business model for solar energy service delivery in
    Gaza.
    3. Project Description
    The proposed project proposes to improve the efficiency of the Palestinian electricity sector, reduce system
    losses and pilot solar energy in support of energy security goals. These objectives will be achieved through
    several interventions along the Palestinian energy supply chain, from generation, distribution, transmission to
    regulation.

    Component 1 - Strengthening the capacity of Palestinian electricity sector institutions: PETL and PERC (US$

                                                     Page 1 of 7
2.5 million):

This component focuses on the sustainability and performance of the Palestinian Electricity Transmission
Company Ltd (PETL) and the Palestinian Electricity Regulatory Council (PERC). It would reinforce PETL and
PERC operational performance through the following interventions:

(i) Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthen the Capacity of Palestinian Electricity Transmission Company Ltd - PETL
(US$ 1.8 million):
This entails investments to support the technical, operational and legal functions of PETL. It would strengthen
PETL capacity as the single buyer of electricity from suppliers (i.e. IEC, future IPPs, Egypt, Jordan) and as
seller of electricity to Palestinian Distribution companies. Key investments include:

• Testing and commissioning equipment, and metering test bench for PETL;
• Supply of vehicles and fault locator for the PMU & PETL;
• Consultant to support PPA negotiations.

(ii) Sub-Component 1.2: Palestinian Electricity Regulatory Council - PERC (US$ 0.7 million):
This sub-component supports monitoring, evaluation, and financial audit functions of PERC. It provides funding
to monitor the quality of service of DISCOs, tracking key performance indicators, auditing financial statements,
and reviewing the use of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. This sub-component will also support
PERC in establishing the bulk-supply tariff at the distribution level and retail once the Power Purchase
Agreement between IEC and PETL has been negotiated.


Component 2 - Improving the operational performance of Palestinian Electricity Distribution Companies
(DISCOs) (US$ 2.8 million):

This component focuses on the sustained improvement of operational performance of the five DISCOs in the
West Bank. It includes a “Revenue Protection Program” (RPP) with improved metering and billing systems. The
RPP reduces commercial losses by the installation of smart meters targeting high end costumers and through
investments to improve Management Information Systems (MIS). A US$ 1 million complementary Energy
Sector Programmatic Technical Assistance (P162545) will finance a diagnostic of the existing meters in the
utilities’ customers and put forward adequate technical specifications and an implementation action plan.

(i) Sub-component 2.1: Revenue Protection Program (US$ 1.4 million):
The RPP will provide smart meters to improve billing and collection from industrial and commercial customers
that represent the majority of the electricity sales. The RPP will also include Advanced Metering Infrastructure
(AMI) comprising communication devices, software (MDMS) and a Metering Control Center (MCC). The
functionalities of the AMI and Control Center include: revenue protection (detection of theft, frauds), automatic
meter reading, remote disconnection/reconnection, and load control and outage detection.

The RPP implementation will consist of the following:

HEPCO and JDECO: For HEPCO, the commercial and industrial sectors represent the “high value” segment
since they make up only 28.2percent of customers but represent 59 percent of its total electricity sales. By
installing an additional 5,449 smart-meters , 100 percent of energy consumed by this segment will be metered
and billed. In JDECO, all customers in the industrial segment will benefit from the program. These customers
are 0.6% of the company’s total number of customers but represent over 17% of its revenues. The program will
also include several dozen “whole-sale” meters at the entrance of refugee camps to improve the transparency
and data available on the impact of refugee camps on the commercial losses of distribution companies in the


                                                Page 2 of 7
West Bank.

(ii) Sub-component 2.2: Management Information Systems (US$ 1.4 million from World Bank):
This component focuses on providing state-of-the-art tools to Palestinian’s DISCOS that will enable improving
key companies’ commercial and operational performances. The investment entails incorporating Management
Information Systems (MIS) at JDECO, NEDCO and HEPCO that have the following features:

a) Commercial Management System (CMS) to support the regular commercial cycle (meter reading, billing,
collection, disconnection/reconnection);
b) Incident Management System (IMS) for effective attention of customer’s complaints due to outages and other
issues in electricity supply and fast service restoration;

A US$ 1 million Energy Sector Programmatic Technical Assistance (P162545) will finance a study to assess a
detailed assessment on existing software gaps in the selected DISCOs and draft bidding documents to optimize
costs.

Component 3 - Improving energy security in Gaza with solar energy (US$ 2 million):

This component supports the design and implementation of a pilot business model for rooftop solar energy in
Gaza. The pilot aims to reduce the barrier to entry for all income levels, including the poor, thereby creating a
model that can be easily replicated and rapidly scaled up. Due to limited funding, this pilot will not significantly
change Gaza’s energy crisis on its own. However, in the long terms, the benefits of scaling up rooftop solar will
include: i) increased energy security in case of conflict, ii) longer hours of available power supply, and iii)
cleaner and cheaper alternative to stand-by generators.

The pilot will aim to install 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 KWp rooftop solar systems on residential rooftops for a total of
1MW installed capacity. Qualified consumers who receive the rooftop solar systems will pay back the cost in
monthly installments until the system is paid off. The monthly payments will then return to a revolving fund that
will be used to install more solar systems. If the existing seed fund for the model is leveraged through additional
funds from donors, private/commercial sectors and consumers themselves, then more capacity can be installed
and a greater number of consumers reached by the program.

The targeting of participants will adopt a two-pronged approach to ensure beneficiaries from the entire income
spectrum can participate. The pay-back scheme will be designed so that the top 80% of the population can
afford the monthly payments without the need for subsidies. The bottom 20%, which can be targeted through the
World Bank’s existing Cash Transfer Program (CTP), will receive relevant subsidies to ensure they are also able
to participate in the program. This two-pronged approach, with 80% non-subsidized, and 20% partially
subsidized solar systems, strikes a good balance between ensuring that the poor are included in the program and
the revolving fund continues to revolve, thereby creating a sustainable business model that can be adopted by
the private sector.

To reward payment loyalty, only consumers with good payment records will be eligible to participate in the
program. The program will initially be led by the public sector (PENRA and GEDCO) to improve its visibility
and control of the energy sector, but will be transferred to the private sector in subsequent phases once the pilot
has been proven successful. The solar system installations will be outsourced to private contractors and the
management of the revolving fund will be under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance or through a
private local bank. To ensure product sustainability, contractors will be required to provide a 2-3 year warrantee
on parts and installation and have a permanent presence in Gaza so that consumers can easily reach them in case
of any problems.



                                                  Page 3 of 7
Component 4: Technical Assistance, Capacity Building and Project Management (US$ 0.7 million): This
component will be used to strengthen the capacity of PENRA and support staffing the Project Management Unit
(PMU) for two years. The PMU is located at PENRA’s offices in Ramallah. The PMU staff will be integrated in
PENRA’s payroll after two years to ensure the Project’s sustainability.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Project activities will target electricity distribution companies spanning the entire geographical area of West
Bank and Gaza.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Helen Z. Shahriari( GSU05 )
 Zeyad Abu-Hassanein( GEN05 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             This project is classified as category “B” according
                                                               to the World Bank Policy OP 4.01. Project
                                                               financing will include interventions for installation
                                                               of rooftop PV solar panels, smart meters, equipment
                                                               for operation of sub-stations, and other meters
                                                               installed on the networks. The environmental
                                                               impacts of those interventions are limited,
                                                               localized, and easily mitigated. Since the exact
                                                               locations of sub-projects will be fully determined
                                                               during project implementation, an Environmental
                                                               and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has
                                                               been prepared and consulted by the client, approved
                                                               by the Bank, and disclosed both locally and on the
                                                               Bank Infoshop before appraisal date on March 12,
                                                               2017.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No              The installations and construction works are
                                                               expected in urbanized areas and no natural habitat is
                                                               expected to be impacted by project activities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No              The installations and construction works are
                                                               expected in urbanized areas and no forests is
                                                               expected to be impacted by project activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09                        No              N/A
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No              no physical cultural resources are expected to be
                                                               affected by project activities
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No              N/A
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No              The project does not trigger the World Bank
                                                               Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12). The only civil
                                                               works is limited to installation of the solar panels
                                                               on the roof tops of the existing residential units in
                                                               Gaza on a pilot bases. Under component 3, the
                                                               business model for rooftop solar energy in Gaza.

                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                                                   Will be piloted. The pilot aims to reduce the barrier
                                                                   to entry for all income levels, including the poor.
                                                                   Although the OP 4.12 is not triggered the
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                   (ESMF) has been prepared and the PIU
                                                                   environmental safeguards officers will screen all the
                                                                   sub-projects for social and environmental
                                                                   compliance.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No              N/A
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   N/A
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              N/A
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Project financing will include interventions for installation of rooftop PV solar modules in Gaza, smart meters,
    equipment for operation of sub-stations, and other meters installed on the networks. for the distribution
    companies in West Bank The environmental impacts of those interventions are limited, localized, and easily
    mitigated. The project triggers OP 4.01 on environmental assessment and the project is classified as category
    "B" requiring partial assessment. Since the exact locations of sub-projects will be fully determined during
    project implementation, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and
    consulted by the client, approved by the Bank, and disclosed both locally and on the Bank Infoshop by March
    11, 2017. The ESMF identified the potential negative impacts of the investments during construction and
    operation, e.g., noise, dust, interruption of services, health and safety risks, waste disposal, among others. It
    includes proposed measures to mitigate for the potential risks. It also include screening methodology for sub-
    projects against safeguards policies, a monitoring plan and implementation arrangements of the ESMF, as well
    any capacity building needs.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    Replacement of spare parts and batteries for the solar modules is expected once every three years. The ESMF
    stipulates that disposal of batteries and spare parts will be conducted in an environmentally sound manner to a
    licenced facility by the Palestinian Environmental Quality Authority.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    N/A
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    A qualified environmental officer at PENRA/PIU will be hired, he will be responsible for conducting sub-
    projects screening, identifying environmental and social risks, liaison with the Environment Quality Authority
    as needed, and monitoring compliance of beneficiary distribution companies and their sub-contractors with the
    provisions of the ESMF.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                     Page 5 of 7
   The Key stakeholder is the Palestinian Energy Authority (PENRA), direct beneficiaries from the project are the
   electricity distribution companies in West Bank and Gaza. In addition, the implementation of the ESMF will be
   ensured in close coordination with the Palestinian Environmental Quality Authority. Consultations with those
   key stakeholders on the ESMF was conducted by the PIU at PENRA late February 2017. Further consultations
   on follow-up ESIA/ESMF will be further conducted by the client and distribution companies with affected
   people during project implementation. The ESMF will be disclosed locally at PENRA website (both in Arabic
   and English) and at the Bank infoshop.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           19-Mar-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        20-Mar-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    West Bank and Gaza                                                          19-Mar-2017
 Comments: ESMF disclosed in Penra premises in Ramallah.
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::
 N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in

                                                  Page 6 of 7
the project legal documents?




III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):           Name:Roger Coma Cunill
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Nina Chee (SA)          Date: 30-Mar-2017
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Erik Magnus Fernstrom   Date: 30-Mar-2017
                               (PMGR)




                                       Page 7 of 7
