Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1487 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P074594 
Project Name: Municipal Management and Service Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader: Stephen George Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (S);Social safety 
nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
DENMARK: DANISH INTL. DEV. ASSISTANCE (DANIDA) 10.00 
 SPECIAL 
FINANCING 
15.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to (i) address the backlog of damaged and/or neglected municipal infrastructure 
resulting from over 4 years of conflict and to assist in restoring municipal service delivery to 
meet new service standards that are realistic and monitorable; (ii) strengthen the capacity of 
national-level institutions responsible for supporting or monitoring local government 
performance; (iii) restore financial stability to the LG sector by arresting the spiraling growth of 
LG arrears, and increase upward/downward accountability and transparency in LG investment 
planning and financial disclosure through standardization of rules, procedures and systems; and 
(iv) strengthen the local government physical planning capacity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Bank and PA agreed on an initial financing requirement of US$25 million, of which US$15 
million would be allocated from IDA Trust Fund resources, complemented by bilateral financing 
already committed by the Danish Government through a Bank-administered Trust Fund in the 
amount of US$10 million for LG capacity building in financial accounting/management, urban 
Page  2
planning and institutional development.  In parallel, AFD has just recently launched its 
Municipal Development Project. that targets specific cities, and KFW is contemplating 
confinancing to the sector through the proposed Municipal Fund, among other donor initiatives. 
It was agreed that the Bank-financed operation would establish the overall sector framework in 
areas requiring critical attention in line with MOLG?s Local Government Reform Action Plan.  
To achieve the proposed development objectives, it was agreed that MMSDP would have three 
main components as follows:  
 
Component 1:  Institutional and Policy Framework Development at the National Level 
(Estimated at US$2 million).  This component would aim at better rationalizing the 
intergovernmental administrative and fiscal system and architecture of WB&G by ensuring the 
establishment of appropriate rules for urban planning, LG budgeting and accounting, further 
development of the transfer formula to address horizontal and vertical imbalances in resource 
allocation, and by conducting relevant analyses necessary for central agencies to make informed 
decisions about revenue adequacy and assignment authorities, and expenditure management.  
Specifically, this component would assist MOLG in establishing a Policy Unit (PU) staffed with 
a
Fiscal Economist, Municipal Financial Management Specialist, an Urban Planner/Physical 
Planning Specialist, and an Institutional Development Specialist among others needed to build 
in-house capacity to review and analyze relevant policy issues and LG performance and advise 
key decision makers of necessary actions where warranted.  
 
The PU would oversee the production and delivery of the following: (i) stardardized LG 
accounting and financial management guidelines, including auditing arrangements, which would 
be produced as a manual and distributed to all LGUs, (ii) standardized LG Budget manual and 
guidelines with annual reporting formats (iii) provision of training on asset management and 
maintenance of fixed asset registries, and (iv) strengthening of MOLG capacity to efficiently 
review and document LG budgetary reporting and planning. The PU would also be responsible 
for assisting in maintaining the Municipal Finance Database and training MOLG staff in 
conducting relevant analyses of data against standard ratios/benchmarks to monitor overall sector 
performance.  Finally, the PU would assist in developing a framework for urban planning and 
explore more efficient options for delivering services and undertaking joint planning through 
Joint Service Councils (JSC) wherever the pooling of resources and other efficiency gains can be 
appreciated .  
 
Component 2:  Municipal Infrastructure & Services Investment Financing (Estimated at 
US$10.5 million).  This component would provide (i) follow up support in administering the 
Municipal Fund following its establishment based on the recommendations of the Management 
Agent financed under EMSRP and (ii) financing through performance-based grants to 
municipalities based on prioritized investment needs.  The main investment needs identified at 
this time would include rehabilitation and maintenance of priority infrastructure and support to 
restore other essential municipal services.  Identification of priority investment needs would be 
framed around the Bank's earlier Infrastructure Assessment Study (December 2004), but would 
reinforce the process initiated under EMSRP of using participatory planning processes at the 
local level.  Investments would likely include internal and access roads, water and sanitation 
services, and storm water drainage networks, schools, health centers and community centers, as 
well as other municipal assets that would generate municipal revenue streams, including bus/taxi 
Page  3
terminals, vegetable markets, parking and other rental facilities, etc.  Project implementation 
would be carried out by the participating municipalities and village councils.  The Municipal 
Fund or the EMSRP Project Coordination Unit (PCU) would oversee and support 
implementation in compliance with project design, depending on whether the MF is established 
by the time MMSDP is appraised.  Performance-based criteria to be considered in order to access 
grants could include:  preparation of an infrastructure asset inventory and condition assessment, 
preparation of a 3 year investment plan, achievement of mutually-agreed local revenue collection 
targets, timely submission and compliance with agreed reporting obligations, performance of an 
annual audit that is published and accessible in the public domain.  
 
Component 3:  Local Government Capacity Building (Estimated at US$2.5 million).  This 
component would be designed to broadly address the needs of the Local Government sector 
through a range of different interventions, but focusing mainly on three subcomponent areas, 
including:  (i) strengthening local financial management capacity and accountability; (ii) 
introducing participatory budgeting on a pilot basis; and (iii) improving urban planning capacity., 
including land use planning, building licensing and regulation.  With the aim of reinforcing each 
of the different subcomponents, a national LG training program, possibly through an existing 
national training center, would be supported under this component aimed at developing 
specialized training programs and training materials in financial management, strategic planning, 
physical planning, accountability and reporting, service delivery, among other areas.  The 
training would be oriented towards, first, introducing new systems, standards and procedures as 
relevant, and, second, to upgrade and develop skills of municipal staff in the specific areas 
addressed under this component.  This training component would reinforce MMSDP 
development objectives, while aiming to institutionalize training as a means of increasing local 
government capacity in specific areas.  A particular focus of this component would be to provide 
technical assistance and training to LGs as needed in order to become compliant or eligible for 
MDF funding, based on agreed reform actions/targets.  
 
Subcomponent (1):  Local Financial Management Capacity and Accountability.  This 
subcomponent would address squarely some of the weaknesses in LG accounting and financial 
management practices detected through the Special Purpose Audit carried out under EMSRP. It 
would develop the functional and technical design of the Municipal Financial Management 
Information System (MFMIS) and automated systems to be established through the Bank-
administered Danish Confinancing Trust Fund.  
 
Subcomponent (2):  Participatory Budgeting.  Building on the consultative practices encouraged 
under EMSRP and the principle of public disclosure of LG budgets, this subcomponent would 
take participatory budgetary planning to a new level by working first with selected municipalities 
on a pilot basis to encourage the active engagement of communities in the formulation of 
multiyear capital investment plans.  Learning gained from this experience could be 
mainstreamed as a regular feature of LG budgeting practice.  
 
Subcomponent (3):  Urban Planning.  The focus on urban planning would respond directly to 
one of the key reform areas identified in MOLG's Local Government Sector Reform Action Plan.  
In anticipation of changing political circumstances, coupled with overcrowded and poorly 
planned urban space, this subcomponent would aim to establish guidelines for urban planning in 
Page  4
both its physical/spatial and socioeconomic dimensions.  It would support a number of selected 
pilot urban planning exercises aimed at adapting and testing new regulatory guidelines, 
strengthen local capacities to develop and implement urban plans, and provide training to MOLG 
and LG officials necessary to strengthen their oversight capacity.  
 
Pursuant to a confirmation of the preliminary project development objectives and components 
of the proposed MMSDP, the Bank team is preparing a schedule to be agreed with the 
Government outlining the next steps for project preparation.  It is expected that the next mission 
would take place by mid-May with the aim of confirming and further developing the project's 
main component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project is planned to be implemented in the Palestinian-controlled areas of West Bank and 
the Gaza Strip.   
 
E.  Borro
wer’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Palestinian Authority institutional capacity to monitor safeguard policies is marginal, but is 
complemented by some of the best consultant environmental monitoring capacity in the Middle 
East. As with prior projects, it is envisaged that EMP preparation and monitoring/updating would 
be outsourced to private sector consultants.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (MNSRE) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
limited number of micro and small works sub-projects are expected to be financed under 
the Project, depending on demand, similar to those implemented under previous projects in 
WB&G such as the Municipal Infrastructure Development Projects I & II and Emergency 
Municipal Service Rehabilitation Project.  Projects will be identified on a demand-driven basis 
against a positive list of eligible investments. Given that most of the likely investment activities 
would support rehabilitation and improvements to the existing infrastructure and service delivery 
with a value that will not likely exceed US$200,000 and would not require land acquisition or 
resettlement, the Project has been placed in environmental screening Category B in accordance 
with WB Operational Policy 4.01 and requires preparation and implementation of an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).  Subprojects will be screened for environmental issues 
in accordance with the EMP prepared by the client prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Cultural property is not expected to be impacted by the Project and measures would be taken 
to avoid any potential negative impacts in the EMP.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/30/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Preparation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be launched during the May 
preparation mission and completed prior to appraisal by consultants familiar with and 
experienced in preparing and monitoring EMPs in West Bank and Gaza.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen George Karam 
10/25/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
10/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
10/26/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
