                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC18460

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                          Project ID:      P160404
                            Project Name:        CEMLA Grant Agreement (II) - DMF II
                            Team Leader(s):      Zeinab Partow
                            Estimated Date       15-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GMF13                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.245579                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Debt Management Facility for LICs                                                        0.245579
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen capacity of DMF-eligible countries to manage debts effectively, so as to enable
                           governments to finance their operations prudently with appropriate cost-risk mix to contribute to
                           macro-economic stability and ensure sustainable debt levels over the long term.
                           C. Project Description
                           The program builds on the activities and guiding principles DMF Program. This project envisages
                           provision of grants to CEMLA (Public Debt Management Program) to work on the following
                           activities jointly with World Bank teams:
                           a) Training of government officials in the application of the Debt Management Performance
                           Assessment (DeMPA) tool at the national and subnational levels. This benchmarks country debt
                           management performance using the Bank's DeMPA tool.
                           b) Training of government officials in Debt Sustainability Assessments.
                           b) Design of Debt Management Reform Plans. This provides detailed and sequenced country-owned
                           capacity building project plans that aim to alleviate the weaknesses identified and analyzed by the
                           DeMPA or through other assessments. These plans detail expected outputs and outcomes, actions,
                           sequencing and milestones and provide an estimate of budget and resources required to implement
                           the respective plans.
                           c) Assistance in developing Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) development. This
                           provides technical assistance (TA) on the joint Bank-IMF MTDS framework for formulating and
                           implementing a debt management strategy for the medium term.
                           d) Assistance in domestic debt market development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           e) Organization of regional training events

                           While carrying out these activities, the recipient may be asked to carry out the following tasks as
                           determined within the scope of the specific mission or training program.

                            (a) providing country background information on the debt management situation in eligible member
                           countries before specific missions, including information on fiscal policy, monetary policy and legal
                           framework related to debt management, as well as related technical assistance programs if available;
                           (b) drafting summaries of country strengths and weaknesses with respect to debt management, based
                           on the above-identified background information before particular missions;
                           (c) participating in pre-mission activities, which will entail data aggregation, teaching useful
                           functions and decrying the cost-risk of the existing debt portfolio for MTDS missions and trainings;
                           (d) preparing sections of the write-up of the report during specific missions;
                           (e) providing inputs on appropriate sections for wrap-up presentations during specific missions;
                           (f) incorporating peer review comments in the report and providing additional information after
                           missions; and
                           (g) participating in training events related to the DMF's work program.Â
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Zeinab Partow
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 04-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Abha Prasad (PMGR)                                           Date: 04-Aug-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
