Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1113 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 1, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P070063 
Project Name: Agricultural Development 
Support Program 
Co-Task Team Leaders: Tijan M. Sallah 
and Paavo Eliste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS1 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment 
Credit 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research 
(40%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(30%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P)  
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: John Boyle (Environment), Kristine 
Schwebach (Social) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 30 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
 
The project development objective is to improve the productivity of smallholder agriculture 
production systems in a sustainable manner, thereby contributing to improvements in food security 
and incomes.  The aim of the project is to create the conditions for smallholders to become more 
market-oriented through improving access to information, technology, infrastructure, and markets 
through the following investment pillars:  (a) investments to support technological change to reduce 
transaction costs and increase production; and (b) expansion of rural infrastructure to reduce 
transaction costs; (c) and integration of smallholders into existing marketing chains.
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
Total IDA 
Component 
Indicative cost 
(US$) % 
Indicative cost 
(US$) % 
1. Policy Analysis and Institutional Support Framework Facilitation
1.3 3.6 1.0 75.5 
2. Support to Extension Services and to Farmer Empowerment 
9.5 
26.1 
8.0 
84.2 
3. Development of Agricultural Infrastructure 
18.3 
50.1 
13.2 
71.9 
Page  2
4. Support to the Agricultural Research System 
5.1 
14 
5.0 
98.1 
5. Project Management and Coordination 
2.3 
6.3 
2.2 
96.2 
36.6 100 29.4 80.4 
Component 1: Policy Analysis and Institutional Framework Facilitation.  
The objective of this 
component is to establish effective policy analysis capacity in MACO and to strengthen coordination 
between MACO and stakeholders in the sector at national and local levels.  The component includes 
activities organized in two sub-
components: (a) Support to MACO’s policy analysis function and (b) 
Support for National and District Level institutional structures. Activities comprise the strengthening 
of the following core areas of MACO: (i) policy analysis and agricultural statistics (maintenance and 
operation of an information databank and coordination of the National Early Warning System, and 
monthly and annual statistical publications); (ii) agricultural land information management; (iii) 
legislation and policy review (review and updating of legislative acts designation of new acts); (iv) 
management information system and monitoring and evaluation for improved MIS and M&E 
functions at national and district levels; (v) capacity building of district and local institutions; (vi) 
local institutions operational support; and (vii) facilitation of national level stakeholder consultative 
forum   via ACF.   
 
Component 2: Support for Extension Services and Farmer Empowerment.  
The objective of this 
component is to provide farmers with access to demand-led extension services and technology 
transfers through increasingly non-public service providers.  Currently the effective extension 
activities to farmers are those provided to a limited number of contract farming schemes or through 
export commodity organizations along the line of rail and to small-scale farmers.  The project would 
strengthen and consolidate the existing service provision arrangements areas that would lead to the 
expansion of effective and client-oriented extension systems among the majority of small scale 
farmers that are not covered by any support. The project will support other innovative arrangements 
such as large commercial farmers assisting smallholder farmers in extension and marketing through 
matching grant scheme to cover the cost of these. The public extension workers and entities in these 
areas would act as a launching vehicle to support farmer empowerment processes while at the same 
time project actions would be to enhancing the capacity of non-public and private players, gradually 
eliciting a more sustainable system.  The component has three sub-components:  (i) Reorientation 
and facilitation of public extension Services; (ii) Farmer capacity building; and (iii) Promotion of 
service provision partnerships.  The main activities include training, housing and transport facilities 
to the concerned camps and blocks officers; training, means for Farmer Field Schools (FFS) 
operations and resources to strengthen farmer organizations and; resources to strengthen capacity and 
use services of non-public/private players.     
 
Component 3: Agricultural Infrastructure Development.  
The objective of this component is the 
development of productive and social infrastructure through farmer-driven and community led 
processes.  The project will support infrastructure development which would facilitate the provision 
of agricultural inputs and outputs or which would increase production and productivity.  Typical 
categories of infrastructure eligible for support under the project would include: (i) social (full or 
partial rehabilitation of tertiary feeder roads from farm to market, water supply and sanitation 
systems, animal health - cattle dips, spray races, and crushes); (ii) marketing (communal structures 
which facilitate marketing, such as warehouses, packing sheds, and described more generally as 
multi-purpose buildings); (iii) community-level production-type infrastructure (small dams and 
weirs, irrigation works, fish ponds and livestock housing); and (iv) private productive sub-projects 
(individual irrigation systems, fishponds, and livestock housing).   The component includes activities 
Page  3
organized in four sub-components: (a) preparation and appraisal of sub-projects; (b) implementation; 
(c) supervision, monitoring and evaluation and; (d) capacity building. 
 
Component 4: Support to the Agricultural Research System.
 
The objective of this component is 
to establish an agricultural research system responsive to farmer demands through a competitive 
grants funding system, strengthened public research, and an effective consultative process.  The 
project would establish a competitive grant funding mechanism for agricultural research that 
progressively becomes capable of attracting donor and private sector financial attention for continued 
functioning, which is expected to become the main system for funding agricultural knowledge 
generation.  It will establish a national sustainable system for high quality and client-oriented 
research work, which takes the farming systems perspective of resource-poor smallholders into 
account and focuses on farmers who want to engage in ‘farming as a business’.  Activities to be 
funded by the project under this component are clustered in three sub-components namely, (i) 
Competitive Agricultural Research Fund; (ii) Support to Core Research functions and; (iii) Support 
to Institutional Reform of Agricultural Research. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination.  
The project will make resources available 
for the establishment and operation of a Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU would be an 
autonomous body organized under the implementing agency, MACO and would be operational for 
the entire project duration.  Support will be provided also for the DACO offices in sixteen 
participating districts, who are attached to the PMU for the management of project activities at 
district levels.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be implemented in sixteen districts in North Western, Copperbelt, Western and 
Lusaka Provinces.  However, the exact locations and likely impacts of project’s activities will be 
only known during project implementation.
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
The Borrower has limited safeguards policies capacity, but this will be supplemented during 
preparation with the hiring of local consultants to carry out the safeguards work as necessary.  The 
project will
 further assess during project preparation the Borrower’s current capacity and identify 
measures to strengthen it.  It will also outline institutional arrangements, including the roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholder groups, to implement and monitor environmental and social 
mitigation measures, and make appropriate recommendations.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Project-related activities may impact the natural environment.  The requisite 
safeguards instrument which will be prepared by the Borrower will be reviewed 
and approved by ASPEN and disclosed in-
country and at Bank’s Infoshop, prior 
Page  4
to Appraisal. 
[] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
 
[x] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
It is expected that the project investments in demand driven productive 
infrastructure (dip tanks, small-scale irrigation, storage sheds, etc.) and extension 
services would result in intensification and diversification and may increase use 
of pesticides.  For this reasons, a pest management framework may need to be 
prepared. 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The planned construction of community driven social and productive 
infrastructures has triggered and Resettlement Policy Framework will need to be 
created. 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[TBD] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
The possible construction of small dams or weirs may trigger the policy 
requirements.   
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[TBD] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
The possible water supply and sanitations, and irrigation investments may trigger 
policy requirements to notify other riparian.  
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   June 30, 2005. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
The safeguards responsibility for the project will be transferred to the TT and Sector Manager.    
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
Environmental and Social Management Framework, and the Resettlement Policy Framework 
will be launched by February 28, 2005 and completed by June 15, 2005.  These documents will 
be prepared and disclosed prior to project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Co-Task Team Leaders: 
Names    Tijan M. Sallah 
 
Paavo Eliste 
Date  
10/29/04 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name      Tom Walton 
Date 
10/29/04 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name      Richard Scobey 
Date 
10/29/04 
Comments 
