Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1662 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/07/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P096131 
Project Name: Zambia Malaria Booster Project 
Task Team Leader: Muhammad Ali Pate 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 29, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 4, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Child health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to quality and effective malaria 
prevention and treatment interventions by 25 percent.  The overall objective of the Zambia 
national malaria control program is to reduce all-cause child mortality by 15%, which is 
consistent with a 60% decrease in overall malaria mortality, and malaria morbidity by 60% in the 
next 4 years by expanding rapidly the coverage and utilization of effective prevention and 
treatment interventions.  The project's development objective is directly aligned with the 
priorities and objectives set out in the 2005-2010 Zambia Roll Back Malaria Strategic Plan.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The key elements of the national malaria program as articulated in the strategic plan 2006-2011 
are: (i) integrated vector management through expanding coverage of ITN and Indoor Residual 
Spraying interventions; (ii) prompt and effective case management, including Intermittent 
Presumptive Treatment of malaria in pregnancy, and improved malaria diagnosis, referral and 
treatment; (iii) multi-sectoral approach and community response; and (iv) program management, 
human resource development and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Page  2
The proposed project will focus on expanding malaria control interventions coverage through 
the following: district basket funding to district health management teams, support for human 
resource capacity, filling gaps in procurement of malaria commodities, community based 
response to malaria prevention and treatment, and strengthening the national malaria control 
centre to coordinate multi-sector efforts, monitoring and evaluation, and support for operational 
research.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All 72 districts of Zambia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Zambian Ministry of Health has good capacity for medical waste management and 
management of DDT.  The current ZANARA AIDS MAP program has had a successful medical 
waste management component. The same highly qualified and effective team will perform the 
medical waste management update for the Booster program and the Vector Management 
Program. Zambia's DDT program was recently evaluated by WHO and given a high rating.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTS2) 
Ms Helen Mbao-Chilupe (AFTH1) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Existing Health sector Medical Waste Management Plan will be updated to include malaria-
specific aspects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
WHO Assessment of Integrated Vector Management in Zambia will provide basis for project 
vector(pest)management plan.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/15/2005 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Medical Waste Management Plan: June to mid-August 2005  
 
Vector Management Plan: June to mid-August 2005  
 
Both documents will be disclosed in Zambia and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to Appraisal, 
August 29, 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Muhammad Ali Pate 
06/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
07/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
07/07/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
