Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1512 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/16/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P093611 
Project Name: Emergency Bridge Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regional integration (S);Natural disaster 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to reinstate key river crossings 
damaged by flooding during the last rainy seasons to original levels of service. This would 
contribute to:  
 
-
Reducing transport costs to the original levels;  
 
-
Securing the timely delivery of social services to the affected population by restoring 
accessibility to its original levels;  
 
-
Strengthening the RDA with support in implementing maintenance management systems.  
 
Project preparation will also focus on ensuring that activities planned under the Project will 
comply with and include safeguard, financial management and procurement requirements and 
will accommodate other cross-cutting issues like HIV/AIDS.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components  
Page  2
The affected river crossings (about 1 095 in number) are mostly found on rural and unpaved 
roads.  The identified damage includes reinstatement (repair, rehabilitation or replacement 
depending on the extent of the damage) of washed-away bridges and culverts and the repair and 
upgrading of ferry crossings. Proposals to upgrade several river crossings, in areas where 
seasonal flooding creates constant hardship for the local communities, are also included.  
 
The project components will be designed to support the objectives of the ROADSIP II-program 
and are listed as follows;  
 
(i) 
Technical Assistance to assess, design and supervise all works and to improve bridge and 
culvert management and maintenance.  
 
(ii) 
River Crossing Repair, Rehabilitation and Upgrading: Assistance with the reinstatement 
of original levels of service at the key river crossings damaged during the past rainy seasons and 
upgrading of other essential river crossings. It is foreseen that the bulk of repairs would 
constitute culvert rehabilitation. Several major bridges (longer than 30 m) are also assessed for 
support.  
 
The required activities will be defined during the Project preparation and appraisal.  
 
Implementation Arrangements  
 
The RDA is establishing a Bridge Management Division as part of its organogram. The RDA 
will manage implementation of the Project through this Division. The NRFA will assume the 
coordination function for this project as part of its responsibility to manage the road sector 
funding. In this way the project will be internalised in existing GRZ-agencies without the need 
for a separate implementation unit.  
 
Proposed IDA credit amounts:  
 
The scope of support under the project will be determined during appraisal with the completion 
of two assessment studies to be undertaken as part of project preparation. The provisional 
amount allocated for this support ranges between $20 and $25 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Throughout the Republic of Zambia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Management Unit (EMU), currently part of the Roads Department but slated 
for full transfer to the RDA, was involved from project inception and will carry out the 
environmental and social management oversight. The EMU staff already reviewed the TORs for 
the assessment studies, have been involved in project processing, and will ensure that the 
required environmental clearances and permits are obtained.   
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a simple project that will focus on the reinstatement of flood damaged river crossings 
only. Part of the activities will focus on urgent works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Several of the river crossings to be assessed are on tourist roads in National Parks. Should the 
initial assessments show that these should be included in the project, this Policy would apply.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
The relevance and applicability of this policy should be verified in the initial assessment.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/16/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Detailed assessment and prioritization studies will examine the level of works to be done as 
well as the levelof urgency.  As an integral part of the studies, an initial safeguards screening 
for all potential works will be undertaken and EMPs for the first year's works will be 
prepared.  These studies will be completed in August/September 2005, approved and 
disclosed prior to project appraisal.Subsequent rehabilitation works will be subject to 
safeguards review and clearance prior to the start of any physical works.  Oversight of these 
safeguards procedures will be carried out by the EMU in accordance with Bank policies and 
national EA laws and regulations.  
 
The existing Resettlement Policy Framework will be re-disclosed against this Project to the 
Infoshop and in the country.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
It has been agreed in the PCN review meeting to the transfer of this project to AFTTR and 
an official memorandum will be issued by the Regional Safeguards Coordinator.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Petrus Benjamin Gericke 
06/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/16/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
06/16/2005 
Comments:   
