AC451
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/26/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: ZAMBIA                                  Project ID: P071407
Global Supplemental ID: P074258
Project: Support to Economic Expansion and       Task Team Leader: Constantine Chikosi
Diversification (SEED)
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 5, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 29, 2004                    IDA Amount ($m): 24.00
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 4.00
Managing Unit: AFTPS                             Sector: Other industry (60%); Agro-industry (20%);
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)  Mining and other extractive (20%)
Status: Lending                                  Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);
Participation and civic engagement (S); Biodiversity
(S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The objective of Phase I is to create the conditions for increasing the contribution of the gemstone,
agribusiness and tourism sectors to GDP. This is to be achieved by improving sector specific policies and
regulatory frameworks and strengthening the capacity of Government agencies to implement them and
through selective public and private investments to stimulate growth. In addition, the project seeks to
reverse the degradation of biodiversity in the Kafue and Mosi-o-Tunya National Parks to underpin the
long-term sustainable development of the tourism sector. The project would thus help sustain the
Government's poverty alleviation efforts by raising rural incomes and generating increased employment
opportunities through improved international competitiveness.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
SEED consists of three components, described below. Program activities focus on export led economic
diversification and contain features aiming to incorporate rural communities in the supply chains to reduce
poverty, and building public-private partnerships:
Agribusiness
The objective of this component is to stimulate agribusiness-based production and export development,
through improved supply chains, higher productivity, encouragement of private investment in key
infrastructure and institutional capacity building. An important aspect of supply chain strengthening
consists of improved business linkages and capacity building within private participants. Support under the
project is subsumed within the broader matching-grant component described below. Complementary
Subcomponents are as follows: (1) preparation of PPPs, including preparation of investors' Information
Memorandum and accompanying bidding documents for the development of a dry-port; in this context the
PPP enabling framework will be reviewed and updated; (2) development and dissemination of a cotton
sector strategy; (3) institutional capacity building, especially in agencies involved in testing and
enhancement of agribusiness products safety; and (4) developing action plans to alleviate constraints to
agribusiness development together with related institutional capacity building.
Tourism and Protected Areas
Phase I of the tourism component is divided into three main areas: (a) policy and institutional support for



2
ISDS
METNR and its agencies; (b) Zambia's flagship destination, Livingstone and Victoria Falls; and (b)
biodiversity in the region, including Musi oa Tunya and Kafue National Parks.
Under Phase 1, the project description is as follows:
MTENR, the project would include funding of an adviser/ coordinator who would assist the Ministry
coordinate and implement the program. The adviser would also assist develop national programs such as
the public private dialogue, processing of the new framework law, setting a work program for
Inter-ministerial and Natural Resources Committees, building the tourism satellite account, and drafting an
ethics code for tourism. There would also be support for the NHCC and the Museums Board.
Livingstone and Victoria Falls. This element would have the following elements: (a) design and
implementation of the integrated development plan (IDP) to revitalize the tow and consolidate its position
as custodian of Victoria Falls and Musi oa Tunya National Park; (b) a minimum infrastructure platform,
including immediate implementation of: (i) the solid waste disposal and management system for
Livingstone; (ii) selected priority urban roads (including access to the industrial area where an EU-standard
abattoir is currently being built), sidewalks and surface drainage, street lighting in the town center; (iii)
rehabilitation of historic landmarks, including the museum, city hall, Mukuni Park, the magistrate's court,
the original railway houses, amongst the oldest in Livingstone; and (iv) installation of public conveniences.
When the IDP is completed, additional works are anticipated for immediate implementation, such as (v)
rehabilitation/ construction of the bus and taxi stations, the municipal market, a cultural center, and
historical buildings. (c) Enhanced dialogue on public private participation, strengthening of the private
sector apex organizations (TCZ and LTA) and forrnalization of relationships; (d) support to the Town
Council to develop a business plan and upgrade its engineering, planning and financial departments with
both capacity building and IT equipment; (e) support to encourage linkages between tourism and other
sectors, including building on successful handicrafts and cultural activities and improving access to the
Victoria Falls; (f) design and implementation of a theme for Livingstone/Victoria Falls which would bring
together the attraction features of the town and the splendid natural resources of the area; (g) studies to
support enhanced tourism activities (e.g. upgrading the railway museum); and (h) project implementation.
An essential pre-condition for Livingstone City Council to become an effective implementing agency, is to
resolve the issue of retrenchment - it is currently overstaffed and about 400 have been identified as
redundant; the Bank is addressing this issue fully and expects to include this component in the PSCAP
program.
Protected areas management. This sub-component consists of three areas of intervention (a) Support for
ZAWA capacity building including (i) Project administration, planning and coordination; (ii) Research,
Monitoring & evaluation; (iii) Human resources management and training; (iv) CBNRM coordination in
communal areas of protected area periphery; (v) Public awareness building; (b) Development of the
Mosi-o-Tunya National Park including (i) Park administration; (ii) Monitoring, mgt & rehabilitation of
critical habitat & species; (iii) Law enforcement; (iv) Infrastructure development & maintenance; (v)
Public-private partnership & business development; and (vi) CBNRM implementation; and (c)Development
of the Kafue National Park including (i) Park administration; (ii) Monitoring, mgt & rehabilitation of
critical habitat & species; (iii) Law enforcement; (iv) Infrastructure development & maintenance; (v)
Public-private partnership & business development; and (vi) CBNRM implementation in the two northem
GMAs
Gemstones
The Credit will finance technical assistance training materials and supplies as required to carry out the
activities listed below: (1) improve the gemstone mining policy and legal framework and foster increased



3
ISDS
investment and confidence m the sector by (a) reviewing tax provisions and mining regulations as
appropnate, (b) carrying out geological surveys to infornn mnvestors and the government of areas of
economic potential, and (2) strengthen the supply cham, by (a) strengthenmg a regional mines bureau to
administer the mining laws and regulations to optirnize the framework for minmg and (b) strengthenig the
operations of the gemstone exchange by improving the policy and legal friamework governmng its operations
and by providing technical assistance and trairung tn best practices, and (3) provide technical assistance to
strengthen gemstone producers' associations
Project Management
Beneficiary institutions will play an active role in project implementation However, a professional
management umt located in the Ministry of Finance, will be charged with implementation of all components
except for the Agribusmess component which will be sub-contracted to a specialized pnvate company, the
Protected Areas Sub-component which will be implemented by ZAWA and the Livingstone Development
Sub-component which will be implemented by the Livingstone City Council While partner organizations
and institutions have some capabilities in the complex activities supported by the project, strong
complementary implementation capacity is needed to ensure that project objectives are met The Credit will
thus finance a team of high calibre local professionals located at the PMU and consisting of a project
manager, financial and procurement specialists, program officer and international consultants In addition
to the salary of these short temn and long term project staff, the credit will finance operating costs
(including up to xxx vehicles) reference material and supplies as we]l as training for both project staff and
other stakeholders participatmg in the project The project wll also finance the contractor who will manage
the Agnbusiness component, short and long term consultants, equipment vehicles matenals and supplies for
ZAWA and the Livingstone City Council
The management of the matching-grant will be outsourced to a team of local and intemational consultants
and will be housed at the PMU This team will include at least a regionally recruited team leader, and
international expert providing short-term assistance over the life of the project (retainer contract of about
12 months), and one or two local professionals responsible for outreach with organizations outside Lusaka
The team will be responsible for disbursements, monitonng, evaluation and reporting Hand-holding of
beneficiaries and prelimmnary screenmg of applications will be undertaken by existing pnvate associations
and institutions, suitably strengthened through assistance provided under the project
I A 4 Project Location (Geographlic location, information about the key environmental and social
charactenstics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
cntical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas )
Project is located in the greater Livingstone area and includes the Mosi-o-Tunya and Kafue National Parks
With the exception of Imoshu village, the Parks are not inhabited
B. Checkl Environmental Classification: B (Parhal Assessment)
Comments This project has been classified as a B in light of its support for (i) construction and rehabilitation
of infrastructure in and around Livtngstone as well as in two national parks, (ui) the application of fertilizers in
four pilot/demonstration projects, and (iii) small and medium enterprises with the highest potential for
diversification
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on W for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief descnption)
Policy                                 Triggered



4
ISDS
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)         * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                 0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                  0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        * Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                            0 Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*      O Yes * No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. Ifinformation is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1 a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Potential safeguard issues are likely to result from (i) construction and rehabilitation activities which could
have negative impacts on the national parks and people living in or near these parks as well as on the urban
environment and its population, including potential resettlement issues related to refencing of some of the
game parks; (ii) infrastructure works in towns, such as rehabilitation of artery roads connecting
Livingstone to game parks; (iii) the use of fertilizer in the four agribusiness pilot/demonstration projects;
(iv) the future projects by small and medium enterprises; and (v) the existence of a dam just outside the
Kafue National Park.
II.D. Ib. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Potential cumulative impacts may include soil and water pollution aas well as loss of biodiversity due to
construction and rehabilitation activities, the use of fertilizers, and future operations of small and medium
enterprises.
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not Applicable
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment: Social and Environmental Assessment was carried out during project
preparation on the infrastructure rehabilitation works in Livignstone. The SEA evaluated the project's
potential environmental risks and impacts in its area of influence. No substantial technical issue is
envisioned. Protected area management remains a specialty involving mostly human skills with little
technological input. Ecological monitoring is an exception, as it requires modem equipment such as GPS,
top computer system for GIS, etc. Universities and international NGOs are providing technical assistance
to this process which will largely be contracted out. SEED has developed an Integrated Pest Management
Plan (PMP) to guide the use of chemical inputs under the agribusiness component of the SEED project.
The PMP focuses on horticulture because that sector would receive most assistance under this component.



5
ISDS
Overall, the legal and regulatory framework to encourage IPM methods in Zambia are in place and reflect
international norms. Nevertheless, the capacity and capability to implement and monitor IPM activities is
such that the agro-processing industry have taken their own initiative to develop and apply codes of
conduct that reflect international standards. Therefore, the Zambian Export Growers Association Training
Trust will be assisted to enhance the scope and capacity of training, particularly of the training of trainers,
in order to provide such advise more systematically than at present. SEED has developed an Environmental
Management Plan for the parks and both a Resettlement Policy Framework for involuntary resettlement of
populations resident within the two parks and a Process Framework for local determination of any further
restrictions on access to natural resources and their use. A Resettlement Action Plan has also been
prepared which will guide any resettlement of the villagers at Imusho village.
Natural Habitat: One of the main objectives of the project is to conserve and protect natural habitats in
two main areas. The GEF component is designed specifically to address conservation of natural habitats
and the maintenance of ecological flmctions in the Kafue and Mosi-o-Tunya National parks, through
specific activities that would secure management and conservation of critical Species and habitats that are
of key significance to global biodiversity and to Zambia's economic development. In support of the GEF
component and in line with OPs 1 & 3 the project will also finance rehabilitation of degraded natural
habitats in these two parks. This project does not involve the significant conversion or degradation of
cfitical natural habitats.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During project identification the team held several open meetings where it met with a wide spectrum of
stakeholders. These included members of the business community in Livingstone, Lusaka and Mfue, the
city council members in Livingstone, community representatives in Mfue and Livingstone and various
government agencies. The team received invaluable suggestions on mechanisms that would ensure
meaningful stakeholder participation in various stages of project design and implementations.
Several stakeholder workshops, focus groups, and individual interviews were conducted during the
Environmental and Social Assessement. The stakeholders consulted included Environmental Council of
Zambia, ZAWA, Livingstone City Council, National Heritage Conservation Commission, Tourism Council
of Zambia, Zambia National Tourism Board, Zambia Investment Center, and other central agencies,
businesses, potential investors, residents of Game Management Areas and communities around the two
national parks. These workshops were instrumental in capturing stakeholder concerns and expectations.
The project's final design was based on the outcome of these consultations. The consultations helped to
build ownership and partnerships in the development process. These partnerships are crucial in the
successful implementation of the project.
To build consensus among Central Government, major private sector operators and the donors active in the
sector, a targeted stakeholders workshop is proposed to take place in Lusaka.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas



6
ISDS
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5/7/2003      6/20/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/27/2003      11/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/27/2003      12/1/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/7/2003      8/11/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/27/2003      11/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/27/2003      12/1/2003
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 2/7/2003      9/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             2/27/2003      11/14/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              2/27/2003     12/1/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Constantine Chikosi                         11/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank  11/26/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                         11/26/2003
Sector Manager                Demba Ba                                    11/26/2003



