                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                     IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                      Report No.: ISDSC13316

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country:             Zimbabwe                       Project ID:      P155751
   Project Name:        Public Procurement Modernisation Technical Assistance
   Team Leader(s):      Howard Bariira Centenary
   Estimated Date       19-Jun-2015
   of Approval:
   Managing Unit:       GGODR                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
   Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (70%), e-
                        Government (30%)
   Financing (in USD Million)
   Total Project Cost: 2                             Total Bank Financing: 0
   Financing Gap:      0
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF)                                                         2
   Environment       C - Not Required
   Category:

  B. Project Development Objective(s)
  The main objective of the proposed grant is to contribute to improved transparency and efficiency of
  public procurement through institutional and legislative reforms and improved readiness for
  eprocurement
  C. Project Description
  The Project will provide technical assistance to support modernization of Public Procurement in
  Zimbabwe. It will support reform to the legal and institutional framework for procurement in
  Zimbabwe. This will include technical assistance to drafting of the new procurement law under
  which procurement is expected to be decentralized to spending agencies and procurement
  management units established within these agencies. The project will support capacity building in
  procurement for the spending agencies as well as the Procurement Regulatory Agency to strengthen
  its new monitoring function. To complement the institutional and legislative reform, the government
  plans to implement e-procurement. The project will support activities to improve readiness for
  implementation of e-government procurement. This will include conducting a readiness assessment,
  development of an e-procurement implementation strategy, sensitization of stakeholders, business
process engineering and developing of the system design and functional requirements.

1.       Component 1 – Legislative and institional reform and capacity building (Recipient Executed)
The objective of this component is to support leglislative and institutional reforms to public
procurement in Zimabawe. In February 2015, the Government of Zimbabwe announced a roadmap
for legislative and institutional reform in government procurement. The roadmap envisages the
consideration of the revised procurement law by the Parliament by the end of the year 2015. The
roadmap also covers (i) strengthening of the State Procurement Board as a standards setting and
performance monitoring body, (ii) decentralization of procurement to spending agencies and (iii)
establishment and building capacity of Procurement Management Units and associated structures in
MDAs. The project shall support the implementation of the roadmap through the following:

Sub Component 1.1: Support to legislative Reform (US$ 330,000)
The project will build on the ongoing support being provided by the African Development Bank by
providing required technical assistance towards the legislative reform. This shall include stakeholder
consultations on the proposed changes targeting the private sector, civil society and government
agencies. The project will finance consultative and dissemination meetings with the private sector
and civil society as well as with relevant committees of Parliament to seek their views on the
proposed ammendments.
The Project will finance technical assistance to the Office of the President and the Procurement
Reform Steering Committee in drafting of the revisions to the law and facilitating stakeholder
consultations. In parallel with the revision to the law, the Project will finance technical assistance to
develop associated implementing regulations and standard bidding documents to be used by
procuring agencies. This shall include support required to define and establish procurement strucures
in the spending agencies.
The absence of a procurement monitoring system in Zimbabwe has led to difficulties in obtaining
any meaningful data on the performance of public procurement. The project will support the
collection of baseline information on procurement performance to be used as a benchmark for
assessing the effectiveness of future initiatives. Thereafter data shall be collected through the
monitoring systems currently being developed as well as through e-procu rement.

Sub Component 1.2: Support to institutional Reform and capacity building of MDAs ($ 930,000)
The revised law is expected to establish relevant procurement management structures in spending
agencies. Procurement Management units are expected to be established in spending agencies staffed
with procurement professionals to manage day to day procurement activities. Procurement
Committees shall also be established to adjudicate and oversee procurement in the spending
agencies. With procurement fully decentralized to these spending agencies, capacity would need to
be built within these agencies.
The project will finance training of selected Procurement Staff and Procurement Committees with
priority accorded to high spending agencies and with at least 1500 government staff trained. The
training will expose them to the revised procurement framework and build skills in procurement.
Technical assistance will be provided to develop training content, train trainers and develop a
training implementation plan taking into consideration the number of trainees to be covered. Training
shall where possible be conducted through Zimbabwe Institute of Public Adminstration and
Management (ZIPAM) following a train the trainer approach. This shall extend to other training
institutions and consultants in the country and region offering relevant procurement training. In
selected agencies, coverage shall include 100% of women trainees that are eligible for training.
The project will also finance equipping of approximately 100 procurement management units in
spending agencies with the basic equipment to enable them to function properly. This shall include
computers, printers, records storage cainets and possibly internet connectivity. The equipment shall
be provided on a needs basis with priority accorded to strategic and high spending agencies.
Sub Componet 1.3: Sensitisation of the Private Sector and Civil Society ($40,000)
Being the other contracting party in procurement, the private sector has a major stake in the success
of public procurement in any country. Similarly civil society can be leveraged to work with citizens
to monitor the performance of procurement agencies in the procurement process and the management
and implementation of contracts.
The project shall support dissemination of the reformed procurement framework to the private sector
and civil society. Dissemination will be focused on exposing them to the requirements of the new
framework with regard to the procedures for preparing and submitting bids, implementing contracts,
and to the complaints redress system. This shall be done through regional training workshops as well
as radio, newspapers and other communication media. Similar technical assistance shall be provided
to the civil society to expose them to the procurement law and contribute to the establishment of civil
society coalitions to monitor public procurement and contract implementation. Work with the private
sector and civil society will be primarily through their organized associatons of providers or
professional associations.

2.     Component 2: Improving readiness for e-procurement (Bank and Receipient Executed)
Sub- Component 2.1: Development of an e-procurement strategy ($100,000) – Bank Executed

This sub component will finance the development of a strategy and roadmap for implementation of
e-prourement in Zimbabwe. The strategy will be informed by an assessment of the readiness of
Zimbabwe to implement procurement to be carried out as part of strategy development. The
readiness assessment shall follow the MDB e-GP Readiness Assessment Survey methodology that
assesses 9 essential components for e-procurement readiness. These are government leadership,
human resources, planning and management, policy, legislation, infrastructure and web services,
standards, private sector integration and systems. This assessment will identify any gaps that would
need to be addressed for e-procurement success. The strategy shall then articulate the government’s
goals and objectives in implementing and inform how these can be achieved through the various
aspects of design. The strategy will include a costed implementation plan with the roles of the
different stakeholders defined therein. The project will finance technical assistance to develop the
strategy in close consu ltation with the government.


Sub- Component 2.2: Business Process Engineering and system design and e-procurement
guidelines ($ 200,000) – Bank Executed

Mere automation of the paperbased procurement system does not give desired efficiency and
leverage the available technology. Paper based procurement processes and practices should be re-
engineered to use modern technology. This will require changing the way the procuring entities
prepare the bidding documents, bidders prepare the bids, fees are collected for the bidding dossier
purchase, bid securities are handled, processes evaluated and communication with the bidders and
other stakeholders is managed, contracts are managed, and complaints are handled. This project will
support the re-engineering process to ensure that the new arrangements under e-GP generate the
required efficiencies and achieve the desired objectives in the strategy. This component will therefore
include the following activities:

a) Development of a standard catalog for common procurement items of goods, works, and
services with standards, templates, and guidelines
Procurement of goods, works, and services under e-GP will require a common catalogue, a basic
standard for this type of procurement for nationwide, regional and international interoperability. The
common catalogue ensures that the same product coding is used through the entire process, through
publication of items online by suppliers, selection, reception and finally payment by the purchasing
entity, especially for the e-framework agreementsbased procurement. It is important that Zimbabwe
adopts a commonly-used classification system to ensure wider harmonization and ease of doing
business.

The proposed project will support development of this catalogue through:

i)       Standardization of goods and services coding which will enable management data in the
form of spend analyses, cost analyses, cost to suppliers, and supply searches, as it improves
transparency and efficiency;
ii)      Classification of Goods, Works and Servies which will allow summarization of data for
reporting and analysis purposes;
iii)     Development of Unique Item Codes for specific items which helps to uniquely identify the
specific goods, works or services based on their specific specification (dimensions, attributes, nature,
etc.).

Common classification and item codes will improve efficiency of procurement because they will
provide the basis for automated gathering and analysis of spend data for budgeting and planning,
strengthen transparency and performance monitoring and reporting, enable automated price
quotations for purchasing, unify financial management systems (i.e. IFMIS), and procurement
reporting (for the feedback in Auditor General’s report), and track requisition, purchase, supply,
inventory, and procurement trends.

b) Development of e-GP Guidelines

11.      While the revised procurement law is expected to provide for e-procurement, automation of
processes and practices generates new relationships between stakeholders and new roles too be
performed by different agencies. For example, the e-procurement system would have to be linked
with different government e-services for accessing, verifying and validating the authenticity of the
data to be used in e-procurement. In addition, the different laws and regulations governing electronic
transactions (e.g ICT, e-Transaction and e-Signature laws), as well as national strategies and master
plans, would need to be synchronized with the public procurement acts and regulations. This requires
that e-GP Guidelines to govern the operation, use, and scope of the e-Procurement system in
Zimbabwe be developed. The proposed project will finance development of the e-GP guidelines,
which would later be approved by the State Procurement Board or the Office of the President and
Cabinet, whichever is relevant in the country.

c) Design of e-gp system and bidding document

To maximize the full benefits of the e-GP System, its development ought to take into account the
technical, functional and business requirements of the players in the procurement industry as well as
government’s objectives as articulated in the e-procurement strategy. The project will in this regard
finance the development of user and functional requirements for the system which will form the
system design and be an input into the bidding document. The e-GP design should define the
complete scope of the e-GP system, and define the deliverables by the software supplier. To
supplement this would be a ready-to-use bidding document for international competitive bidding.
This component of the grant will support the development of both the e-GP and the accompanying
bidding documents.

Sub - Component 2.3: Building capacity for e-GP in government and stakeholders ($150,000) –
Receipient Executed

a) Building SPB Human Resource Capacity
To effectively implement e-GP in the country, adequate capacity will need to be built. The State
Procurement Board, which is expected to be the lead agency to operate and own the national e-GP
System, would need to enhance technical and technological capacity to support e-GP implementation
in the country. To this effect, SPB would need to enhance the technical expertise of existing
technical and management personnel and to recruit key technical experts and specialists in the areas
of IT and network and security systems procurement expertise, ICT Specialists and help desk staff.
Funding under this Grant can support initial hiring of the experts, which may be absorbed by the
Government in subsequent years.

An e-procurement steering committee is expected to be established to oversee the implementation of
e-procurement at policy level. Members from this committe and from the SPB staff will be
supported to participate in a study tour with the objective of providing feedback on the model of e-
Procurement operation based on the lessons learned by other countries and to recommend best e-
Procurement practices as learned during the study visit. This will inform the decision on an
appropriate, sustainable model for the operation of the e-procurement system, management strategy,
risks and other best practices that might have relevance for procurement reform and modernization of
Zimbabwe procurement.

b) Building Capacity of Other Stakeholders
SPB will engage other stakeholders to promote and support change management amongst the
procurement and non procurement staff and the service providers. The project will support
Stakeholder Consultations for sensitisation of public and private sector on e-GP through workshops
and relevant media. This shall include working with private sector associations to sensitise service
providers in the private sector about e-GP.

Sub - Component 2.3: Technical Assiatance for Project Implementation ($150,000) – Receipient
Executed

This component shall also finance the required project management, procurement and financial
management experts required to support project implementation in the Office of the President and
Cabinet and the State procurement Board as well as equipment and futniture for their use. It shall
also cover monitoring and evaluation including collection of monitoring information for the project.


3.      Component 3 – Implementation Support by the World Bank (US$ 100,000)
Procurement reform is an engaging process requiring extensive consultations and discussions with
stakeholders. Implementation Support to Government on e-GP requires extensive International
expertise to provide comprehensive guidance to Government departments. The grant will support the
hiring of experts in this respect to advise/support the Bank team. This will also finance preparation of
the e-procurement investment project.
  D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
  analysis (if known)
  No salient physical cahracteristiccs

  E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
  Not applicable

  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
  BP 4.01
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
  Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
  BP 4.11
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
  4.12
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
  Projects on International                    No
  Waterways OP/BP 7.50
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
  7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
      Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
  Team Leader(s):                  Name: Howard Bariira Centenary
  Approved By:
  Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                                   Date: 10-May-2015
  Practice Manager/                Name: V. S. Krishnakumar (PMGR)                                    Date: 11-May-2015
  Manager:



  1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
  InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
  affected persons.
