Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3507 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P110893 
Project Name: Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation (Additional Financing) 
Task Team Leader: Usman Qamar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 8, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (75%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (10%);Central government administration (10%);Sub-national government 
administration (5%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural 
development (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the ongoing Emergency Irrigation Rehabiliation Project (EIRP) is 
to restore irrigated agricultural production in rural areas, through improved and reliable water 
supply to rehabilitated traditional irrigation schemes.  This objective would remain unchanged.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed additional financing will support additional activities under the same project 
components that are included in the ongoing EIRP: (i) rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; 
(ii) rehabilitation of Hydro-Met Network; (iii) monitoring and evaluation, and preparation of 
feasibility studies for future projects; and (iv) institutional strengthening and capacity building. 
The additional financing will support about 21 additional medium and large rehabilitation 
schemes; expansion of the Hydro-Met network; preparation of feasibility studies for irrigation 
schemes for future implementation; M&E, including establishment of a permanent M&E Unit in 
MEW; and continuation of various institutional strengthening and capacity building activities. A 
greater proportion of resources would be allocated for the rehabilitation of Hydro-Met Network 
Page  2
and Institution strengthening than in the ongoing project.  Expansion of Hydro-Met networks 
would include cableways at about 40 key sites for flow measurement, and installation of 
meteorological facilities that would help to better forecast river flows and water availability and 
provide prior warnings of floods and drought.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The activities supported by the additional financing would be implemeted in the same six regions 
in which EIRP is currently operating: Mazar, Kundoz, Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, and Herat   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Currently MEW has very limited capacity for dealing with safeguard issues. However, the EIRP 
Project Coordination Unit is being assisted by a Techincal Assistance Team from FAO who are 
deeply involved in all aspects of project implementation. No schemes are approved, and funds 
are not allocated, until the environmental viability is ascertained in accordance with the 
Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework (ESSMF) included in the 
Technical Annex of the ongoing project.  Site specific environmental impacts are dealt with at 
the design stage and during the actual rehabilitation.  During the extended project period 
attention to environmental and social issues would be further enhanced by (i) appointing 
Environmental Focal Persons in the PCU and field teams; (ii) including focused training in 
identification, mitigation, monitoring and reporting of environmental and social issues, in the 
agenda for training and capacity building; and (iii) adding environmental monitoring and 
reporting in the terms of reference of the M&E unit of EIRP.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework (ESSMF) was prepared 
for EIRP in November 2003. The ESSMF has worked quite well. No schemes are approved, and 
funds are not allocated, until the environmental viability is ascertained in accordance with 
ESSMF.  Site specific environmental impacts are dealt with at the design stage and during the 
actual rehabilitation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The Ministry of Agriculture is developing capacity for IPM in the context of the IDA 
supported Horticulture and Livestock Project and FAO has been appointed as the facilitating 
partner for IPM. It is envisaged that the coverage of IPM would be gradually expanded in the 
country and would also cover other crops besides horticulture.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP 4.12 would be triggered considering that larger schemes may involve land acquisition. 
No involuntary resettlement will take place under the project and land acquisition will be kept at 
a
minimum. The existing Environmental and Social Safeguards Management Framework 
(ESSMF) applicable to EIRP will be followed 
–
specifying the transparent procedures to be 
followed and appropriate documentation required in case of Land Acquisition, of private 
voluntary contribution of land or land acquired against community compensation.  The ESSMF 
has been supplemented with an abbreviated resettlement framework.  Feasibility studies for the 
rehabilitation of large irrigation schemes will include a full environmental and social assessment.  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
A
waiver for notification under OP 7.50 was obtained in the context of EIRP processing.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies are envisaged at this stage.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Usman Qamar 
03/12/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/14/2008 
Comments:  cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
03/24/2008 
Comments:  approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
