Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/19/2007 
Report No.:  AC3286
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P106259 
Project Name:  Second Education Quality Improvement Program 
Task Team Leader:  Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
22.00 
 
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
84.70
156.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To increase equitable access to quality basic education especially for girls through school 
grants, teacher training and strengthened institutional capacity with support from 
communities and private providers.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: School Grants  
 
Sub-Component 1.1 School Grants for Quality Enhancement  
 
The objective of the quality enhancement grant is to develop healthy linkages between 
schools, communities and local government while supporting and empowering schools 
and communities as local education managers. The grant would finance activities such as 
education materials and supplies, supplementary readers, toolkits, expenditures for 
workshops, seminars, meetings and transportation for teachers and School Shura/PTA 
members to participate in appropriate meetings. Under the program, there would be two 
types of grants: first and second generation grants.  
Page  2
Sub-Component 1.2: Infrastructure Grant  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to rehabilitate and construct schools using 
community participation and community-based decision making. Priority would be given 
to: (i) girls schools; (ii) schools with both boys’ and girls’ sections/shifts; and (iii) boys 
schools which plan to open up sections/shifts for girls. This component has been tried and 
tested in the past two IDA-funded education programs in Afghanistan and its design is 
based on the lessons learned.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3 Social Awareness and Mobilization  
 
The main objective of this sub component is to mobilize and strengthen School Shuras 
to manage their schools based on local priorities. It would finance: (i) social mobilization 
activities for communities to implement the program components with NGO support 
where relevant; (ii) the development of training modules for training and support to 
DEDs, PEDs, Provincial Departments of Construction (P-DOCs) and MOE at the center; 
and, (iii) the organization of community and provincial level dissemination of program 
information.  
 
Component 2: Teacher and Principal Training and Education  
 
Sub-Component 2.1: District Teacher Training Teams (DT3s)  
 
The objective of this sub component is to facilitate the creation of a system for 
sustainable teacher training and professional support in order to increase the knowledge 
and skills of teachers already working in MOE schools.  Three types of training would be 
delivered to teachers: pedagogy and basic knowledge training (INSET-I); content-
knowledge training (INSET-II); and training to educate under-qualified female teachers 
(Accelerated Learning-AL). This sub component would also support the rehabilitation 
and construction of District Education Offices (DEOs) based on need and in order to 
provide for appropriate facilities in support of the DT3s.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2: Development of School Principals  
 
The two objectives of this sub-component are: a) to equip principals in government 
registered schools (currently 9,500 in number) with the most needed administrative and 
leadership tools for improving schools; and b) to establish a system of professional 
development networks which would support the longer-term MOE reform strategy for 
better quality teaching and learning. Principal training, implemented across Afghanistan 
and delivered to all principals, would have two phases.  
 
Sub-Component 2.3: Support to Increase Female Teachers  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to increase female enrollments in high schools 
and TTCs, through: (i) a program that hires and places qualified individuals to teach in 
under served high schools around the country and (ii) a nation wide household 
scholarship program for girls entering TTCs. The sub-component would also partially 
support MOE’s plans to have fully equipped TTCs by providing for the construction of 
classrooms in provinces where no TTCs exist or there are gaps in funding, with a priority 
on classrooms for females.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
3.1
Program Management and Coordination  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to support the structure for the management and 
implementation of the program. The project would continue to be managed under the 
structure which has evolved and has been tried and tested during implementation of 
EQUIP I.  
Page  3
Sub-component 3.2: Monitoring  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to measure if and to what extent monitoring 
KPIs have been achieved (See Annex 2). This information will be used in the third party 
evaluation and will also be utilized for ongoing program improvement.  
 
Sub-Component 3.3: Evaluation  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to verify monitoring information and to measure 
if KPIs have been achieved. Independent third party evaluators will be used to assess all 
components as well as the program as a whole.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have activities all over Afghanistan. After the long conflict, droughts, 
and excessive use of natural resources, negligence of proper resource and environmental 
management and the consequent environmental degradation as well as fragile ecosystems 
prevalence is a common problem in the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is expected to have considerable positive and no negative social impact. 
OP/BP 4.12 is triggered, although the planned school rehabilitation and construction 
activities primarily will be on existing government land, and no major land acquisition is 
expected. The Environmental and Safeguards Management Framework, followed by 
other ongoing/planned projects in Afghanistan, specifies the procedures to be followed in 
case of Land Acquisition or of voluntary contribution of land by the community and 
ensures that the proceedings are conducted in a transparent manner and are appropriately 
documented.  
Page  4
The potential environmental safeguard issues identified under the project related to 
potential soil and groundwater pollution, with a particular concern for unsafe asbestos 
disposal. While the planned rehabilitation activities are not expected to generate 
significant negative environmental and social impacts, they may, however, incur potential 
localized negative impacts which would require appropriate mitigation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future rehabilitation activities could contribute to soil and groundwater pollution, soil 
erosion, loss of vegetation due to solid and liquid wastes generated at the construction 
sites, inappropriate disposal of oils, paint, and grease, asbestos if left unattended. These 
impacts could be exacerbated if the rehabilitated facilities, including water supply and 
sanitation facilities, were not operated and maintained effectively.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
It was determined that the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will adequately address any 
potential negative impacts of future rehabilitation activities, and therefore, project 
alternatives did not have to be considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the safeguards issues identified under the project, the project has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Implementation of the 
ESMF will be the responsibility of Ministry of Education (MoE) which through its 
program implementation unit and the Department of Construction (DoC) will ensure that 
relevant program staff is given adequate training on safeguards issues. Specifically, the 
water and sanitation engineers will act as focal points to ensure compliance with 
safeguards.  
 
To ensure effective implementation of the ESMF, the project will provide resources for  
 
(i) Environmental management training for the ESMF Focal Officer, selected members 
of the Technical Services of the Provincial Directorates of the Ministry of Education and 
members of the project’s Implementation Unit.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project will involve the staff of the Ministry of Education (MOE) in relevant training 
and awareness-raising. The ESMF has been prepared in consultation with the relevant 
stakeholders, government relevant ministries, NGOs, communities and the general 
public. They welcomed the rehabilitation activities as these would contribute to a 
hygienic learning environment and thus attract more students. The ESMF would be 
disclosed in Afghanistan on November 20, 2007 and at the Bank’s Infoshop on 
November 20, 2007.   
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/23/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The document will be disclosed by November 20, 2007 after the authorized date of 
appraisal (November 15, 2007)   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  6
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
11/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
11/19/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
11/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/19/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Amit Dar 
11/19/2007 
Comments:   
