Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC4228
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P112873 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Usman Qamar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASDA 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (67%);Central government administration (33%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing for the Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation Project 
(EIRP) is intended to support implementation of expanded activities to scale up the 
project impact and development effectiveness. The development objectives of the project 
would remain unchanged -  to restore irrigated agricultural production in rural areas, 
through improved and reliable water supply to rehabilitated traditional irrigation 
schemes.  Key indicators for this PDO include (i) increase in irrigated area; and (ii) 
increase in agricultural productivity.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing would help finance costs associated with scaled up 
activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project. There would be no major 
changes.  The proposed additional financing will support additional activities under the 
various components of the ongoing project, including (i) rehabilitation of about 85 
medium and lesser schemes, 8 large schemes  including performance-based contracts for 
operation and maintenance (O&M); (ii) installation of hydro-meteorological facilities ; 
(iii) support for monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including mainstreaming of M&E 
Page  2
activities in MEW; and (iv) continuation of various institutional strengthening and 
capacity building activities, including construction and refurbishing of office buildings 
for MEW and provincial irrigation departments.  Expected outcomes from the additional 
financing would be as follows: (i) irrigated agriculture would be restored in an additional 
area of about 23,000 ha that is currently out of command because of the dilapidated state 
of the irrigation facilities; (ii) increase in agricultural productivity in rehabilitated 
irrigation schemes   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The activities supported by the additional financing would be implemented in the same 
six regions in which the ongoing EIRP is currently operating: Mazar-e-Sharif, Kundoz, 
Kabul, Jalalabad, Kandahar, and Herat. The same is the case for the rehabilitation of the 
hydro-meteorological network. The additional financing will support essentially the same 
project components that are already being implemented under the ongoing project.  The 
EIRP has had no significant irreversible environmental and social impacts, and has a 
Category B environmental classification. Since the irrigation systems consists of a large 
number of medium and large schemes, the final selection of schemes for rehabilitation 
under the Additional Finance must meet the scheme selection criteria agreed with the 
Government:  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
(i)  Significant land mine risk (not certified by the Mine Action Center for Afghanistan 
(MACA) as having low-to-nil risk)  
 
(ii) Significant social issues, including (a) social safeguard impacts (e.g. unresolved land 
acquisition issues or more than 200 affected PAPs in case of land acquisition); (b) 
unresolved or potential water rights disputes with other users of the water source (e.g. in 
case of engineering of intake construction); (c) unresolved water distribution disputes 
within the system command area (e.g. with tail-enders); or (d) absence of functioning 
institutional maintenance arrangements.  
 
(iii)  Significant environmental safeguard issues  
 
(iv) High probability of triggering riparian issues by the downstream riparian states.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 
(i) Large economic impact, as reflected by the low rehabilitation cost, large incremental 
benefits and large number of beneficiaries per ha of irrigated land  
 
(ii) Agreement by local communities to contribute towards scheme rehabilitation costs 
and to take over the responsibility for post-rehabilitation operations and maintenance 
(O&M) cost  
 
(iii) Balanced geographical distribution in all the five river basins  
 
No schemes are approved, and funds are not allocated, until the environmental viability 
is ascertained in accordance with the Environmental and Social Safeguard Management 
Framework (ESSMF) included in the Technical Annex   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
Page  3
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental category of activities under the additional financing would remain 
unchanged and rehabilitation schemes will continue to be subjected to the Social 
Safeguard Management Framework (ESSMF) included in the Technical Annex of the 
ongoing project, supplemented with an abbreviated resettlement framework. The 
additional financing will support essentially the same project components that are already 
being implemented under the ongoing project. The EIRP has had no significant 
irreversible environmental and social impacts, and has a Category B environmental 
classification. No schemes are approved, and funds are not allocated, until the 
environmental viability is ascertained in accordance with the ESSMF.  Site specific 
environmental impacts are dealt with at the design stage and during actual rehabilitation 
using codes of practices that are outlined in the ESSMF.  OP 4.12 is triggered considering 
that larger schemes may involve some voluntary or involuntary land acquisition. 
Feasibility studies for the rehabilitation of large irrigation schemes will include a full 
environmental and social assessment.  Attention to environmental and social issues has 
been enhanced by (i) appointing Environmental Focal Persons in the PCU and field 
teams; (ii) including an Abbreviated Resettlement Framework in the ESSMF containing 
procedures for restoring housing, compensation for loss of land and livelihood in case of 
less than 200 project affected families (PAPs) (iii) including focused training in 
identification, mitigation, monitoring and reporting of environmental issues, in the 
agenda for training and capacity building; and (iv) adding environmental monitoring and 
reporting in the terms of reference of the M&E unit of EIRP.  Coordination with the 
Ministry of Agriculture would be enhanced to benefit from the integrated pest 
management program (IPM) initiated under the Bank-assisted Horticulture and Livestock 
Project.  
 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues  
 
Page  4
The proposed Additional Finance will primarily comprise rehabilitation of existing 
medium and large irrigation infrastructure and of Hydro-Met Network, and is expected to 
have considerable positive and no negative social impact. OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered as 
limited land acquisition can not be ruled out for individual sub-projects. However, no 
involuntary resettlement will take place under the project and land acquisition will be 
kept at a minimum. In the event that minor areas of land would be needed for a sub-
project, such land could only be obtained through either compensation payments for 
assets acquired by the local community, private voluntary donations or available 
government land. For government land, documentation would be needed that the land is 
free of encroachments, squatters or other encumbrances, and has been transferred for the 
project by the authorities. The existing ESSMF applicable to EIRP will be followed 
–
specifying the transparent procedures to be followed and appropriate documentation 
required in case of Land Acquisition, of private voluntary contribution of land or land 
acquired against community compensation.  An Abbreviated Resettlement Framework 
has been developed containing procedures for restoring of housing, compensation for loss 
of land and livelihood of project affected families in a consultative and mutually 
agreeable manner, compliant with OP 4.12.   A satisfactory settlement of the land issues 
is a precondition for sub-project implementation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Because investments will be limited to the rehabilitation of existing schemes, no 
significant impacts are expected. However, for the rehabilitation of large schemes, the 
limited environmental assessment (LEA) will assess any potential indirect and/or long-
term impacts in the project area, and define mitigation measures, as required. The full 
social and environmental assessments to be carried out as part of the feasibility studies 
for large new schemes will address these impacts.  
 
The project does not allow an increase in the total volume of water diversion at the 
intake to protect downstream riparian. Any issues arising due to ay future activities would 
be dealt with by the Mirabs of respective communities   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The environmental and social screening process as outlined in the ESSMF would 
adequately address any potential negative impacts of rehabilitation activities, and 
therefore, project alternatives did not have to be considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Recognizing the current social and environmental management capacity constraints, 
while at the same time ensuring due diligence in managing environmental and social 
risks, the framework approach adopted under EIRP will be continued. The Environmental 
and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSMF) provides for early identification of potential 
adverse impacts, without the requirement of rigorous analysis through quantification, and 
also provides broad guidance for their effective mitigation.  
 
Page  5
The provisions of the safeguards framework will be applied as follows:  
 
Sub-project type 
Definition 
Screening  
 
---------------         ----------      ----------  
 
Small schemes 
Investment per scheme up to $50,000. Average size 100 ha. Single 
source. No formal assessment, but checklist on negative environmental and social impacts 
as part of the project proposal.  
 
Medium schemes 
Investment per scheme up to $300,000. Average size 750 ha. Small 
watershed. 
Codes of practice  
 
Large schemes 
Investment per scheme above $300,000. Average size 2500 ha. 
Large watershed/sub-basin. Limited Environmental Assessment  
 
Feasibility studies for large new irrigation schemes Large new irrigation scheme. Full 
Environmental and Social Assessment  
 
----------------------  
 
The selection, design, contracting, monitoring and evaluation of sub-projects, including 
small, medium and large irrigation schemes, will be consistent with the following 
guidelines:  
 
•
A
negative list of characteristics that would make a proposed sub-project 
ineligible for support  
 
•
Guidelines for land and asset acquisition, entitlements and compensation,  
 
•
Procedures for the protection of cultural property, including the chance discovery 
of archaeological artifacts, and unrecorded graveyards and burial sites  
 
•
Generic codes of practices for environmental management at design, construction 
and operation stages  
 
•
Formats for limited environmental assessment (LEA) and generic Terms of 
Reference for a full Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)  
 
•
Formats for Abbreviated Resettlement Framework and generic Terms of 
Referencefor a full Social Assessment  
 
•
The requirement that confirmation is received through the Regional Mine Action 
Center that areas to be accessed during reconstruction and rehabilitation activities have 
been de-mined  
 
Implementation of the ESMF will be the responsibility of Ministry of Energy and Water 
(MEW), which through its Project Coordination Unit (PCU) supported by the FAO 
Technical Assistance and the Provincial Water Management Departments will ensure that 
relevant program staff is given adequate training on safeguards issues.  
 
During the extended project period attention to environmental and social issues would 
be further enhanced by (i) appointing Environmental Focal Persons in the PCU and field 
teams with specific ToR focusing on ESMF implementation; (ii) including focused 
training in identification, mitigation, monitoring and reporting of environmental issues, in 
the agenda for training and capacity building; and (iii) adding environmental monitoring 
and reporting in the terms of reference of the M&E unit of EIRP.  
Page  6
An environmental specialist with TOR satifactory to the Bank is being fielded by the 
FAO technical assistance team to train PCU staff and to enhance quality of 
Environmental and social assessment reports.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESSMF was developed on the basis of an overall Framework for World Bank-funded 
reconstruction operations which was prepared in consultation with the principal NGOs 
and development partners participating in reconstruction activities in Afghanistan.  Prior 
to approval of the EIRP it was disclosed by the Government in both Dari and Pashto, as 
well as English, and also made available at the World Bank’s Infoshop on November 20, 
2003. The ESSMF and the abbreviated resttlementFramework has again been disclosed in 
country on January 14, 2009 and is being sent to the Infoshop.  
 
The proposed project will support feasibility studies for future large irrigation schemes, 
for which World Bank safeguard policies relating to consultation and disclosure will 
apply, if they are financed by IDA.  In particular, for environmental Category A and B 
investments (as defined in World Bank Operational Policy 4.01, Environmental 
Assessment) proposed for future operations, the implementing agency will consult 
project-affected groups and local non-governmental organizations about the project's 
environmental and social aspects, and will take their views into account.  The executing 
agency will initiate such consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful 
consultations, will provide relevant material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Usman Qamar 
02/28/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
01/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
01/15/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal 
01/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/12/2009 
Comments:  cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
03/10/2009 
Comments:  approved 
