Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3556
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P110658 
Project Name:  Afghanistan Health (supplement II) 
Task Team Leader:  Emanuele Capobianco 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Population and reproductive health (P);Child health (P);Health system 
performance (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives will continue to guide the additional grant as well. 
The objectives are to: (i) assist the MOPH to achieve its stated goals of reducing the rates 
of infant and child mortality, maternal mortality, child malnutrition, and fertility through 
expanding delivery of the BPHS and increasing equity in the delivery of services; (ii) 
increase MOPH’s stewardship over the sector including a greater role in health care 
financing, coordination of partners, and overseeing the work of NGOs; and (iii) build the 
capacity of Afghan health workers to provide and manage health services.   
 
3. Project Description 
1. Extension of BPHS:  The additional grant will finance the extension for an additional 
year, up to June 2009, of the existing 12 sub-grants provided by MOPH to NGOs.  The 
extension of BPHS in PPA areas will guarantee continued provision of basic health 
services to approximately 6 million people in the Project Area.The contract terms will be 
modified to reflect population increase and inflation, but will remain identical with regard 
to objectives and implementation arrangements.  The additional grant will also support 
the extension of the MOPH-SM in three provinces near Kabul with an estimated 
population of 1.1 million.  
Page  2
2. Strengthen BPHS delivery in insecure areas, particularly in Helmand:  The additional 
grant will support the implementation of BPHS in Helmand by Ibn Sina, a local NGO 
with large experience in conflict affected areas.  The key elements of this activity are: (i) 
conditional cash transfer schemes for well child visits and for mothers to deliver in the 
facility; (ii) a performance-based incentive scheme for CHWs; (iii) a security allowance 
for skilled health workers on top of the National Salary Policy to keep insecure facilities 
appropriately staffed; (iv) the establishment of 10 sub-centers on a pilot basis; (v) the 
establishment of a monitoring system by the provincial health office, members of the 
community, and IbnSina; and (vi) community midwifery education.  
 
3.
Polio eradication and Measles/Neo Natal Tetanus Control:  The additional grant will 
provide financial support to polio eradication efforts as well as immunization campaigns 
and routine vaccinations.  The funding will be used to procure vaccines and related 
goods, through UNICEF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The supplemental project will be implemented in the eleven provinces covered by the 
original project and the seven provinces included during the first additional financing.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
With regard to safeguard issues, this second additional financing does not differ from the 
original health sector emergency reconstruction and development project and the first 
additional financing. The environmental risks of the proposed project are linked to the 
use and disposal of sharps and needles for immunization/curative purposes, as well as to 
the disposal of hazardous waste (e.g. placenta). Risks associated include accidental 
transmission of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B. The risks are 
Page  3
mostly at the individual level; the possibility of large scale irreversible impacts are 
minimal.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of the original project, the MOPH implemented environmental policies to address 
waste management. After production and distribution of guidelines, waste management 
has greatly improved: a third party assessment found proper disposal of sharps in 46% of 
health facilities studied in September, 2004. This has increased to 77.5% nationwide in 
2006 and 84.4% in 2007. The MOPH is determined to maintain and further strengthen the 
waste disposal mechanisms set in place so as to reach 100% coverage of health facilities. 
The existing Environment and Social management framework, including the institutional 
arrangements, will continue to be used for the additional financing. Further rounds of 
third party assessments will be conducted to review progress against key indicators of 
medical waste management.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
NGOs delivering the basic package of health care services are the primary recipient of 
policies developed by the Ministry of Public Health. In the past few years, NGOs have 
been sensitized about waste management and, as mentioned above, their performance has 
gradually improved. The additional financing will support further enhancement of NGO's 
waste management through sensitization and continuos monitoring through third party 
assessments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/06/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/06/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/06/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
An environmental assessment was carried out in 2003 as part of the preparation of the 
initial grant. The results of this assessment were used to formulate health care waste 
management policies by the Ministry of Public Health. The progress of implementation 
of the policies is being tracked through annual health facility surveys (which show a 
significant improvement in waste management). Hence, a new environmental assessment 
was not required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  5
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emanuele Capobianco 
04/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
04/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/17/2008 
Comments:  Cleared and transferred to SASHD for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mariam Claeson 
04/17/2008 
Comments:  Cleared with no comments 
