Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3494 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/27/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P110658 
Project Name: Afghanistan Health (supplement II) 
Task Team Leader: Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (P);Child health (P);Health system 
performance (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the original project will continue to guide the additional grant as 
well. The objectives are to: (i) assist the MOPH to achieve its stated goals of reducing the rates 
of infant and child mortality, maternal mortality, child malnutrition, and fertility through 
expanding delivery of the BPHS and increasing equity in the delivery of services; (ii) strengthen 
the Government by increasing MOPH’s stewardship over the sector including a greater role 
inhealth care financing, coordination of partners, and overseeing the work of NGOs; and (iii) 
build the capacity of Afghan health workers to provide and manage health services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. Extension of BPHS:  The additional grant will finance the extension of the existing 16 PPA 
contracts for an additional year, up to June 2009.  The extension of BPHS in PPA areas will 
guarantee continued provision of basic health services to approximately 6 million people.  The 
contract terms will be modified to reflect population increase and inflation, but will remain 
identical with regard to objectives and implementation arrangements.  The additional grant will 
also support the extension of the MOPH-SM in three provinces near Kabul with an estimated 
population of 1.1 million.  
Page  2
2. Strengthen BPHS Delivery in insecure areas, particularly in Helmand:  The additional grant 
will support the implementation of BPHS in Helmand by Ibn Sina, a local NGO with large 
experience in conflict areas.  The key elements of this component are: (i) conditional cash 
transfer schemes for well child visits and for mothers to deliver in the facility; (ii) a performance-
based incentive scheme for CHWs; (iii) a security allowance for skilled health workers on top of 
the National Salary Policy to keep insecure facilities appropriately staffed; (iv) the establishment 
of 10 sub-centers on a pilot basis; (v) the establishment of a monitoring system by the provincial 
health office, members of the community, and IbnSina; and (vi) community midwifery 
education.  
 
3.
Additional sub-centers and mobile teams:  The additional grant will support the 
establishment of 50 sub-centers to increase coverage and utilization of health services in remote 
areas.  The sub-centers will be established by NGOs according to MOPH criteria and guidelines.  
The location of the sub-centers will be decided by PPA NGOs in conjunction with local 
authorities in the provinces, and MOPH.  NGOs will also be provided additional funds to 
establish mobile teams to cover remote areas.  MOPH will regularly review sub-centers and 
mobile teams’ performance through HMIS data.  
 
4.
Expansion of CMW Training: The additional grant will finance the expansion of CMW 
training in Nimroz and Helmand provinces, where no such training has yet taken place.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The supplemental project will be implemented in the  eleven provinces covered by the original 
project and the seven provinces included during the first additional financing.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the original project, the MOPH implemented environmental policies to address waste 
management. After production and distribution of guidelines, waste management has greatly 
improved: a third party assessment found proper disposal of sharps in 46% of health facilities 
studied in September, 2004. This has increased to 77.5% nationwide in 2006 and 84.4% in 2007. 
The MOPH is determined to maintain and further strengthen the waste disposal mechanisms set 
in place so as to reach 100% coverage of health facilities. The existing Environment and Social 
management framework, including the institutional arrangements, will continue to be used for 
the additional financing. Further rounds of third party assessments will be conducted to review 
progress against key indicators of medical waste management.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment was carried out in 2003 as part of the preparation of the initial 
grant. The results of this assessment were used to formulate health care waste management 
policies by the Ministry of Public Health. The progress of implementation of the policies is being 
tracked through annual health facility surveys (which show a significant improvement in waste 
management). Hence, a new environmental assessment is not required.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
none   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
03/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/12/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Cornelis P. Kostermans 
03/10/2008 
Comments:  The health facility survey data are encouraging re the medical waste disposal. Approved 
by K Kostermans, Acting SM 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
