Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3505 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P110644 
Project Name: Afghanistan Financial Sector Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader: Md. Reazul Islam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 3, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Banking (60%);General finance sector (40%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the proposed project is to establish key initial building blocks for broader 
financial sector reform that will achieve greater efficiency in banking transactions and improve 
availability of efficient banking services to the underserved. This will be achieved by 
strengthening the supervisory capacity of DAB, enhancing credit information flow among the 
financial institutions, and providing better training for staff in financial institutions.  
 
Key outcomes of the project will include: (i) enhanced capacity of the DAB in carrying out its 
core function of financial stability, which can be measured in terms of a clean audit report by the 
external auditors, an assessment of compliance with Basel Core Principles, and the establishment 
of a modern human resource system; (ii) improved capacity to assess credit risk of borrowers, 
increased range of assets that can serve as acceptable loan collaterals, and increased quality and 
number of qualified bankers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 
–
Strengthening the capacity of Da Afghanistan Bank (U$ 5.5 million)  
Page  2
(a) 
 Human Resource Management (U$ 1 million)  
 
Appropriate Human Resource (HR) policies and management are critical for the efficiency and 
effectiveness of any institution. Although efforts have been made by consultancy services to put 
in place a HR system in DAB, overall HR management capacity needs to be further improved to 
enable DAB to effectively carry out its core function. There is a strong need to develop and 
implement necessary HR policies, automate the HR functions and create a comprehensive 
database for a more transparent and effective HR management.  
 
This component will assist DAB to adopt modern HR management and HR strategy and to 
develop a comprehensive human resource management policy including recruitment, placement, 
evaluation, compensation, promotion, incentives, mobility and training. It will cover the 
provision of technical assistance to carry out the foregoing, the necessary training for the HR 
staff and managers, as well as the provision of financial assistance to develop a required IT 
system for these activities.  
 
(b) 
 Accounting and Internal Audit (U$ 2.5 million)  
 
Accounting and internal auditing capacity of DAB is particularly weak: accounting reports are 
not produced on a timely basis and their quality is dubious; and there is no qualified internal 
auditor in DAB. The financial statements of DAB for the period ending March 2006 were 
qualified.   A disclaimer of opinion for the period ending March 2007 was issued. The external 
auditor noted, among others: (i) no proper accounting procedure is built in the system; (ii) there 
is no accounting manual; and (iii) DAB does not follow a system of periodic internal review, 
verification, and reconciliation of balance. The Auditor’s Report also notedthe need for 
strengthening the internal control system that is commensurate with the size and nature of the 
business of DAB to ensure adequate integrity of balances in the financial statements. Without 
having a proper accounting and internal audit system in itself, it would be difficult for DAB to 
impose the placement of such a system on the commercial banks, thus hard to undertake a 
rigorous banking supervision.  
 
This component will support the Chief Financial Office and Comptroller General Department to 
enable DAB to produce better quality and more timely financial data. The component will 
include technical assistance to strengthen the accounting and internal auditing capacities, 
formulate the accounting manual and gradually move these to internationally accept accounting 
standards. It will also fund the development of the required IT system for the foregoing 
activities.  
 
(c) 
 Banking Supervision (U$ 2.0 million)  
 
In a situation where the commercial banks' activities are increasing significantly, it is very 
important for the Central Bank to have adequate in-house capacity for banking supervision so 
that the commercial banks are properly supervised according to international norms and 
practices. Failure of any commercial bank because of inadequate supervision may cause a serious 
Page  3
impact on the financial sector in terms of discipline and clients' confidence, and may trigger 
reversals to the gains that have already been achieved.  
 
The Da Afghanistan Bank Law (2003) empowered DAB to require more extensive bank 
disclosure and higher reporting standards, increased capital requirements, and more rigorous 
banking supervision.  Despite these developments, banking supervision capacity of DAB needs 
to be further strengthened, which was also strongly recommended by a recent IMF review.  For 
example, examiner training is still inadequate, and growth in staff size and experience has lagged 
behind growth in the number, size, and complexity of institutions to be supervised.  There is also 
a
need to develop and implement a framework for Prompt Corrective Action (PCA). Public 
disclosure and market discipline also need to be improved even further by requiring banks to 
disclose prudential ratios such as the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), and the Non-Performing 
Asset (NPA) ratio in their published financial statements.  
 
This component will support the establishment of an appropriate system of supervision and 
regulation of commercial banks in accordance with Basel Core Principles (BCP) for Effective 
Banking Supervision.  It will primarily help to implement a risk-based approach to bank 
supervision; carry out a self-assessment of compliance with BCP; propose a framework for PCA; 
provide capacity building program; and recommend measures to strengthen public disclosure and 
market discipline.  
 
Component 2 
–
Development of necessary infrastructure in the financial sector (U$ 2.25 
million)  
 
(a)  
Credit Information Bureau (U$ 1 million)  
 
Information on clients and credit transaction history is very important for transparency of the 
financial sector and particularly for the commercial banks in evaluating the creditworthiness of 
potential clients. The Credit Information Bureau (CIB) would contribute to improving the credit 
market and volume of credit transaction by increasing the efficiency in the process of credit risk 
assessment on the borrowers and by reducing the extraordinary amounts of collateral. It will also 
help reduce the default risk, and enabling the expansion of credit-based lending, thus making the 
financial system more efficient and reliable.  
 
The absence of a CIB in Afghanistan, however, together with the absence of audited financial 
statements makes it very difficult and costly to assess the credit risk of borrowers. This causes 
banks to require borrowers to provide extraordinary amounts of collateral and consequently to 
increase the cost of loans.  
 
This component will help to set up a CIB at the Central Bank, through financial and technical 
assistance. The funding will cover amongst other things: (i) development of a business model to 
ensure sustainability; (ii) software and hardware procurement and installation; (iii) establishment 
of the legal and regulatory framework for a special CIB law and data protection law including, 
amendments to the existing laws; (iv) development of a training program for financial 
institutions; and (v) carrying out a stakeholder awareness program.  In the long run, in line with 
experiences in other countries, a private market for credit information business is envisaged – 
Page  4
and CIB will be hived off from DAB to the private sector.  This initial catalytic role of the public 
sector in CIB establishment is, however, considered critical.  
 
(b)  
Collateral Registry (U$ 0.75 million)  
 
Even though most loans in Afghanistan are extended on a collateral basis, there is no 
centralized collateral registration for movable or immovable property. Creditors have difficulty 
in determining whether the collateral received has been already pledged to other creditors. 
Moreover, given the current state of the legal adjudication system, enforcement of financial 
contracts is also very difficult. It is an accepted fact that systems that use both movable and 
immovable properties as collateral effectively increase access to finance and reduce the cost of 
finance.  For these reasons, the commercial banks as well as DAB are keen on the establishment 
of a centralized collateral registry for movable and immovable property.  
 
The component will support establishment of a collateral registry and fund the following 
activities: (i) development of technical specifications; (ii) business modeling to ensure 
sustainability of operations; (iii) software and hardware procurement and installation; (iv) 
training of various stakeholders once it becomes operational; (v) awareness-raising for general 
public; and (vi) review and issuance of necessary regulations for the smooth operation of the 
collateral registry.  
 
(c)  
Banker's Training Institute (U$ 0.5 million)  
 
Given the rapid growth of the financial sector, the capacity building of the commercial banks 
and the DAB has become more important in order to provide efficient and transparent banking 
services to the clients.  However, weak human resources capacity remains an obstacle to 
financial sector development.  Some individual banks are developing their own training 
programs, but these are not adequate to meet the national need.  There is strong demand to 
establish a training institute that improves the skills available in the financial sector.  
 
This component will support the effort of the DAB and Afghanistan Bank Association (ABA) 
to establish a Bankers’ Training Institute (BTI). It will fund the following activities: (i) 
establishment of a BTI as a legal entity with participation of DAB as a shareholder; (ii) 
development of business model and curriculum designed to ensure sustainable operation; and 
(iii) provision of a seed capital to finance the equity portion of DAB. In the long run, the BTI is 
also expected to be operated on a commercial basis by the private sector.  
 
Component 3– Implementation support (U$ 0.25 million)  
 
The project will be implemented by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in DAB led by a 
Project Director.  DAB has no experience in implementing donor funded project and lacks 
capacity particularly in the areas of procurement, financial management and IT services.  This 
component will therefore help develop the internal procurement and financial management 
capacity to implement the proposed project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  5
The project components primarily consist of technical assistance, coupled with provision of 
necessary equipments to the financial sector at both institutional and national level and do not 
comprise construction of new physical structures. No safeguards policies will be triggered.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As a result of more than two decades of conflict, exodus of trained personnel, low salaries, and 
the lack of exposure to new approaches, the Borrower’s institutional capacity is very weak, 
especially in such specialized areas as safeguard policies. However, this project does not have 
any component of infrastructure rehabilitation or construction and therefore the (OP/BP 4.01) is 
not triggered and there will be no Environmental Impacts on the local Environment.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/01/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Md. Reazul Islam 
09/17/2008 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/17/2008 
Comments:  Cleared: category "C" endorsed on the understanding that no physical works will be 
undertaken. Project is transferred to SASFP for safeguards oversight. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
09/17/2008 
Comments:  Cleared. 
