Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2009 
Report No.:  AC4311
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P116651 
Project Name:  Sustainable Development of Natural Resources - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Craig B. Andrews 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (75%);Central government administration (25%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Legal institutions for a 
market economy (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Additional Financing for the Sustainable Development of Natural 
Resources Project (SDNRP) would help finance additional activities that will support 
attainment of the original development objective and increase project impact.  This 
additional financing of the project has been requested by the Government of Afghanistan 
on March 3, 2009. The development objective of the project will remain unchanged: to 
assist the Ministry of Mines in improving its capacity to effectively regulate 
Afghanistan’s minerals and hydrocarbon resources sector in a transparent manner and 
foster private developments in this sector.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is successfully moving towards achieving the development objective, despite 
a
number of constraints under which many projects in Afghanistan have to operate. The 
additional funding requested is necessary largely because of two developments since the 
project was appraised.  First, international interest in the Afghanistan mineral sector was 
stronger than anticipated, and, at the request of the government, the project, with funding 
from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) for the initial phases of the 
Page  2
process, provided assistance for additional priority activities not originally envisaged, 
such as preparation and conduct of the international tender for the Aynak copper deposit.  
The successful tendering of the Aynak deposit has already led to a payment of US$ 80.8 
million (the initial portion of a US$ 808 million ‘signature bonus’) from the successful 
bidder to the GoA.  Second, the field operating expenses necessary for the consultants to 
carry out their work on the mining cadastre and geological survey have risen substantially 
due to, among other things, the security situation of the country.  
 
The proposed additional financing will finance additional  advisory services to support 
the GoA in completion of the ancillary agreements for the Aynak copper deposit and the 
tender process for the Hajigak iron ore deposit, and the increased operating expenses for 
field trips.  The activities to be supported by the additional financing fall within the 
second and third components of the project, developing regulatory capacity and fostering 
sector development, respectively.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The activities supported by the additional financing would be implemented in the same 
areas where the ongoing SDNRP is currently operating, i.e. Kabul and field trips to 
various mining areas, including Aynak and Hajigak.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (SARDE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
To date, the project’s safeguards compliance is rated as satisfactory.  There are no 
outstanding or unresolved environmental or social issues.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
While this project is not directly involved in mine investments, its role in facilitating 
sustainable mineral sector investments necessitates a change from the current 
Environmental Category "C" to Environmental Category "B", which is in line with 
current Bank practice.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Effective safeguards for development and implementation of mining projects facilitated 
by the project will be supported by: (i) a Mining/Hydrocarbon Sector Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA); ii) inclusion in contractual agreements' provisions to follow 
World Bank Group environmental and social policies in mine development projects; and 
(iii) consultancy services to monitor performance of the investor at the Aynak copper 
deposit.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The SESA is under procurement, and its output will inform planning and management of 
environmental and social aspects of mining sector development. In addition, the South 
Asian Social, Environment and Water Resources Management Unit (SASDI) is preparing  
a
non-
lending TA activity to complement the project’s work. The SASDI activity will 
focus on capacity building at the National Environmental Protection Agency, which is 
needed to support environmental and social assessments and mitigation plans at the 
project-specific level.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
ISDS along with a one page disclosure note will be submitted to and posted by Infoshop.  
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Craig B. Andrews 
04/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/28/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
