Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3789 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/14/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P110407 
Project Name: AF Rural Enterprise Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Qazi Azmat Isa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDA 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (20%);Other social services (20%);Micro- and SME finance 
(20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (20%) 
Theme: Other rural development (25%);Rural non-farm income generation (25%);Rural 
markets (24%);Small and medium enterprise support (13%);Gender (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The MRRD articulates the over-arching development goal for AREDP as to stimulate inclusive 
economic growth by harnessing the potential of micro-enterprise sector and its strategic linkage 
with high growth drivers, particularly SMEs and large agri-businesses, for sustainable 
employment and income gen
eration in rural areas’. Specific objectives include increased rural 
incomes, livelihood generation, reduced vulnerability, improved food security, import 
substitution and developing rural enterprises (farm and non-farm).  
 
In line with these objectives, key result areas of the project would broadly include:  
 
•
Expansion of the rural enterprise sector, particularly numbers of micro-entrepreneurs their 
turnovers and increases in household incomes;  
 
•
Emergence of new market opportunities, as evidenced by diversity in rural SMEs and 
improved SME turnovers; Increased investments in and improved incomes at various stages of 
the value chain;  
 
•
Improved access to financial services from banks and MFIs;  
Page  2
•
Increased employment opportunities, particularly for women and youth;  
 
•
Strong social and human capital developed in poor rural communities   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
AREDP is described as a vertically integrated approach to assist in the enhancement of rural 
livelihoods and formation of rural enterprises from the smallest to the largest. Community level 
group formation, provision of enterprise support services, improving access to credit, and 
strengthening the ability of GoA to deliver these services are key elements of the program. 
AREDP seeks to cluster and graduate the smaller micro enterprises into larger and more efficient 
enterprise associations that will be able to compete and establish forward linkages to SMEs. This 
approach would be achieved through the following three components:  
 
Component A:  Institutional Development and Livelihoods Support Services  
 
•
A-1 Group formation around assets and livelihood opportunities. Development of cluster 
organizations through the aggregation of existing community groups and associations;  
 
•
A-2 Business development centers at provincial/regional levels. Technical assistance on value 
chain development, including processing and storage, and marketing.  
 
Component B:  Financial Services  
 
•
B-1 Community Fund to support small scale rural enterprises and their access to assets;  
 
•
B-2 Technical assistance to improve outreach of financial services to rural enterprises and 
provide support to potential borrowers;  
 
•
B-3 Competitive grant facility to encourage private sector - rural enterprisepartnerships;  
 
Component C:  Project Management and Co-ordination; including a Rural Enterprise Policy 
Unit and an Afghanistan Enterprise Development Council  
 
The program would be implemented through a phased approach working both on a bottom-up 
and top-down approach. From the bottom up: social mobilization, building institution of the 
poor, facilitating access to assets, reaching scale and fostering forward linkages with private 
sector and financial services will be the key sequence. From the top-down: the program would 
support SMEs to develop business proposals with clusters of producers, improve access to 
finance, and reduce the transaction costs associated to partnership with rural entrepreneurs. A 
flexible approach would be adopted that can adapt to the Province, the capacity of existing 
institutions and the enterprise/livelihood opportunities available.  
 
The MoF and MRRD plan for the AREDP to be a national program, with a budget of US$ 428 
million over a five year first phase. A subsequent five year phase is budgeted at US$ 422 million. 
However, the budget includes the provision of credit to SMEs on soft terms. This was not 
favored by the Bank and other donors and is not a part of this concept note. Initial finance 
through IDA is also likely to be substantially less than the MRRD proposal. The program will 
begin in a limited number of provinces, and scale out to additional provinces as finances are 
secured, with the goal of reaching all 34 provinces within four years.  This approach would allow 
early results and impact on household incomes and employment to emerge and for the AREDP 
model to be refined. Detailed calculations will need to be carried out of the initial geographical 
spread of the program for the first phase using likely IDA and bilateral donor finance, and the 
Page  3
additional funds needed and the timeline for scaling-up to a national program.  Preliminary 
calculations suggest that a four year program (excluding SME credit) would require US$ 32-40 
million. Complementary finance from bilateral donors (such as DFID, CIDA and the Netherlands 
Embassy) could increase this amount significantly. This finance would support the majority of 
AREDP elements (particularly group organization & mobilization; enterprise and business 
development support; matching grants facility for micro-enterprises and SME/producer group 
partnerships and; institution building).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As the initial finance through IDA is likely to be substantially less than the MRRD proposal of 
US$428 million the program will have to be selective and begin in a limited number of 
provinces. It can then scale out to additional provinces as finances are secured, with the goal of 
reaching all 34 provinces within four years.   
 
E.  Borr
ower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
After the long war, brain drain and institutional collapse in Afghanistan the overall capacity 
constraint in the country is a great problem for project and program formulation and 
implementation. Environmental and social safeguards management is even further complicated 
in the country context as proper value addition is not yet realized and appreciated in the country 
with little available resources and capacity for it in the country. On the other hand, the 
government has established a National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) who drafted 
Environmental Law for the country which has already been passed by the parliament. Also the 
EIA regulation was drafted and has been sent to cabinet by NEPA for approval and yet to be 
formally announced and applied. Some scattered EIA education and application been started and 
promoted by some donors.  
 
After long negotiations with the partner agencies and the World Bank staff most of our partner 
ministries have identified one or two Focal Officers for the Environmental and Social Safeguards 
management. We have conducted numerous training workshops for these FO and other relevant 
staff working in these projects but still there is a long way to go.  
 
We need to create an awareness regarding the general environmental problems and concerns, 
including problems related to pollution, waste management, land and resource depletion and 
workplace and community health and safety issues. There is a need to enhance the capacity of 
the micro-entrepreneurs how to improve their health and safety practices. We can provide some 
Environmental guidelines for different micro-enterprises. It might be useful to develop some 
simple guidelines for to make more efficient use of space, resources, and infrastructure. In the 
field of Agriculture where most rural enterprises may have connection to the concepts of 
recycling, transportation, energy, housing, water and sanitation and health could be examined 
from an environmental perspective to assess their business potential for micro-entrepreneurs.  
 
Since this is a new and challenging field it is believed that the former generic ESMF developed 
for the country would not be effective as it currently stands as it is; (i) very construction oriented 
too general to provide relevant measures for impact identification, and relevant measures would 
not be very appropriate for the small industrial sector; (ii) not able to identify in a participatory 
manner the Environmental and Social challenges, constraints, opportunities, and understanding 
Page  4
about the baseline situation needed in the small but evolving industrial sector in the country; (iii) 
not developed with full appreciation and ownership of the government as the government was 
too weak and not ready at all to consider such issues and; (iv) the capacity development part of 
the previous ESMF is very weak as it was made to prevent harm and non-compliance with the 
World Bank OP policies and provide some protection to the local communities and the 
environment.  
 
Therefore, a new ESMF with all the needed instruments, e.g., check lists, negative lists, 
environmental audit, environmental guidelines, EMS etc. should be developed by a relevant 
expert in the field for the Rural Enterprise /SME sector. This can be developed in joint 
cooperation with AISA as they are also working on the Industrial Estate where hundreds of 
SMEs will most likely be working.  
 
Specific social safeguard issues are expected to be minor if any, while social issues still remain.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): There is a need to develop skill in the relevant 
stakeholders especially the project management team to understand and appreciate the 
Environmental and social Impact assessment process and relevant tools and how to design the 
mitigation measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
TBD   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
TBD   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
TBD   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
TBD   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Only minor land acquisition is expected within AREDP. An Abbreviated Resettlement 
Framework has been developed containing procedures for restoring of housing, compensation for 
loss of land and livelihood of project affected families in a consultative and mutually agreeable 
manner, compliant with OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/09/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined during the preparation mission.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Qazi Azmat Isa 
10/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
11/04/2008 
Comments:  cleared 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
11/04/2008 
Comments:  cleared 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
