Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/11/2007 
Report No.:  AC3203
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P102573 
Project Name:  Afghanistan Skills Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Venkatesh Sundararaman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2008 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Vocational training (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.00 
 
US: Agency for International Development (USAID) 
6.00 
 
NORWAY: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
6.00
16.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is: Increased number of immediately-employable 
graduates is produced by building, in stages, a high quality TVET system that is 
equitable, market responsive, and cost-effective.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project components are highlighted below:  
 
Component 1: Develop Regulatory and Quality Assurance Framework for TVET (Total 
$
1.5
million, IDA $1.5 million)  
 
This component will create the necessary institutional conditions for a quality TVET 
system that is demand driven and oriented towards labor market needs. This will be 
achieved through the establishment of: (a) an appropriate regulatory structure and quality 
assurance system; and (b) a Qualifications Framework.  This component will have three 
sub-components and will be developed in parallel to Components 2 and 3 (see below). 
Page  2
There is sufficient information for the priority sectors (Administration and Management, 
Accounting, ICT, Basic Engineering Trades, and Agriculture) for the project to be able to 
move on Components 2 and 3, even while it puts in place new institutions to help manage 
and run the a modern TVET system.  
 
Sub-Component 1.1:  Establish of the Afghan National Qualification Authority (Total $ 
0.3 million, IDA $0.3 million)  
 
This sub-component will establish an independent help convene a temporary policy 
body known as the Skills Development Mission (SDM), to be Chaired by the First Vice 
President.  The NSDP will act as the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for this 
committee through an agreement reached with MOE, MOHE and MOLSAMD.  The 
NSDP PIU will carry out all administrative and management functions. The SDM will be 
tasked with putting in place the necessary legal and regulatory foundations and to 
establish the Afghan National Qualifications Authority (ANQA) as an independent, 
statutory Authority, with its own staffing and budget line.  Once the ANQA has been 
established, all the policy level and other administrative functions of the SDM will be 
taken over by the Authority.  
 
Sub-Component 1.2:  Establish the Afghan National Qualifications Framework (Total $ 
0.8 million, IDA $0.8 million)  
 
This sub-component will be implemented by the ANQA which will oversee the design, 
development, and institutionalization of a National Qualifications Framework (NQF).  
The NQF will provide a levels-based structure needed to map all education and training 
course provision in the country and to allow for appropriate, coherent and meaningful 
certification and accreditation processes.  
 
Sub-Component 1.3:  Establish Awarding Board (Total $ 0.4 million, IDA $0.4 million)  
 
The ANQA will establish several Awarding Boards that will provide certification within 
specific levels of the NQF. In particular, for TVET, the ANQA will establish a National 
Vocational Education and Training Board (NVETB) as an independent, statutory Board, 
with a formal charter, staffing and budget line.  
 
Component 2: 
Improve Relevance, Quality and Efficiency of TVET (Total $ 27.5 
million, GOA $ 3.0 million, IDA $12.5 million, USAID $ 6.0 million and Norway $ 6.0 
million)  
 
The objective of this component is to improve the relevance, quality and efficiency of 
TVET programs, and to increase the number of graduates from these programs, through 
the establishment of a new institute, and by undertaking rehabilitation and reforms of a 
select number of other institutions.  Training programs will be contracted out to 
experienced, national and international training institutions through partnership 
Page  3
arrangements.  The partners will develop and implement comprehensive training 
packages, using competency-based approaches in selected sectors.  These training 
packages will be designed in such a way as to allow them to be fitted onto the NQF once 
this has been established. There is sufficient information regarding the priority sectors to 
allow for the Component 2 to be implemented simultaneously with Component 1.  
Programmed activities will focus on both direct teaching of students and on the critical 
area of training of TVET teachers.  
 
Sub-Component 2.1: Establish the National Institute of Management and Administration 
(NIMA) (Total $ 17.0 million, IDA $5.0 million, USAID $ 6.0 million and Norway $ 6.0 
million)  
 
This sub-component is aimed at establishing a new National Institute of Management 
and Administration which will offer programs in three key areas: (i) Management and 
Administration, (ii) Accounting, and (iii) Information Technology.  The Institute will 
cater to student at Grades 13 and 14.  Management and activities within the Institute will 
be contracted out to international training providers. A new, fully equipped, campus will 
be developed.  This sub-component will be executed in a partnership with USAID 
(parallel financing) and the Government of Norway (co-financed with IDA).  A 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed between the MOE, USAID and the 
Government of Norway, identifies the specific roles of the various parties, with Norway 
committing to financing the establishment of new, physical infrastructure and goods 
needed for the school and to finance the rehabilitation of existing facilities to serve as 
temporary accommodation, with USAID committing to the supporting the ‘software’ 
needs of the new Institute, such as, technical assistance and some of the operating costs 
for the first three years.  The MOE/GOA has also committed to take on an increasing 
share of the operating budget and cover all local costs by the end of Year 3.  IDA 
proposes to also finance the establishment of the new institute and the rehabilitation of 
temporary facilities.  In addition, IDA will finance scholarship support to the students and 
goods and equipment, such as, computers, dormitory and classroom furniture, books, and 
a
couple of vehicles.  
 
Sub-Component 2.2:  Institution-Based Reform Package (Total $ 10.0 million IDA $7.0 
million)  
 
This sub-component aims to support reforms and rehabilitation in the remaining 
institutions within the DTVET mandate.  These include the 42 institutions currently 
operating in Afghanistan and which have not received support from other donors.  
Institutes under the DTVET, seeking financial and technical assistance, will need to 
pledge to undertake reforms to improve their relevance, quality and efficiency.  Reforms 
would include: (i) administrative and management process reforms, structural changes, 
and capacity building, and (ii) establishment of a cell to build direct linkages with 
industry and employers.  
 
Page  4
The MOE will develop a detailed guidance document on what the reforms and 
rehabilitation package will include and state the initial conditions and undertakings that 
have to be met by institutions intending to participate in the program.The MOE will then 
review the responses of the individual institutions and decide upon institution specific 
strategies and action programs with the institute.  The project will finance such support, 
including physical upgradation, appropriate equipment, process consulting and technical 
assistance, and faculty training and support as may be identified.  
 
Sub-Component 2.3:  Management Reforms in DTVET (Total $ 1.0 million, IDA $1.0 
million)  
 
This sub-component aims to support reforms within the DTVET which will ensure that: 
(i) the various departments and personnel within DTVET develop a better understanding 
of the structure and functioning of modern TVET systems and become more responsive 
to market needs and accountable for effective vocational training delivery for institutions 
under their control, (ii) concerned staff and officer understand and implement the 
imperatives of the whole project and address internal capacity building issues as 
necessary, (iii) the administrative procedures within DTVET are re-oriented in terms of 
the wider responsibilities that the implementation of the project will entail. In as much as 
the DTVET is a major driver of the whole project, it is the responsibility of this 
directorate to ensure that there is a seamless integration between internal DTVET reforms 
and external structural changes brought about through the creation of the ANQA, the 
Qualifications Framework and the NVETB.  Therefore, internal reforms shall be 
designed and implemented in such a manner that the overall project objectives are always 
fully supported.  Lastly, this sub-component will also focus on the Management 
Information System (MIS) needs of the DTVET and the IT infrastructure needed to 
support it.  
 
Component 3: Skills Development Program and Market Linkages with a Rural Focus 
(Total $ 5.0 million, IDA $5.0 million)  
 
This component aims to support a slice of the on-going activities by the National Skills 
Development Program, and build the capacity within NSDP and MOLSAMD to 
undertake reforms in technical and vocational training, labor market assessments, and to 
strengthen industrial and market linkages.  The three program subcomponents are:  
 
Sub-Component 3.1: Contracted Vocational Training Packages (Total $ 3.0 million, 
IDA $3.0 million)  
 
This component will contract out to training providers market driven training for waged 
and self employment, with a focus on (i) youth, (ii) ‘Chronically Poor Women’, and (iii) 
marginal farmers and landless farm laborers.  Training providers will be chosen 
competitively and their performance formatively monitored.  Training will be based on 
localized labor market studies and will typically cover trades in the agriculture (including 
horticulture, animal husbandry, apiculture and market gardens), construction sector and 
Page  5
fabrication, etc.  Where training relates to self-employment, Business Development 
Services (BDS) training and facilitative links to micro-finance will be provided.  
 
Sub-Component 3.2: Training of Trainers Program (Total $ 1.5 million, IDA $1.5 
million)  
 
Contracted training for Productive Skills Officers (PSOs),  BDS trainers, and selected 
trade trainers; and the development of a menu of 15-20 contextualized productive skills 
curriculum materials, through competitively selected public and private/NGO training 
providers, or consortia of providers, to support the USAID-funded Learning and 
Community Empowerment Project 2 (LCEP2)  
 
Sub-Component 3.3: Capacity Building for NSDP/MOLSAMD (Total $ 0.5 million, 
IDA $0.5 million)  
 
This sub-component will build the capacity within NSDP/MOLSAMD in the following 
areas: (i) curriculum and materials development, (ii) capacity building in these 
organizations to collect, collate, analyze and interpret labor market information.  This 
will also focus capacity building efforts on carrying out a labor force survey jointly with 
the CSO and (iii) training up to 10 key personnel from the NSDP/MOLSAMD in TVET 
planning, management and outreach.  
 
Component 4: 
Research, Monitoring & Evaluation (Total $ 1.0 million, IDA $1.0 
million)  
 
The objective of this component is to develop a program monitoring and information 
system that will provide routine, timely, and accurate information on program 
implementation and allow for the measurement of longer term impacts and independent 
research.  
 
Sub-Component 4.1: Monitoring and Decision Support (Total $ 0.4 million, IDA $0.4 
million)  
 
This sub-component will put in place monitoring and information systems to measure 
program progress. Information generated by the monitoring system (and other relevant 
data) will be used as input for a decision support mechanism which will identify 
alternatives and recommend course-corrections in program implementation.  
 
Sub-Component 4.2: Impact Evaluation (Total $ 0.6 million, IDA $0.6 million)  
 
This sub-component will conduct impact evaluations on specific sub-components in 
relationship to stated program objectives and identified key performance indicators.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have activities across several points (less than 10) in Afghanistan. Most 
of the project activities will involve small construction activities (with single biggest 
activity covering an area about 60,000 m2). These could be both new construction and 
rehabilitation of old and existing infrastructure.  These activities will be predominantly in 
urban areas and are not expected to have adverse environmental impacts.  Given the very 
localized nature of these activities, the project is not expected to have a significant 
environmental footprint. Anticipated environmental and social impacts are manageable 
and within the scope of proposed project activities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main safeguard issues identified under the project relate to potential soil and 
groundwater pollution, with a particular concern for unsafe disposal of asbestos that are 
released during the renovation of old buildings.  
 
There will be no land acquisition under the project as all the physical works relate to 
renovation/rehabilitation of buildings belonging to existing training institutions or few 
new constructions within these institutions, which are all located on Ministry of 
Education land. All the training institutions are currently functioning, and there are thus 
no questions of squatters or informal sellers on these lands.  
 
While the planned rehabilitation activities are not expected to generate significant 
negative environmental and social impacts, they may, however, incur potential localized 
negative impacts which would require appropriate mitigation.   
Page  7
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The future rehabilitation activities could contribute to soil and groundwater pollution, soil 
erosion, loss of vegetation due to solid and liquid wastes generated at the construction 
sites, inappropriate disposal of oils, paint, grease, asbestos if left unattended. These 
impacts could be exacerbated if the rehabilitated facilities, including water supply and 
sanitation facilities, were not operated and maintained effectively.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
It was determined that the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will adequately address any 
potential negative impacts of future rehabilitation activities, and therefore, project 
alternatives did not have to be considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To address the safeguards issues identified under the project, the project has prepared an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Implementation of the 
ESMF will be the responsibility of MoE  who will identify one staff for taking care of the 
ESMF management in addition to other activities he/she may have and located in the 
Project Management and Implementation Unit. This staff will be used across both EQUIP 
II and this project.  
 
To ensure effective implementation of the ESMF, the project will provide resources for 
(i) environmental management training for the ESMF in-charge, selected members of the 
MOE’s DTVET; (ii) the preparation of an environment section for the maintenance 
manuals to be developed for the rehabilitated facilities; and (iii) the preparation of 
separate Environmental Assessments, should these be required.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project will involve the three key public sector ministries engaged in education and 
training, viz., Education (MOE), Higher Education (MOHE), and the National Skills 
Development Program/Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled 
(NSDP/MOLSAMD), with a specific focus on MOE and MOLSAMD. The ESMF has 
been prepared in consultation with these stakeholders. They welcomed the rehabilitation 
activities as these would contribute to a hygienic learning environment and thus attract 
more students. The ESMF should be disclosed in Afghanistan  by mid-November, 20007,  
and at the Bank’s Infoshop by end-November,2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  8
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/19/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/23/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Venkatesh Sundararaman 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Asta Olesen 
11/26/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/11/2007 
Comments:  Clearance is provided on the understanding that the Task Team will provide specific 
supervision measures in the ESMF to assure safeguards compliance during implementation, 
particularly for component 2 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Reema Nayar 
11/28/2007 
Comments:   
