Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4164
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P112446 
Project Name:  Strengthening Health Activities for the Rural Poor (SHARP) 
Task Team Leader:  Emanuele Capobianco 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Child health (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will follow a programmatic approach by providing flexible financing for 
interventions where financing by Government of Afghanistan (GOA) or other partners 
may not be sufficient.  In line with the approach, the project development objective, the 
indicators for the project, as well as the activities, will be aligned to the HNSS.  The 
development objective of the project is therefore the Health and Nutrition Sector Strategy 
2008-2013 (HNS
S) goal to “contribute to improving the health and nutritional status of 
the people of Afghanistan, with a greater focus on women and children and under-served 
areas of the country   
 
3. Project Description 
(a) 
Component 1: Sustaining and strengthening the Basic Package of Health Services 
(BPHS) (USD 17.5million):  This component will support the implementation of the 
BPHS through Performance-based Partnership Agreements (PPA), i.e., contracts between 
the MOPH and the implementing NGO.  It will also support GOA’s own efforts at 
delivering the BPHS through contracting in management services (MOPH strengthening 
mechanism) in a number of provinces.  The project will support further expansion of 
Page  2
health facilities, particularly sub-centers, to improve access for the 60% of people who 
live over an hour away from a health facility; training of additional community mid-
wives (CMW); and training of female community nurses (CNs).  This component will 
also support retroactive financing of expenditure occurred for delivery of BPHS in the 
twelve months before SHARP effectiveness.  
 
(b) 
Component 2: Strengthening the delivery of the Essential Package of Hospital 
Services (EPHS) (USD 2million):  This component will finance an evaluation of the 
impact and lessons learnt from different approaches adopted for EPHS implementation in 
the past three years.  It will support the policy dialogue to develop a systematic and 
coherent package of hospital policies that will ensure efficient use of resources and 
provision of priority services, especially for the poor.  Through third party assessment 
(see Component 3), SHARP will also contribute to monitoring hospital performance in 
the country.  Upon finalization of the evaluation and adoption of a package of evidence 
based hospital policies, the project may finance hospitals and hospital functions critical to 
reduce maternal and child mortality in some locations, with special emphasis on the poor.  
The support to hospitals may occur through contracted NGO or through the MOPH 
strengthening mechanism, based on a specific EPHS expansion plan and on availability 
of resources.  
 
(c) 
Component 3: Strengthening MOPH stewardship functions (USD 10.5million):  
In close coordination with other donors, this component will strengthen both the central 
MOPH and the Provincial Health Offices (PHO), while maintaining coordination and 
promoting decentralization.  At central level, this component will finance contractual 
staff in critical areas of MOPH (e.g., procurement, monitoring and evaluation, health care 
financing, public relations, etc.) as well as a limited number of line manager positions, as 
did the previous Bank project.  At provincial level, PHO will be strengthened through the 
computerization of PHO, reactivation of provincial health coordination meetings. 
Performance-based bonuses for PHO staff based on clear PHO specific performance 
indicators may be introduced based on the results of the RBF pilot.  SHARP will 
contribute to the organization of semi-annual national health coordination workshops and 
to upgrading of the MOPH website, so as to transform it in a communication platform 
between the center and the periphery.  Capacity of staff at central and provincial levels 
will be strengthened through participation in training activities as well as relevant 
national and international conferences. Renovation of GCMU offices will also be 
financed.  This component will further support monitoring and evaluation of BPHS and 
EPHS through the contracting of a third party evaluator to conduct health facility surveys 
and household surveys. The project will support retroactive financing of expenditure 
occurred for monitoring and evaluation in the twelve months before SHARP 
effectiveness.  
 
(d) 
Component 4: Piloting Innovations (USD 10million):  This component will pilot 
supply-side interventions as part of an international results-based financing (RBF) study 
supported by the Government of Norway.  One pilot will target health providers by 
paying performance based bonuses against achievement of agreed indicators related to 
MDG 4 and 5.  Another RBF pilot may support testing of performance based payments in 
the hospital sector.  An impact evaluation will be conducted to assess and document the 
Page  3
effects of the pilots.  To ensure credibility and independence, a qualified research 
organization will be contracted to gauge annual performance, conduct annual facility 
surveys and full household surveys at the beginning and at the end of implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
In view of the programmatic approach, the project will provide flexible financing for 
delivery of services throughout the country. However, the project will be primarily 
implemented in eight provinces covered by the previous project. The pilot testing 
component of the project will be implemented in some of the eightprovinces as well as 
other provinces not covered under the components 1 and 2.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESMF) developed for 
Afghanistan will be applied to the proposed project which has been classified as 
environmental category “B”.  Activities under the project should not entail 
significantnegative environmental impact, provided they are designed and implemented 
as planned.  Proper management of health care waste is critical in efforts to control health 
risks associated with exposure to waste. In this regard the MOPH has been requested to 
revise the 2003 environmental management plan within the first 4-6 months after project 
effectiveness.  There will be no physical works funded by this project and hence no 
acquisition of land, so OP 4.12 is not triggered and neither is OP. 4.10, as there are no 
communities classified as Indigenous Peoples in Afghanistan. Overall the project which 
focuses on providing services for the rural poor, especially women and children is 
expected to have significant positive social impact and no negative impact. All project 
Page  4
components which require consultations with or outreach to local communities or 
beneficiaries, will conduct gender segregated consultations in order to elicit the views 
also of the female population, particularly important in view of the project’s focus on 
womenandchildren.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The key issues and risk mitigation measures from the environmental point of view are the 
following:  
 
-
Waste can constitute a danger for the environment and its inhabitants even at far 
distance. The main danger is contamination of underground water reservoirs, fountains 
and wells and the land itself. This may constitute a direct hazard for humans and animals 
in case insects and rodents have access to those areas. Such animals are well known 
vectors for various infectious diseases. The risk mitigation measures consist of 
implementing proper waste management procedures (collecting in closed containers and 
disposing in environmentally safe land fills or if it is not available at least in safe dumps).  
 
-
Healthcare waste is of concern to human health and the environment. While a large 
fraction of healthcare waste is similar to household waste, the rest may contain 
microorganisms potentially harmful to hospital patients, their visitors, health care 
employees, and the general public. In addition, used needles, syringes and other sharps 
present risks of injury and infection (such as Hepatitis B and C, and HIV) for health care 
employees. National guidelines for safe handling of sharp and waste disposal should exist 
and should be enacted. MOPH will create/strengthen and implement regulations on safe 
handling, disposal, transportation and destruction of hazardous waste. Proper training will 
be delivered to the healthcare personnel and adequate procedures will be enforced. Public 
awareness training will be provided and the implementation of procedures will be 
monitored. Where necessary, appropriate mechanisms for safe disposal of health care 
waste (based on WHO guidelines) will be provided under the Project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Progress in environmental management has been made in the health sector over the past 
few years, but there are still important gaps: The MOPH had issued sound health care 
waste management policies which were informed by the environmental assessment 
carried out in 2003. Data have been regularly collected at primary health care level 
through annual facility surveys conducted over the past four years: the results show 
encouraging improvement in waste management. However, the implementation of these 
policies has not been appropriately tracked at all levels, especially in public hospitals. 
The country still lacks a sound biomedical waste management system. There is not yet 
any legislation or regulation in place. The MOPH lacks the handling and disposal 
methods, facilities and trained staff, without which proper health care waste management 
Page  5
will not be possible. The World Health Organization is helping MOPH to assess health 
care waste management issues and to strengthen the current management system.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The overall responsibility of project implementation rests with the Ministry of Public 
Health (MOPH).  A designated safeguards focal officer will be identified with 
responsibility for overseeing the proper application of the Environmetal Management 
Plan within the Grant Contract Management Unit at the MOPH. The MOPH focal point 
will be responsible for coordinating and monitoring the joint efforts of all relevant 
stakeholders during operations and make sure that the work is in accordance with the 
provisions of the social and environmental management framework. The officer will 
report any gaps, constraints in the implementation of the Environmental Management 
Plan to the MOPH Management.  
 
Also, National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) has the responsibility of 
developing legislation and regulation regarding protection of the Environment and has an 
overall oversight role when it comes to proper implementation of national environmental 
requirements.  
 
The Environmental Management Plan was disclosed by the Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan in 2003 and will be updated before the beginning of project implementation.  
The updated version will be redisclosed by the Government of Afghanistan in Dari, 
Pashto and English before start of implementation activities. It will also be redisclosed 
through Infoshop as soon as available.  
 
It is worth noting that GOA intends to make all project documentation publicly 
available to the relevant stakeholders and through the Afghan Information Management 
System.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/01/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/04/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/18/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The environmental management plan was disclosed in 2003 for the first health project. 
As SHARP is a repeater, the environmental management plan was redisclosed in country 
in December 2008. The MOPH and Bank teams agreed at appraisal to have a revised 
version of the EMP within four months from effectiveness, i.e. before initiation of 
activities on the ground. This agreement has been recorded in the financing agreement.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emanuele Capobianco 
01/16/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
01/16/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal 
01/16/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Asta Olesen 
01/16/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
02/13/2009 
Comments:  Cleared, with the understanding that improvements in medical waste management will 
be carried out. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
02/11/2009 
Comments:  The Safeguards applied for this emergency project appear reasonable. 
