Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3940 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/31/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P112446 
Project Name: Strengthening Health Activities for the Rural Poor (SHARP) 
Task Team Leader: Emanuele Capobianco 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to support the Afghanistan Health and 
Nutrition Sector Strategy objective to “contribute to improving the health and nutritional status 
of the people of Afghanistan, with a greater focus on women and children and under-served areas 
of the country”.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Bank will follow the government’s programmatic approach for the health sector by 
providing flexible financing for interventions not financed by the Government or other partners.  
Within this approach, the Bank will focus on the following areas:  
 
Component 1. Sustaining and Strengthening BPHS Delivery: The project will support the 
implementation of the BPHS through Performance Partnership Agreements (PPAs), i.e., 
contracts between the MOPH and the implementing Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). 
It will also support the government’s own efforts at delivering the BPHS through contracting in 
Page  2
management services in the provinces the government selects. There will be support for 
expansion of sub-centers, training of additional community mid-wives and of community nurses.  
 
Component 2. Strengthening EPHS Delivery: Despite MOPH increased interest on EPHS, there 
is little evidence of which hospital model may be best for Afghanistan.   For this reason, in the 
initial phase the project will provide technical assistance to support testing of different options 
including: (i) contracting hospital services to NGOs; (ii) strengthening management autonomy 
and decision-making authority in public hospitals; and (iii) establishing accountability 
arrangements and pay for performance (related to component 4 below).   In the second phase, 
upon evaluation of the options above, the project will support the expansion of the preferred 
model.  
 
Component 3. Building Further Capacity for the Stewardship Function of the MOPH: This 
component will support: (i) the monitoring and evaluation system (through contracting of an 
independent agency); (ii) the Grant and Contract Management Unit and related line managers; 
(iii) the health care financing unit; (iv) the communication unit; (v) the MOPH regulatory 
function; and (v) the provincial health offices.  
 
Component 4. Testing Important Innovations: The project will pilot-test supply side 
interventions (e.g. pay for performance for health workers) on a large scale results-based 
financing study.  The study is financed by a Norwegian grant that the MOPH recently obtained 
through a competitive process. This component might also finance the expansion of other 
innovations, such as demand-side financing for women to deliver in institutions and 
performance-based pay for community health workers   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In view of the programmatic approach, the project could provide flexible financing for delivery 
of services throughout the country. However, the project will be primarily implemented in the 
eleven provinces covered by the previous project. The pilot testing component of the project will 
be implemented in some of the eleven provinces as well as other provinces not covered under the 
components 1 and 2.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has developed health care waste management policies and has been following its 
implementation by service providers through annual facility surveys. However, there is still not 
yet proper health care waste management system in place in the country. The MOPH has been 
supportive of an integrated approach to health care waste management across different diseases. 
The borrower has been building its capacity through time.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal (SASDI) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The MOPH had issued sound health care waste management policies which were informed 
by the environmental assessment carried out in 2003. However, the implementation of these 
policies has not been appropriately tracked at all levels, especially in public hospitals. Data have 
been regularly collected at primary health care level through annual facility surveys conducted 
over the past four years: the results show encouraging improvement in waste management.  
 
The country still lacks a sound biomedical waste management system. There is not yet any 
legislation or regulation in place. The MOPH lacks the handling and disposal methods, facilities 
and trained staff, without which proper health care waste management would not be possible. 
The World Health Organization is helping MOPH to assess health care waste management issues 
and to strengthen the current management system.  
 
The proposed project will facilitate a review of the environmental management plan for 
health care waste management. During the project life, surveys will be conducted and progress 
on this topic will be assessed on a regular basis.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/08/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguards- related studies are anticipated.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Emanuele Capobianco 
10/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
10/29/2008 
Comments:  cleared on understanding that specifics of steps to improve waste management will be 
clarified by appraisal. Decision to transfer safeguards oversight to SASHD will be made at QER or 
appraisal stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
10/29/2008 
Comments:  Afghanistan has made relatively substantial progress in health care waste management. As 
with the many other sector priorities, full-scale implementation will require sustained support. 
