Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/20/2009 
Report No.:  AC4089
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Afghanistan 
Project ID:  P110644 
Project Name:  Afghanistan Financial Sector Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader:  Md. Reazul Islam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  SASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Banking (60%);General finance sector (40%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Other financial and private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main objective of the FSS Project is to attain greater efficiency in the banking system 
and improve access to formal banking services to the underserved by establishing key 
initial building blocks for broader financial sector reform. This will be achieved by 
strengthening the overall capacity of DAB including banking supervision, enhancing 
credit information flow among the financial institutions, and providing better training for 
staff in financial institutions.  
 
Key outputs of the project will include: (i) enhanced capacity of DAB in carrying out its 
core function of financial sector stability, which can be measured in terms of a clean audit 
report by the external auditors, an assessment of compliance with Basel Core Principles, 
and the establishment of a modern human resource management system; (ii) improved 
capacity to assess credit risk of borrowers, increased range of assets that can serve as 
acceptable loan collaterals, and increased quality and number of qualified bankers.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 
–
Strengthening the capacity of Da Afghanistan Bank  
 
Page  2
1. 
Strengthening the capacity of DAB has been a focus of the GoA since the fall of 
the Taliban regime.  DAB has, for some time, been working in close collaboration with 
various development partners including the World Bank , USAID and IMF on 
strengthening its internal administration and bank supervisory capacity.  While there has 
been some very good progress, DAB now recognizes it needs to upgrade its capabilities 
in three critical areas:  
 
•
Develop the off-site supervision systems and supervision competencies in DAB  
 
•
Creating an effective accounting and internal auditing system functioning to 
generally acceptable international standards, which is critical operationally and goes to 
the heart of DAB’s credibility as a Central Bank; and  
 
•
Establishing an effective human resource management system so it can move 
from relying on expatriate advisors to well-trained and empowered local staff;  
 
(a) 
Banking Supervision  
 
2. 
Infrastructural Weaknesses: The absence of standard supervisory infrastructure 
within DAB and the usual means of mitigating the consequent weaknesses expose the 
commercial banks to significant risks. As experience is short in the supervision 
department, these risks are difficult to measure, and thus difficult to manage. It also 
means that DAB is handicapped in delivering an effective system of supervision. Many 
of the wider infrastructural weaknesses in the legal system are, however, being resolved 
through the drafting of new laws, e.g. the Mortgage Law and the Secured Transaction 
Law.  
 
3. 
Systemic Risks: Systemic risks relating to the rapid development of the private 
banking sector are also increasing. Although these have been somewhat improved by 
supervisory measures, these are only temporary solutions. Systemic risks include:  
 
•
Access to credit: accessing credit is relatively new for borrowers, while thebanks 
in Afghanistan generally have unseasoned loan books. The weak infrastructure, combined 
with the lack of management depth in the banks poses a significant risk;  
 
•
Loan structure: credit culture is informal and loans are not structured in a Western 
sense. Lending is still done through personal knowledge of the customer and the problem 
of measuring credit risk remains acute despite DAB’s strides in requiring banks to 
introduce a more formal approach;  
 
•
Risk on liabilities side of the balance sheet: the deposit base of banks may well be 
volatile in Afghanistan due to unusual inducements such as lotteries; and  
 
•
Excess capital: while public banks are now highly liquid and have excess capital; 
this will evaporate quite quickly if their loan books continue to expand rapidly.  
 
4. 
Current On-Site Supervisory Procedures:  As regards on-site examination, 
considerable efforts have been put into training and coaching since 1st November 2002, 
largely by the Bearing Point advisers as set out in Annex 1. Although the Bearing Point 
consultants will leave DAB in February 2009 following the “no cost extension” of their 
contract, it is likely that USAID will continue to support the examiner capacity 
development through a new contract. In addition the IMF, largely through METAC, its 
regional technical assistance centre, will continue to provide training for banking 
Page  3
supervision. There is, however, a need to further build up the capacity for DAB staff to 
audit IT systems in commercial banks.  
 
5. 
Off-Site Supervisory Procedures: The off-site supervisory function needs to be 
strengthened. Currently this aspect of supervision is undertaken by those who collect and 
check data derived from regular reporting by banks. Then specified examiners, when not 
occupied with examinations, are also responsible for acting as contact persons for 
individual banks.  Each examiner prepares assessments for the bank to which he has been 
assigned and the output for these is considered when assessing priorities for the 
examination program and other supervisory action. There is also a special supervision 
section which handles banks under supervisory action of varying types. One of the deputy 
directors is responsible for aggregating bank reported data and preparing assessments of 
the whole sector. The results of both exercises are then circulated to the Governor and 
senior officials.  The current off-site analysis process is a poor cousin to the on-site 
examination procedures, and analytical time devoted to it necessarily comes second to the 
time spent on examinations. Many of the current deficiencies could be addressed through 
automating the off-site supervisory processes.  
 
6. 
Although there is presently a case manager for each bank, the job is secondary to 
the examiner’s responsibility to fulfill his or her obligations to the examination program. 
The expansion of the Financial Supervision Department (FSD) will allow for the 
enhancement of the role of case manager who will become the individual responsible for 
managing the supervision of the bank allocated. The case manager would become the 
recipient of off-site reporting and other intelligence received by the FSD. He or she 
would be responsible for periodic analysis based on received data, proposing the 
supervisory strategy for the bank, including the priority for inclusion in the examination 
schedule, targeted examinations etc., briefing of examiners, participating in examinations 
if appropriate, ensuring that points raised in the examination report are followed up, the 
supervisory strategy amended, and so on. The case manager would also be the principal 
point of contact for correspondence with the bank on risk management and other policies 
that require or should require to be approved by DAB. Much of this work can be done 
between examinations although on-site examination provides the best method of 
verification that it has been done correctly. The case manager should also be the 
instigator of discussions with external auditors and should process approvals of new 
managers, directors, shareholders etc. Finally, the case manager should also be 
responsible for managing corrective action with the help of the specialist team in the 
‘special supervision’ function.  
 
7. 
Career Development for Supervisory Staff, Case Managers and IT Staff:  A 
further important need in DAB is the skill and career development of supervisory staff. 
The career development is extremely important in ensuring that supervisory staff have an 
incentive to develop professionally and are fully effective. Suffice it to say that 
application of modern human resource management will not be effective in the FSD until 
a
Director General is appointed and retains the post long enough to exercise effective 
management.  
 
Page  4
8. 
The FSS Project will support the automation of the off-site supervisory 
capabilities of DAB by replacing the Excel spreadsheets which are currently used with a 
more modern system in order to reduce time in producing reports and then validating and 
removing errors. Additionally, the project will finance the training of the staff who will 
be involved in the off-site supervision work, developing a career development plan and 
enhancing the role of the case manager.  
 
(b) 
 Accounting and Internal Audit  
 
Accounting  
 
9. 
The accounting system in DAB was set up initially in 1965. In 2003, DAB, with 
the help of their advisers, developed an in-
house system called ‘Database’ using MS 
Access program. It was developed from a currency conversion program with 
functionality extended to banking operations, payments, inter bank transfers, accounting, 
market operations etc. While DAB was able to capture all its transactions with this 
system, the Database results were not very reliable or acceptable as it had certain inherent 
deficiencies. In 2006, a Core Banking Solution (CBS) system was acquired by DAB, 
funded by USAID, to address the increase in the volume of transactions, and changes in 
DAB’s role with the licensing of new commercial banks. Though the software was 
designed for a commercial bank, the scope of the software had the ability to be extended 
to central bank operations. DAB, with the assistance from Bearing Point consultants, also 
developed an exhaustive Chart of Accounts for this system in compliance with the 
International Financial Reporting System (IFRS).  Currently, the main module of the 
software has been implemented in all the departments of the Head Office, and the six 
regional (zonal) offices. It is now being extended to two of the 20 priority branches. The 
specific modules like Payroll, Fixed Assets, Market Operations, Budgets, etc. have not 
yet been implemented. It would take about five years for this system to be fully 
operational in all the functions and activities of DAB at the Head Office, regional offices 
and the branches. CBS is, however, unlikely to fully meet DAB’s accounting and 
Management Information System (MIS) needs. It is advisable that DAB should continue 
to use this system for a few years, but in the medium to long run it should move on to a 
customized comprehensive central banking IT system for its accounting and MIS system. 
Without having a proper accounting and internal audit system in itself, it would be 
difficult for DAB to impose the placement of such a system on the commercial banks, 
and to undertake rigorous banking supervision.  
 
10. 
Current weaknesses in the Accounting Department: Despite the introduction of 
the CBS system, there are still numerous weaknesses in the internal control systems in 
DAB. For example there is more reliance on the inbuilt system controls without adequate 
manual controls, checks and balances to ensure the integrity of the input data and the 
information provided by the system. The procedures and policies in respect of 
transactions in core activities were developed when required but they were not well 
documented or collated. Additionally, in the absence of a well documented procedure, 
Page  5
there is a lack of consistency in the account coding, and further, the account code 
allocated is not cross checked or verified by anyone, other than the Supervisor of the 
Accounting Methodology section in the Accounting Department. Moreover, although the 
vouchers received from other divisions are numbered they do not appear to be sequential. 
Hence it cannot be confirmed whether all vouchers have been received and recorded. 
Reconciling the manual books to the database balances is posing a difficulty since the 
documents developed during the Taliban era were not maintained properly or was not 
readily available. The reconciliation for the subsequent period seems to be progressing 
smoothly in respect of correspondent banks subject to certain differences due to 
reconciling items. However, branch reconciliation is delayed due to a communication gap 
and DAB has been able to reconcile to date only about 26 branches out of 71, while the 
others are in progress.  
 
11. 
Accounting Manual: DAB has been formulating the Accounting Policies and 
Operational Procedures as and when required but has not collated and documented it into 
a
formal Accounting Manual. An Accounting Manual would generally elucidate policies 
and procedures in respect of transactions of each core activity of the bank, and the 
documentation required for these processes. The internal review and verification 
procedure would also be performed while complying with such laid down procedures. 
Although
,
Bearing Point’s Accounting Advisor was working to develop an Accounting 
Manual, only 25-30% work has been completed to date. Moreover, the Accounting 
Manual has to be well understood by the staff in order to properly follow the outlined 
procedures.  
 
12. 
In light of these internal controls and other weaknesses, the financial reports 
produced by DAB cannot be relied upon. The financial statements of DAB for the period 
ending March 20, 2006 (SY1384) were qualified due to a number of factors including: (i) 
the opening balances of assets and liabilities were estimated rather than fully authentic 
and reliable; (ii) DAB’s General Ledger was not complete in all respects; and (iii) the 
need to reconcile the assets and liabilities swapped between the Ministry of Finance and 
DAB. It also received a disclaimer of opinion for the period ending March 20, 2007 
(SY1385) due to several reasons, among others: (i) no proper accounting procedure is 
built in the system; (ii) there is no Accounting Manual; and (iii) DAB does not follow a 
system of periodic internal review, verification, and reconciliation of balance. The 
External Auditors in their “Report of Factual Findings” dated 8th January 2008 have also 
observed control weaknesses in the area of foreign reserve operation over accounting and 
reporting of the Reserve Assets of DAB. The Auditor’s Report also noted that there is a 
need to strengthen the internal control system that is commensurate with the size and 
nature of the business of DAB to ensure adequate integrity of balances in the financial 
statements.  
 
13. 
Staff Capacity and Training: The existing staff in the Accounting Department 
only have a basic understanding of book keeping, and traditionally maintain details of 
DAB’s transactions in manual registers. With the exception of a few staff, many staff 
members do not have a technical knowledge or training in preparing financial statements. 
Only a few staff have exposure to International Accounting Standards (IAS) or IFRS 
Page  6
requirements. Most staff are trained in the basic module of the CBS software, while some 
are trained in other modules such as Fixed Assets, Payroll, Market Operations, Budget, 
etc.  
 
14. 
The FSS project will support DAB to hire an expert to complete the Accounting 
Manual and also prepare the Accounting Policy and Operation Procedures for effective 
implementation of the Accounting Manual. An expatriate consultant will be hired for 12-
18 months on a full time basis to undertake the entirety of the completion of the 
Accounting Manual, policies and procedures, and also assist in capacity building in order 
for successful implementation of the Accounting Manual. The project will also assist the 
development of staff capacity in the Accounting Department in terms of financing short 
courses (internally and externally), including external long term courses for professional 
development and career enhancement. This will be assessed and implemented by the 
Human Resources Department in conjunction with the Accounting Department.  
 
Internal Auditing  
 
15.
The Department was established in 2004 with an Acting Internal Auditor and 
about 15 staff members. In accordance with the Law of Da Afghanistan Bank, this 
department should be led by a Comptroller General appointed for a period of five years.  
There has been no Comptroller General of the Audit Department since its creation in 
2004. The department generally performs compliance audits in respect of all departments 
and branches, it does not, however, undertake risk based audits. Generally, an audit is 
conducted by a team of three staff members who report in Dari language, through the 
Comptroller General, to the Governor, First Deputy Governor, the Chief of the Audit 
Committee and its two members. All members of the Audit Committee are also members 
of the Supreme Council of DAB 
–
this structure is defined in the Law of Da Afghanistan 
Bank 2003. Since the Audit Department’s establishment, no audit of the accounting 
department has been done as thestaff were engaged in the preparation of financial 
statements for the past years and the external audit. The Auditor’s Report stated that there 
is need to strengthen the internal control system to ensure adequate integrity of balances 
in the financial statements. The capacity of the Audit Department needs to be 
strengthened further so that it can discharge its function more effectively. Although staffs 
have all been given training in and access to the current CBS system, the competence to 
perform audits is considerably lacking.  
 
16. 
Audit Manual: The Audit Department does not have a proper Audit Manual nor 
Policies or Operational Procedures. It also does not have the policies and operational 
procedures of the other departments in order to monitor them. Bearing Point is helping to 
develop an Internal Audit Manual, but since the “no cost extension” will end in February 
2009, the work will not be completed within this time.The Audit Department assessed 
that about 30-35% work on the Audit Manual and Operational Procedures may be 
completed by February 2009. Moreover, the departmental staff will require to be trained 
in the usage of the manual for them to follow in the future.  
 
17. 
Staff Capacity and Training: The internal audits are performed by the staff more 
out of experience in banking operations than by proper education or training and they are 
Page  7
not well exposed to modern international banking and international accounting 
requirements or trained in them. Therefore, appropriate training needs to be assessed and 
accordingly a training program developed.   
 
18. 
The FSS project will support DAB to hire a consultant to complete the Audit 
Manual and also prepare the Audit Policy and Operation Procedures for effective 
implementation of the Audit Manual. An expatriate consultant will be hired for 12 
months to undertake the entirety of this task and also in capacity building in order for 
successful implementation of the Auditing Manual. It will also assist the development of 
staff capacity in the Audit Department in terms of financing short courses (internally and 
externally), including external long term courses for professional development and career 
enhancement. The training needs will be assessed and implemented by the Human 
Resources Department in conjunction with the Audit Department.  
 
(c) 
 Human Resources  
 
19. 
The Human Resources Department (HRD) needs to be reformed and organized to 
properly reflect its core functions.  The middle level capacity needs to be assessed and 
strengthened and new, modernized business processes need to be developed. General HR 
reform will have to be complemented by a strengthening of the staff skills to operate the 
new systems and processes. Furthermore, the management of these skilled staff will 
require good practices to attract, motivate and retain qualified staff.  
 
20. 
HRD policies need to be developed covering (i) Recruitment policy that matches 
the short and long term skills requirement of DAB;  (ii) placement and mobility policy to 
ensure that there is adequate specialization and least disruption to key department 
functioning; (iii) training and career development policy that is in line with skills 
requirement, which is both sustainable and effective as well as safeguarding DAB from 
excessive turnover of staff; (iv) performance evaluation that is structured, participative 
and constructive; (v) rewards management and compensation policy that encourages 
productivity; (vi) exit mechanisms to ensure that non performers have a way out of the 
system; and (vii) termination benefits policy that provides the right incentives and 
warnings to performers and non performers. Furthermore, there is a need for developing 
comprehensive procedures on grievance handling, code of conduct and the HR manual in 
line with the strategy and aspiration of DAB  
 
21. 
Additionally there is a strong need for the HRD to carry out an analysis of staff 
competencies in order to identify gaps in current training practices and provide 
recommendations for new training components to all departments. Job descriptions of all 
DAB staff will be prepared in terms of their importance and contribution to the 
organization. Based on the job description and current competencies of the staff, it would 
be possible to assess the training needs of the key staff to design a comprehensive 
training program for DAB staff. Both local and international training in the core areas of 
central banking would be needed to upgrade the professional skills that the new 
organization would demand and expect from all staff. The training assessment will also 
Page  8
analyze both behavioral and technical training priorities.  Specially tailored management 
development programs could be arranged through local and international training 
institutes for the middle management at DAB. As new HR policies are rolled out, there 
will need to be a large communication and training effort to assist with the 
comprehension and application of various new policies as well as the strategic plan.  
 
22. 
The FSS project will therefore finance an HR adviser for up to 12 months to 
advise and develop a set of new HR policies as set out above and assist in their 
implementation for HR reform in DAB which would include ‘Gender Mainstreaming’as 
described in Annex 10. The HR Adviser will work closely with the HR Director and 
HRD to ensure that the new HR policies are in line with DAB’s Strategic Planand that an 
adequate training program is developed to build necessary capacity in DAB. 
Additionally, it will finance the training of HR staff to develop the capacity of the HRD 
and to be able to effectively implement the policies developed under the project, with a 
view to designing and implementing, in cooperation with all departments, an overall 
training program for DAB. This will be supported through the development of an 
understanding for the rationale of change and how it will affect individuals personally. A 
good, comprehensive and varied communications program will help new HR policies to 
succeed. Finally, the project will fund the automation of HR management for HRD to 
store and maintain a database of information about each employee for efficient HR data 
management, based on the results of the above two tasks.  
 
(d) 
IT Development of DAB  
 
IT System Strategic Plan for DAB  
 
23. 
DAB envisages that further automation will also be required in the next few years 
in order for it to achieve its mission of fostering price stability and building a robust 
financial system while implementing the five strategic pillars under the ‘DAB Strategic 
Plan for 2008-2014’, DAB requires up to date and accurate information on a variety of 
aspects related to the monetary, financial and associated sectors of the economy in 
performing its functions as the central bank.  
 
24. 
The current IT system cannot provide this. The management at DAB is aware of 
the existing deficiencies and would like to initiate an organization wide program to 
upgrade the IT environment at DAB. To ensure that the planned investment envisaged in 
this area yields measurable productivity, operational and strategic gains, DAB 
management desires that:  
 
•
The up-gradation in the technology and skills capacity be defined and driven by 
the information requirements of the fundamental business process that DAB has to 
perform to carry out its mission, achieve its objectives, and plan & organize its work 
programs;  
 
•
The prioritization of initiatives be carried out by identifying key areas which 
present the maximum opportunities for improvement; and  
 
•
The urgent need for a broader spread of modern office technology systems and 
processes to be addressed as early as possible.  
Page  9
25. 
The IT consultants financed by the FSS project will therefore assist DAB update 
their Information Systems Strategy Plan (ISSP). The ISSP is expected to provide a plan 
for 5 years of development. The ISSP would derive the hardware and software 
requirements from an analysis of the fundamental business processes carried out by 
DAB, the information requirements and information flows associated with these business 
processes and identify specific information systems that would need to be implemented to 
satisfy these requirements. The ISSP would identify priority applications on the basis of 
need and opportunity as determined by DAB management. It would estimate the cost and 
time required for implementation of the system and the specific items of hardware and 
software that would need to be acquired. It would include an implementation plan and 
suggest a phasing of activities in accordance with management priorities and the 
absorptive capacity of the organization. In particular it would identify areas of maximum 
opportunity and tasks, which should be carried out to address immediate needs and those 
of the longer-term requirements. It would identify the human resource requirements in 
areas of skill set required for implementing the plan and derive a training plan for 
existing staff and the skill set to be added by additional recruitment.  
 
IT System Development  
 
26. 
The FSS project will also assist DAB in carrying out a cross-cutting IT system 
development for automation of off-site supervision, automation of HR management; and 
for the Public Credit Registry and Collateral Registry.  
 
27. 
In order to determine the specifications for the IT systems required for off-site 
supervision and the HR management, a consulting firm will be hired to conduct an IT 
assessment to determine the exact specifications required for the hardware and software. 
The IT assessment will also assist in determining basic requirements for operation of the 
Public Credit Registry and Collateral Registry by analyzing: the current level and 
performance of DAB’s IT systems, its suitability and capacity of hosting the Public 
Credit Registry and Collateral Registry, as well as reliability and performance of the 
telecommunications network. It would also include:  
 
•
Determine the changes and upgrades required in terms of hardware and 
softwareconfiguration and telecommunications that DAB’s IT main system  will require 
tosatisfy the fundamental technical requirements and needs of the Collateral Registry and 
Public Credit Registry;  
 
•
Determine the level of internal capacity of DAB’s IT staff to support the 
development of the systems, manage and operate them;  
 
•
Broadly define the training needs, for DAB’s personnel to reach self sufficiency 
in hosting, handling and maintaining sophisticated systems such as the Public Credit 
Registry and Collateral Registry; and  
 
•
Broadly define IT staffing needs in terms of position, responsibilities, and profiles 
required by DAB to smoothly run the internal main system and manage the ancillary 
systems including Public Credit Registry and Collateral Registry.  
 
Page  10
28. 
The exact technical specifications for the Public Credit Registry and Collateral 
Registry will be determined by a vendor based on the RFP requirements drafted by DAB 
with the assistance of the IFC. The IFC will also determine the final training 
requirements of DAB IT staff based on the final software and hardware specifications 
developed and implemented by the vendor.  
 
Component 2 
–
Development of necessary infrastructure in the financial sector  
 
29. 
Improving access to finance is a long and arduous process but is essential to 
support the development of the private sector. Resolving the core constraints to lending to 
the private sector involves a number of important steps, among others: (i) establishing 
secure property rights on movable and immovable property; (ii) devising means to 
establish and enforce the realization of collateral; (iii) enhancing credit information flow 
and identifying “good” and “bad” customers;(iv) developing new financing mechanisms 
such as leasing and Islamic financing; (v) training bankers in the assessment of private 
sector credit risks; (vi) building appraisal capacity to establish values; and (vii) 
developing insurance markets to insure collateral against hazardous events.  The World 
Bank in consultation with DAB and the private sector prioritized the following 
components to be included in the FSS Project:  
 
•
Establishing a collateral registry for movable property that will provide lenders 
the ability to effectively use their property as collateral;  
 
•
Setting up a credit information bureau that will provide lenders information for 
efficient risk assessment on borrowers; and  
 
•
Developing a banker’s training institute that can build credit assessment skills 
throughout the banking system.  
 
30. 
Under this component costs are being shared between IDA and IFC for the 
establishment of the Collateral Registry and the Public Credit Registry. IFC will provide 
technical assistance and fund the “soft” parts of the component – the necessary legal 
reviews, support for any amendment to relevant laws and/or drafting of new 
laws/regulations. Additionally, IFC will also provide advice to DAB on developing the 
Request for Proposal for the hardware and software components. Basic information about 
the suitability of DAB’s IT operations and training requirements will be provided by the 
IT review funded by IDA under Component 1, however, the exact specifications of the 
systems, and training for DAB IT staff, for the Collateral Registry and the Public Credit 
Registry will be determined by the vendor, based on the RFP developed by DAB with 
technical assistance from the IFC. Once the enabling environment for both the Collateral 
Registry and the Public Credit Registry has been established, IFC will also finance 
awareness raising campaigns among key stakeholders. IDA will finance the procurement 
of the necessary computer hardware and software for the physical infrastructure.  
 
(a)  
Public Credit Registry  
 
Page  11
31. 
Financial markets in Afghanistan are largely dominated by a few commercial 
banks in terms of loan volume while an active microfinance sector represents almost 90% 
of loans by number. Commercial banks primarily focus on larger and public 
organizations which have left a large gap in the availability of finance for smaller, private 
firms in Afghanistan. In the process of loan assessment by the financial institutions, for 
all intents and purposes, no credit information is currently available to lenders in 
Afghanistan. Only very limited data is exchanged between DAB and the 15 commercial 
banks, which is basic statistical information on outstanding portfolios and deposits. 
However, this information is aggregated in consolidated amounts of all exposures, 
transmitted on paper, and of no added value in terms of risk assessment. Furthermore, 
information can be only utilized by DAB for statistical purposes, very limited supervision 
activities, and to comply with international standard requirements. Dissemination of 
information to lenders is not contemplated, and there is no information returned from 
DAB to the banks for credit underwriting purposes. There is no other alternative source 
of credit information, neither public nor private used by the lenders to underwrite credit. 
The absence of reliable credit information is a significant impediment to the expansion 
and development of a healthy financial sector in Afghanistan. Developing a new credit 
information sharing system would include new risk management tools and procedures to 
collect and make available exhaustive, complete and predictive full-file credit profiles 
and information. While it is premature given the current state of the credit markets in 
Afghanistan to consider a private credit bureau, the project intends to assist DAB in 
initially establishing a Public Credit Registry.  Once the market conditions are supportive, 
private, for-profit credit bureaus should be encouraged and enabled to enter the market 
with DAB’s role related to sharing of credit information migrating to that of the new 
private bureaus. The introduction of effective private credit bureaus should be planned 
once consumer literacy and utilization of credit are customary and broader, when risk 
management skills of lenders are more developed, and when reputable, international 
operators are motivated to make a direct investment in Afghanistan.  
 
32. 
Current Legal framework for credit information sharing: The existing legal and 
regulatory framework, mainly the Law of Da Afghanistan Bank, and Law on Banking in 
Afghanistan, seems to give DAB sufficient, autonomous powers to collect information 
for supervisory and statistical purposes. However, it does not appear tailored to allow the 
establishment of a full-file credit-reporting infrastructure, i.e., positive and negative 
information on all loans. Further, under the current legal framework, it does not seem 
feasible for DAB to have the authority to issue new or amended regulations to modify 
and enhance current legislation. An alternative to cope with this matter would be to rely 
on consent by borrowers which, in some jurisdictions, e.g., Saudi Arabia, is sufficient to 
establish credit information sharing platforms. This alternative needs to be coupled by a 
Code of Conduct issued by DAB and applied by all lenders. This option should be 
explored in Afghanistan as it is the simplest way to establish a legal base for credit 
information sharing. However despite the draw backs, this option could be a good 
starting point to launch the development of the credit reporting system. DAB should, 
however, work in parallel to this process to ensure that a transparent legal framework for 
credit reporting is in place in Afghanistan.  
 
Page  12
33. 
The FSS project will therefore assist DAB to develop a Public Credit Registry 
(PCR) in two phases.  
 
PHASE I: Laying a Solid Legal Foundation for Credit Information Sharing  
 
34. 
A review of existing legislation is needed to determine options of creating an 
effective enabling environment for credit information sharing.  The options to be 
explored include: (i) a new, specialized law and related regulations; (ii) DAB-issued 
regulations; or (iii) using borrower consent as legal authority. IFC will undertake this 
review before the project is approved by the World Bank Board. Results from the review 
are expected in early to mid-February 2009.  
 
35. 
Following the above assessment, if DAB decides to seek adoption of a new Law 
or Regulations on Credit Reporting, the Law or Regulations need to be prepared to allow 
for collection and sharing of comprehensive, full-file information among financial 
institutions: i.e., supervisory purposes for DAB; and loan assessment and risk 
management purposes for financial institutions.  In addition, the Law or Regulations 
should ensure that the lender’s need for credit information andthe consumer’s right to 
privacy will be effectively balanced. The Law or Regulation should provide a legitimate 
legal basis for immediate inclusion of all the available lenders/credit data from both 
regulated and-non regulated entities, including MFIs; and contain mandatory 
requirements on borrowers to consent to share data and on lenders to collect data, 
immediately and all inclusively.  
 
36. 
The Project will assist DAB in setting up the necessary legal foundation for credit 
information sharing in Afghanistan by: drafting the Law or Regulations if necessary; 
supporting discussions among DAB and others during the enactment process; conducting 
a
workshop(s) for DAB, lenders and other stakeholders to explain the benefits of credit 
reporting systems and details of the necessary legislative reforms.  
 
37. 
The IFC expect to engage a legal consultant by February 2009 to review the 
relevant laws and regulations. The results of this review will be made known by mid 
February 2009. Once this review is complete, IFC will be able to advise DAB about the 
best method for creating an effective enabling environment for credit information 
sharing.  
 
PHASE II: Physical development  
 
38. 
The FSS Project will support physical development of a PCR by providing 
necessary resources for software and hardware development. Once effective enabling 
legislation is in place, an RFP for a technical service provider would be drafted, 
advertised and awarded to establish the PCR. The Project will also support DAB during 
the process and assist in the monitoring of the vendor’s progress and adherence to 
contractual obligations. The PCR will be built as a first class system by an external 
reputable technical service provider, and have the same functionality as a modern private 
Page  13
credit bureau. It is inevitable that DAB initially runs the PCR, however it is advisable the 
PCR will be hived off to the private sector in the medium/long term.  
 
39. 
During the vendor selection process, the IFC will assist DAB in drafting and 
floating a RFP. DAB will also form a selection committee with selection criteria to be 
prepared by DAB in discussion with IFC and IDA. During the course of physical 
development, IDA procurement guideline will be applied. Implementation arrangement 
shall be designed in a way to ensure DAB’s full participation and ownership by forming 
project steering committee and/or technical working group.  
 
40. 
Technical Assistance: The FSS Project will also provide necessary technical 
assistance such as organization of a study tour; workshops for lenders and policymakers; 
provision of support to outreach event such as a conference to raise awareness and 
educate interested parties.  
 
41. 
The PCR will represent the first full-file information sharing experiment in the 
country, and an effective response to the need to supply DAB with an efficient tool to 
conduct rigorous supervision of the credit system. It is also essential to enable the 
financial institutions to access complete credit information without any limitations, under 
the form of complete credit reports, thus improving credit underwriting and introducing 
other risk management systems.  
 
(b)  
Collateral Registry  
 
42. 
Lending in Afghanistan is heavily reliant on collateral and firms cannot utilize 
most of their movable assets such as equipment, inventory, accounts receivable as 
collateral due to the absence of the movable assets registries and effective functioning 
legal framework which would support property rights of lenders. Since there is no 
centralized collateral registration for movable properties in Afghanistan, it is difficult for 
creditors to check whether proposed collateral has already been offered to other creditors. 
This makes debt enforcement by creditors difficult, increases the cost of credit and 
ultimately reduces willingness of lenders to deal with movable collateral, thus limiting 
financing opportunities in general.  
 
43. 
Reforms to increase the efficiency of collateral laws and registries can have a 
positive impact on increasing access to credit. Economic analysis also indicates that 
countries that have better collateral laws and registries have greater access to credit, 
better ratings of financial system stability, lower rates of non performing loans, and a 
lower cost of credit.  
 
44. 
Current Legal framework for secured lending:  There is currently no legal and 
regulatory framework to allow having a movable collateral registry in Afghanistan, and 
relying on the existing legal framework, i.e., Civil and Commercial Codes of 
Afghanistan, would not be a prudent option. The provisions of this legislation do not 
meet the requirements of the modern secured financing systems and would not support 
Page  14
effective operation of the collateral registry. The process of amending these legislative 
acts would be cumbersome and time consuming.  
 
45. 
Approach for establishing the Collateral Registry: Modern best practice principles 
are based on notice registration, which means providing notice of a transaction that 
includes only the information necessary to alert third parties to the potential existence of 
a
charge covering identified assets. Such registries are simple and fast to use, both for 
registration and for retrieval of information from them. They require disclosure of 
minimal information and require no formalities because registration is not a pre-requisite 
to effectiveness between the parties. Registration serves only two purposes: (i) to give 
notice to third parties; and (ii) to establish priority of the registrant according to the time 
of registration.  
 
46. 
Most modern best practices registries provide for registrants to register 
electronically via the internet. Such registries do not require discretionary decisions by 
the small registry staff, so they reduce or eliminate opportunity for error and corruption. 
Electronic registration is instantaneous, since acceptance decisions are made by the 
registry software. Best practice registries are very inexpensive to operate compared to 
traditional registries. Such a registry can be placed in any entity which has sufficient 
technical capacity. DAB for example, having relevant infrastructure could host the 
Registry in this case.  
 
47. 
Though several stakeholders in Afghanistan understood such registration 
principles, for many it represents a novelty. A full acceptance of the approach would 
depend on the extensive public awareness raising which will target primarily 
governmental and financial institutions, and will aim to illustrate benefits associated with 
such registration process.  
 
48. 
The FSS Project will assist DAB in establishing a Collateral Registry in two 
phases:  
 
PHASE I: Adoption of an effective legal framework for Secured Lending  
 
49. 
The Draft Law of Secured Transactions, which is currently being discussed in the 
Parliament of Afghanistan, includes the features of a modern secured transactions law. So 
far as the draft law goes, it generally conforms to modern secured lending principles; and 
though there are some minor gaps, those should not hinder the effectiveness of this 
proposed framework.. IFC provided recommendations to the DAB on how to improve 
and strengthen the proposed draft law. The majority of the proposed recommendations 
were incorporated into the draft law and it will now be considered by the Parliament 
during the upcoming session in February/March 2009. IFC will continue providing 
support to the DAB, Parliament and other stakeholders, as necessary, to ensure that Draft 
is adopted by the Parliament in its current form. In addition, the Government of 
Afghanistan would have to issue detailed Regulations that will address the issue of 
registration. IFC will support DAB by drafting these Regulations.  
 
Page  15
50. 
Buy-in from public institutions, lenders and various stakeholders is critical to 
ensure the successful establishment of a collateral registry. In order to raise awareness 
amongst the different stakeholders and improve the overall environment for secured 
lending in Afghanistan, during this phase, a workshop will be conducted for regulators, 
lenders, legislators on the benefits of the Registry.  
 
PHASE II: Physical Establishment of the Collateral Registry  
 
51. 
Physical development: Upon completion of, or in parallel with the first phase of 
the program, the Collateral Registry (CR) will be designed and established on the base of 
the modern notice filing system and according to the legal framework adopted. The data 
shall be recorded and maintained in a computerized system using an IT solution and a 
web-site designed for the online application. Hardware and system software will be as 
required to operate the application software, to include appropriate facilities.  
 
52. 
Detailed specifications for hardware and system software to fit the local needs, 
i.e. the law and the limitations on the form and location of the registry will be developed 
by the Registry expert funded by the IFC. These specifications would be the basis for the 
RFP which the IFC will assist DAB in drafting. The RFP shall be floated and awarded for 
procuring the application software, including necessary adjustments to meet local needs, 
and the supporting hardware and system software. The IDA and IFC would support DAB 
during the process and assist in the monitoring of 
the vendor’s progress and adherence to 
contractual obligations.  
 
53. 
Technical Assistance: Once the policies are developed and the Registry is set up, 
the following activities could be undertaken with support from the Project:  
 
•
Building Internal Capacity of the Collateral Registry: Training would be 
necessary for the DAB staff on how to effectively run the CR;  
 
•
Internal circulars to support operation of the CR: To ensure that there is a full set 
of rules under which the Registry will function, necessary regulations and instructions 
will be developed. These shall describe in detail the policies and procedures governing 
the Registry;  
 
•
Raising awareness among stakeholders about the Registry: In order to 
increaseawareness among various stakeholder groups in Afghanistan, an awareness 
campaign will be undertaken, which will focus on educating the public, including the 
finance and entrepreneurial community, government entities, regular citizens, about the 
existence of the Registry, its objectives and associated benefits; and  
 
•
Registry Guide and the Manual development: Further support can be provided 
through development of: (i) “Registry Guide for Lenders” on the use of the Registry, 
which will aim at providing information to clients on how to register transactions and do 
searches; it will help lenders understand the importance of the filing system and the 
processes for application; and (ii) “Registry Manual” which will provide a 
comprehensive overview of the registration process, optimally provided on the web-site 
as an integral part of the software.  
 
Page  16
(c)  
Afghanistan Institute of Banking and Finance  
 
54. 
The weak human resource capacity in the financial sector remains an obstacle to 
financial sector development. As such there is immediate demand for an institute to help 
improve the skills available in the financial sector. Given the rapid growth of the 
financial sector, the capacity building of the commercial banks and DAB is important in 
order to provide efficient and transparent banking services to clients. While some 
individual banks are developing their own training programs, these are not adequate to 
meet the national need. In order to meet this challenge, a ‘Bankers Training Institute 
Steering Committee’  was formed underthe leadership of DAB on February 25, 2008 to 
establish the Afghanistan Institute of Banking and Finance (AIBF). The AIBF will aim at 
improving human resources of financial institutions by: (i) upgrading the skills and 
knowledge of credit officers, managers and administrators; and (ii) conducting research 
and promoting discussions on financial sector policy issues to help national development.  
 
55. 
The AIBF will be run as a private “for profit” organization. The Board of 
Directors has been determined and will consist of 5-7. This will include: the DAB 
Governor (who will chair the Board), 3 members of the ABA (one each from the Private 
Commercial Banks, State Commercial Banks and one of the branches of the foreign 
owned banks), a representative from the Chamber of Commerce and a representative 
from the American University in Kabul.  
 
56. 
In order to ensure the successful operation of the AIBF, the FSS Project will assist 
the AIBF in developing a 3-5 year collaboration with a regional banker’s training 
institute in the South Asia Region. Under this collaboration, staff from both the AIBF and 
from the regional banker’s training institute will visit each other’s respective institutions. 
The staff from the AIBF will be able to see how a modern and effective banker’s training 
institute is run and take part inlessons and learning programs while visiting. The staff 
from the regional institute will visit Kabul and stay in order to provide best practice 
assistance to the AIBF and assist in implementing a modern curriculum in the AIBF. It is 
also expected that they will conduct some limited teaching. Over the years, the level of 
assistance the AIBF will require from the regional banker’s training institutewill 
decrease, however, it is expected that long term ties are forged and the institutes continue 
to work together through joint seminars, teaching programs and so on.  
 
57. 
The FSS project will support the creation of the AIBF and also its physical 
development by establishing it, at first, within rented premises, purchasing necessary 
equipment and hiring key staff, in addition to the 3-5 year collaboration set out above. 
The initial focus of the AIBF will be on providing training to the existing banks in 
Afghanistan. As the AIBF develops, the curriculum and facilities will be expanded to 
accommodate demand from the financial services industry in Afghanistan. The World 
Bank’s contribution of US$0.25 million will be matched by DAB, while the Afghan 
Banker’s Association will provide a further $0.5 million, in order to provide an initial 
funds pool. Running costs for the AIBF will be borne by yearly contributions from ABA 
members.   
 
Page  17
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
No applicable   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDI) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not funding any activity which will have any potential direct impact on the 
local environment  Also the project is categorized C from the Safeguards point of view. 
There is therefore no requirement for an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework Review.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
Page  18
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Page  19
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Md. Reazul Islam 
03/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli 
03/19/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Asta Olesen 
03/20/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Asila Wardak Jamal 
03/19/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Simon C. Bell 
03/19/2009 
Comments:   
