Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/10/2008 
Report No.:  46465
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P108583 
Project Name:  3A W/C Africa Air Transport Phase II-B 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 25, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Aviation (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program standardized development objectives are as follows: a) Improve Civil 
Aviatio
n
Authorities’ (CAAs) compliance with International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) safety standards; b) Increase CAAs’ compliance with ICAO’s security standards; 
and c) Enhance main international airports’ compliance with ICAO’s security standards. 
These same objectives will be used for this phase of the program.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project includes the following components:  
 
•
Component 1 - Strengthening of CAAs’ safety and security oversight capacities: 
this component will finance each country’s CAA technical assistance necessary mainly 
for: a) the adoption and utilization of harmonized aviation code and regulations; b) the 
training of civil aviation staff in the areas of civil aviation security and safety oversights; 
c) the acquisition of basic communication and inspection equipment (e.g., two-ways 
radios, inspection vehicle, computers, etc.); and d) the procurement of library equipment 
(e.g., relevant ICAO’s manuals, directives, online library, training materials, etc.).  
Page  2
•
Component 2 - Improvement in airport security and safety standards: This activity 
will involve establishing appropriate aviation security legislation, development of 
security programs (national, airports and airlines programs) and provision of security 
equipment at the main international airports. The main areas of focus will be: a) the 
implementation of measures to reinforce security at the various airport access points 
(identification equipment, security cameras, patrol vehicles, communication systems and 
reorganization of passenger flows); b) the equipment of crisis centers within existing 
airport building premises, including acquisition of necessary communication and 
surveillance tools to equip these centers as well as the equipment for airplane remote 
parking zones and the acquisition of patrol vehicles; c) the training of airport security 
personnel; and d) the development of airport security through the acquisition of 
passengers and cargo X-ray machines, when necessary.  
 
•
Component 3 - Management and governance oversight of the project: This 
activity is meant to encompass the financing of project operating costs included, but not 
limited to: a) Project unit’s technical assistance cost in the form of individual consultants’ 
fees (e.g., procurement, financial management and equipment specialists); b) office 
rentals and expenses, if applicable; c) annual fiduciary audits; and d) day-to-day 
management of the program.  
 
No sensitive environmental or social issues should be raised by the project 
implementation as there will be no construction activities or land acquisition.  The 
proposed investments are essentially for the acquisition of basic communication and 
inspection equipment and the development of safety and security programs. These 
investments do not have environmental or social safeguard implications, hence there will 
be no negative impact from the project. No environmental or safeguard policies are 
triggered by investments under the current proposed operation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location: Headquarters of Civil Aviation Agencies of Senegal and Benin in, 
Dakar, Cotonou respectively, and the airport premises of Dakar and Cotonou.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Due to the nature of the work to be carried out at each airport, no environmental or social 
issues are anticipated as none of these airports are experiencing issues related to illegal 
settlement on their premises. No environmental or safeguard policies are triggered by 
investments under the current proposed operation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
11/05/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
11/05/2008 
Comments:  This is a transfer Category C project. It only needs approval by the Sector Manager of 
the Transport Unit 
