Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/17/2009 
Report No.:  AC4702
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P079736 
Original Project Name: CEMAC - 
Transport-Transit Facilitation 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P115259 
Project Name:  CEMAC Transport Transit Facilitation - Additional financing #1 Central 
African Republic and Cameroon 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Francois Marteau 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 14, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 29, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Central government administration (10%);Railways 
(10%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (75%);Trade facilitation and market access (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
217.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will contribute to the shared growth objectives of the CEMAC countries# 
PRSPs, by ensuring that the CU is effectively implemented and by improving trade 
facilitation in the region.  It will also support the broader goal of increasing the regional 
integration of CEMAC member states by improving the core rail and road infrastructure.  
It will also contribute to trade increase within the region and between the region and the 
rest of the world. Furthermore, the development of the two corridors (Cameroon # Chad 
and Cameroon # CAR) to be supported by the project are part of the priority New 
Partnership for Africa#s Development (NEPAD) Infrastructure Short Term Action Plan 
for Central Africa.  
 
The overarching objective of the program is to contribute to facilitate regional trade 
within the CEMAC and improve Cameroon#s, CAR#s, and Chad#s access to world 
markets. This overall objective is achieved through two PDOs which are: (i) improving 
Page  2
the implementation of the CEMAC CU; and (ii) reducing physical and non-physical 
barriers along the Douala-
N#Djaména and Douala-Bangui corridors.   
 
3. Project Description 
General initial project and program description  
 
This project is a piece of the priority actions of a general program that should, in the 
end, cover the whole CEMAC region, with a common objective to secure access to the 
landlocked countries and increase trade in the CEMAC countries.  
 
The Project includes the following major components to be funded with support from 
IDA, African Development Fund (ADF), European Commission (EC), France and Japan 
through parallel funding arrangements:  
 
(I) Roads and Railway Infrastructure Improvement: This will include: (i) periodic 
maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading works on selected road sections along the 
corridors and access roads to the corridors; (ii) paving of existing gravel road sections; 
(iii) harmonization and enforcement of axle load control policies; (iv) improvement of 
rest areas; (v) rehabilitation of critical rail infrastructure; and (vi) implementation of HIV-
AIDS awareness and mitigation measures.  
 
(II) Transit and Transport Facilitation Investments: This will include: (i) ICT 
communication between stakeholders, especially within the port community; (ii) transit 
regime and border crossing improvements through cargo tracking, border posts); (iii) port 
safety and security strengthening; and (iv) improvement in intermodal interfaces.  
 
(III) Customs and Transport Sector Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building: 
This will include: (i) CEMAC CU and national customs strengthening; (ii) institutional 
support for transport facilitation institutions; and (iii) management of the project#s 
components.  
 
IDA- funded components  
 
1. 
IDA funding primarily covers:  
 
#
In Cameroon, contribution to the paving of the Ngaoundéré-Garoua-Boulaï 
section, critical infrastructure rehabilitation between Ngaoundéré and Garoua, 
rehabilitation of part of the Maroua-Kousséri section with a by-pass of Kousséri, 
rehabilitation of rail track between Yaoundé and Belabo and a smaller section near 
Douala (component 1 (ii) and (v)), facilitation of the port IT interfaces and Security 
improvement in Douala, intermodal interfaces in Douala and Ngaoundéré (component 2 
(i), (iii) and (iv)), and customs reform and institutional support to the ministries of 
transport and public works (component 3);  
 
#
In Chad, the co-funding with Republic of Chad of a long-term performance based 
maintenance contract and critical road rehabilitation works on the N#Djaména - 
Page  3
Moundou # Touboro (Cameroonian border) road section (component 1 (i) and (iii)) and 
institutional support to customs and the ministry of infrastructure (component 3 (i) (ii) 
and (iii));  
 
#
In CAR, a contribution to the paving of the Garoua-
Boulaï-Bouar section and to 
the heavy maintenance of the Bangui-Baoro section (component 1 (i) and (ii)), 
improvement of intermodal interfaces (component 2 (iv)) and support to customs reform 
and to ministries of transport and public works (component 3 (i) (ii) and (iii)).  
 
Specifics of the additional activities  
 
The proposed additional financing of the CEMAC Transport Transit Facilitation Project 
for the CAR and Cameroon, represents: (i) a US$67 million equivalent IDA Grant for 
CAR, and (ii) a US$150 million equivalent IDA Credit for Cameroon. The purpose of the 
requested additional funding is as follows: (i) to complete the original project activities 
currently compromised by a financing gap, especially on activities funded by other 
donors, and (ii) to improve the project#s capacity to achieve its objectives by scaling up 
the road rehabilitation activities of unpaved sections linked to the international corridor in 
the case of CAR.  
 
Bridging funding gaps in CAR: the total size of the funding gap is approximately 
equivalent to 7 km of road on the road initially to be funded by AfDB, and 33 km of 
roads initially to be funded by the EC. The IDA funded contract under the current project 
will be accommodated within the existing Grant H 314-CA, but it is more expensive than 
initially planned, taking into account contingencies. This will result in cancellation of 
activities (periodic maintenance of the corridor and some of the facilitation activities). It 
is proposed that these activities be carried over to the proposed additional funding, and 
that IDA funds the financing gap under the EC and AfDB sections.  
 
Additional activities on the Bangui Douala corridor in CAR: the project will secure a 
better condition on the corridor through:  
 
#
Revised contribution to the rehabilitation of the Bangui-Baoro international 
corridor with the rehabilitation of 10 km between Bossembélé and Yaloké. Parallel 
funding by Japan and the Road Fund will cover the remaining funding needs.  
 
#
Revised contribution to the international corridors# periodic maintenance.  
 
#
Contribution to the rehabilitation of the Bangui By-pass.  
 
Bridging funding gap in Cameroon: The Ngaoundéré-Garoua section of the Douala-
N#Djaména corridor was to be funded by the French C2D at a cost of US$40 million (see 
Table 1 of the PAD of the project). It consisted mostly of the reconstruction and 
enlargement of the Mbé Cliff, the reconstruction and enlargement of five bridges and 
several low points critical for the passability of the section and reconstruction of 10 km of 
an almost destroyed section. The government would fund the section reconstruction, 
while IDA would fund the cliff rehabilitation as well as the bridges and low points. The 
project will also fund the Kousséri by-pass at the border with Chad.  
Page  4
Additional activities: the project will fund the rehabilitation of the most critical section 
between Maroua and Kousséri and contribute to an extended investment plan for the rail 
infrastructure.  
 
The proposed additional financing activities are part of the initial component 1 of the 
CEMAC TTF project, while the activities not carried out under H 314-CA belong to 
component 1, 2 and 3. The additional funding proposed will ensure that the original 
development objectives will be reached (which would not be possible otherwise due to 
the funding gap) but will also increase its impact on the Douala-N#Djaména corridor   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will finance activities at several different sites in Cameroon, CAR and Chad, 
including (a) several sections of the road corridors linking N'Djamena and Bangui to 
Douala that need upgrading or long term maintenance; (b) rail sections in Cameroon 
between Yaoundé and Belabo and near Douala that need to be rehabilitated; and (c) a 
number of trade-related investment and technical assistance in the three countries.  
 
Safeguards issues concern relatively minimal environmental and social impact resulting 
from the road and rail investment components of the project in Cameroon, CAR and 
Chad. A RAP was prepared to address some small trader housing displacement issues in 
the Kousseri by-pass at the border with Chad. In general, key social issues relevant to the 
project objectives are mostly in relation to social impacts of the road improvements in 
Cameroon and CAR. Although direct resettlement is expected in Chad, rail investment 
will take place within an existing functioning framework that has been put in place with 
the support of the Cameroon Railways project, Cr 3695-CM. Environmental impacts 
were assessed for the road links and the EMP designed for the Cameroon Railways 
project has been improved and updated to cater for permanent actions and additional 
issues not identified during the first phase.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment : OP/BP 4.01 was triggered and three main Environment and 
Social Impact Assessment studies were carried out both in Cameroon, Central Africa 
Republic and Chad.  The Environmental Assessment of the road sections has not revealed 
any significant direct environmental impacts. The activities covered by the proposed 
additional financing were partly covered by these ESIAs, but an additional EIA and 
ESMP was disclosed for th
e
road section in the Far North region of Cameroon (Kousséri 
by-pass, while Maroua-Kousséri was already covered by the initial ESIA and ESMP). In 
CAR, the activities were fully covered by the ESIA and ESMPs in place on the Douala 
Bangui corridor. The most important negative environmental impacts associated with the 
road rehabilitation in CAR and Cameroon concern an encroachment of Benoue National 
Park (4ha in Cameroon). This encroachment will not affect a continuum area but small 
area along existing  road crossing the  national park,  disruption of drainage, increase in 
STI and the HIV/AIDS, and the potential indirect stimulus to illegal logging and the 
bushmeat trade. The Government of Cameroon plans to compensate (by allocating a 
similar additional surface to the same park or a park located in the same ecological zone) 
the encroached area according to the national legislation. The project will also increase 
control measures to reduce poaching in the national park due to the increase of the traffic. 
 
During the works, air quality in local areas will be somewhat degraded by intensive 
use of gas-powered machines and repetitive truck movements, but this air pollution will 
be limited in time and importance. A major environmental benefit of the pavement of 
roads in this region lies in reduction of dust generation, particularly important on dirt 
roads during the dry season. Works can also affect rainwater streaming and the soils 
physical properties. As the area is highly populated in the stretch close to Ngaoundéré in 
Cameroon, strict water sanitation and drainage precautions have to be taken to avoid 
important changes in rainfall runoff causing erosion. After pavement, the road will 
become a waterproof strip that can considerably modify water streaming.  
 
Page  6
Proper environmental measures can avoid most of negative environmental impacts 
resulting from the physical works and these measures will be included in all the 
procurement documents. A specific budget has been allotted for the environmental 
mitigation measures to be undertaken in Cameroon, CAR and Chad. Regarding the road 
maintenance contract in Chad, the contractor will be held responsible through the 
procurement arrangements for the adverse environmental effects resulting from the 
project, that have been assessed to be very limited.  
 
Some environmental and social impacts during construction phase relate to the 
destruction of physical habitat and the logging of fruit-trees within the road reserve. 
However, no new road section except the Kousseri Bypass ,will be constructed and the 
widening of some sections will only affect very partially the local agricultural activity 
and trader houses. An ESMP was prepared and disclosed for that purpose.  As a side-
effect of the physical works, agricultural workforce will be reduced in the region. Impacts 
during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and accident risks 
due to the increased traffic and HIV/AIDS propagation. High attention will be paid to 
road safety improvement. A dedicated part of the financing from the development partner 
community has been allotted to sensitize the local population to fight against HIV and 
promote road safety and environmental conservation.  
 
For the Bangui bypass, the team will rely on the current CAR - Emergency Urban 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Maintenance Environmental and Social Management 
Framework disclosed in CAR and at Infoshop on November 23, 2007. Before the 
beginning of the civil works a specific ESIA and ESMP will be prepared and disclosed in 
country and at Infoshop.  
 
The rail operator in Cameroon was privatized in 1999. The investments to rehabilitate 
rail track for part of the Section Yaounde-Belabo will be executed by the concessionaire. 
An Environmental and Safety Management Plan (ESMP) has been produced to detail 
mitigation measures, which cover both the works to be carried out and the company#s 
overall environmental liabilities. Major potential impacts related to the environmental 
impacts of rail rehabilitation works and Environmental and Social impacts of rail 
accidents were taken into consideration in this reviewed ESMP, and a component of both 
the initial Credit to Cameroon and of the proposed additional financing support its 
implementation.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04):  The National Road subject to the rehabilitation goes 
along the Benoue National Park ( 180,000 ha)  for at least 54 km. To ensure the security 
distance a  small encroachment  along the 54 km was evaluated for a total area of 4ha  
representing 1/45 000 of the in Benoue National Park in Cameroon previously 
mentioned, the operation, including the bridges rehabilitation, will not have any 
important direct impact on natural habitats, as it will support road rehabilitation rather 
than construction. To ensure a better control of the national park against poaching and 
illegal logging, the project has already equipped  the Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife 
regional office with 4 motorcycles and one 4x4 vehicle. This will ensure a permanent 
control of the road by the officials. The project will also help capacity building of the 
National Park management in fighting poaching and illegal logging control, and 
controlling bushmeat trade along the corridor. 
Page  7
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):  The operation will cause some involuntary 
resettlements. It is estimated that 126 families in CAR and160 families in Cameroon will 
be affected for the whole corridor.  For each country a specific Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) was prepared and disclosed in country and in the Infoshop. It is important to note 
that families will not be displaced more than 50 to 200 meters away from their original 
sites. In each country a financial provision has been done to ensure the implementation of 
the RAP and compensate the other impacts assessed by the EIA. The additional activities 
funded as part of an additional financing mainly in the Kousseri By Pass   will cause  
additional social impacts in terms of Involuntary destruction of about 30 trader houses  
belonging to 17 persons on the Kousseri bypass. On the additional sections between 
Maroua and Kousseri, some lost crops were identified but no houses were concerned. For 
these purposes  a specific RAP was prepared and disclosed in Cameroon on September 1, 
2009 and at Infoshop on September 2, 2009.  
 
For the Bangui bypass, the team will rely on the current CAR - Emergency Urban 
Infrastructure Rehabilitation & Maintenance Resettlement Policy Framework disclosed in 
CAR and at Infoshop on November 23, 2007. Before the beginning of the civil works a 
specific RAP will be prepared  to identify project affected people and provide a basis for 
compensation and disclosed in country and at Infoshop.  
 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): No archeological site has been identified 
during the EIAs, including for the additional activities proposed under the additional 
financing. The EC will be funding some archeological research on the corridor as part of 
the project, and the research team will have access to the various sections funded by the 
development partner community. Some graveyards have been located in Cameroon and 
CAR. Compensation will be provided with respect to national legislations.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Along the road sections considered no indigenous 
people were identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main long term adverse impacts identified by the EIA in Cameroon, CAR and Chad 
are the increased road accident risks due to traffic growth, HIV/AIDS propagation and 
potential increase in pressure on natural resources, particularly through illegal logging 
and the bushmeat trade. The relevant ministry in Cameroon is already strengthened by 
motorcycles and a vehicle to ensure a better control of such illegal activities. The 
Government has also indicated its willingness to send more field staff in this region. For 
the CAR, the same measures are in process to be taken and equipment have already been 
delivered in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative has been considered to minimize adverse impacts. As for road 
investments, the operation is mainly a rehabilitation of existing roads so no alternative 
plotting is therefore conceivable. The most sustainable technical option has then been 
Page  8
chosen with respect to the project resources.  The project will ensure that all mitigation 
measures are taken to reduce or avoid environmental and socials impacts/ risks   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
For Each country the Ministry in charge of Environment was responsible for the approval 
of the EIA the EMP and the RAP. A special environmental and social unit was also 
created inside the Ministry in charge of Public works or strengthened in each country to 
ensure the implementation of the EMP and the RAP in close collaboration with the 
Ministry in charge of Environment.  Specifically, the RAP will be implemented by an 
interministerial committee under the Supervision of the Patrimony Protection and Roads 
Environment Division inside the Ministry in charge of Public Works. The details are 
described in the RAP.  
 
Central African Republic:  The legal framework regarding environmental matters 
remains weak in CAR. The Government published in December 2007 the Environment 
Law. This law makes an EIA a requirement for each investment in the country. The 
Country is still in process to issue a specific decree defining the way to carry out EIAs.  
 
The EMP will be followed and monitored by the Environment Protection Unit hosted in 
the Ministry in Charge of Public works and by the Environment General Directorate 
hosted at the Ministry of Environment and Ecology. The project has already trained staff 
of these two structures, who can now supervise roads rehabilitation and paving impacts 
mitigation measures, such as ensuring the use of adequate equipment against pollution 
caused by the works.  
 
Cameroon:   Since the beginning of the 90s, the government of Cameroon has 
significantly improved the legal framework for environmental management. Law no. 
96/12 of August 5, 1996 sets the framework for environmental matters. The decree no. 
2005/0577/PM of February 23, 2005 provides guidance for the EIA. The creation of the 
Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection in 2004 has reinforced the institutional 
capacity of the government to monitor environmental matters. An Inter-ministerial 
commission exists through the 96 Environment Law and plays its role in term of 
approving EIA and EMP. The Ministry of Public Works has a special unit for 
environmental and social issues. This Unit presents all competencies able to ensure the 
implementation of the process with the monitoring of the Ministry of Environment and 
Nature Protection and its creation was set up through IDA funding under the Transport 
Sector Project. The members of this Unit will receive   training in the area of Bank social 
safeguards to allow them to properly monitor the implementation of RAPs. The project 
will also provide capacity-building targeting the Ministry of Environment and Nature 
Protection, and the Ministry of Forests and Wildlife.  Furthermore, the implementation of 
the Forest and Environment Program and the Environmental and Social Capacity 
Building project in the Energy Sector supported by the Bank will contribute to the 
improvement of the legal and implementing framework. In the rail sector, a 
Memorandum of Understanding between Camrail and the Ministry in charge of 
Environment and Nature Protection governs relationships and monitoring of the main 
Page  9
impacts associated to the rail. Under IDA Credit 3695 CM, now closed, CAMRAIL has 
implemented successfully an anti poaching program with the support on an international 
NGO. To ensure the sustainability of this important activity, the project provides means 
able to pursue through an international or local NGO such anti poaching activities in 
close collaboration of the Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife.  
 
Chad: The principal agencies involved in the environmental management of the 
rehabilitation works are the Direction Générale des Routes of MININFRA, and the 
Ministry of Environment and Fisheries.  The requirement to conduct environmental 
assessments of investment projects is established by law No. 14/PR/98, and approval of a 
General Guideline for the Preparation of Environmental Impact Assessments is still 
ongoing.  The project has started to provide support to strengthen the environmental 
management capacity of both the Direction Générale des Transports de Surface of 
MININFRA, and the Ministry of Environment and Fisheries, and will also support a 
separate analysis of the social impact of recent road investments in the same region, to 
help maximize the socio-economic benefit of future investments.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
#
Local populations  
 
#
NGOs,  
 
#
Development partners,  
 
#
Regional and local leadership and  
 
CAR:  
 
#
Ministry of Environment and Ecology  
 
#
Ministry of Forests and Wildlife,  
 
#
Ministry of Public Works,  
 
#
Ministry of Interior and Public Security,  
 
#
Ministry in charge of rebuilding public infrastructures,  
 
#
Ministry of Urban Affairs and Housing  
 
#
CEMAC (Community of Central African States)  
 
Cameroon  
 
#
Ministry of Environment and Protection of Nature  
 
#
Ministry of Forests and Wildlife  
 
#
Ministry of Publics Works  
 
#
Ministry of Transports  
 
#
Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization  
 
#
Ministry of Energy and Water  
 
#
Ministry of Justice  
 
Chad  
 
#
Ministry of Environment and Fisheries  
 
#
Ministry of Infrastructure  
 
Consultation Mechanisms  
 
Page  10
All documents were carried out on the basis of a participative approach. Individual 
interviews, group discussions and several meetings were organized during the execution 
of the study and during the approval process. The project contents, in terms of economic, 
social, cultural, environmental stakes, as well as mitigation impacts and compensations 
measures were developed and discussed with diverse stakeholders. The consultation was 
organized during the preparation of Kousseri By pass EA ( May 2008)  and RAP ( June 
to July 2009). For Bangui ,the main stakeholders were consulted during the preparation 
of the RPF in 2007 and will be consulted during preparation of the associated EA and 
RAP.  
 
The team will ensure that this participatory consultation process continues on a regular 
basis during project implementation. Supervision missions will be the opportunity to 
assess the whole process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/01/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  11
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Francois Marteau 
09/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
09/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
09/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
09/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Supee Teravaninthorn 
09/14/2009 
Comments:   
