Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4510 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P114466 
Project Name: Kagera River Basin Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Amal Talbi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 4, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%);Irrigation and 
drainage (25%) 
Theme: Water resource management (50%);Environmental policies and institutions 
(25%);Other environment and natural resources management (25%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
3.37
3.37 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed Project is to support long term 
investments and capacity building to leverage investment opportunities in the Kagera 
catchments.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Promoting Investment Opportunities through Project Preparation Studies  
 
Under this component a number of project preparation studies (including pre-feasibility studies, 
and feasibility studies) will be undertaken for investment opportunities identified in the Kagera 
Basin monograph, financed by SIDA-NORAD. This proposed project will therefore support the 
promotion of investment opportunities arising out of the Kagera Basin monograph. Potential 
investment areas identified in the strategy include: (i) feasibility study for multipurpose storage 
reservoir (covering aspects development of small hydropower development and water supply and 
sanitation); (ii) feasibility study for an agriculture development program with a focus on 
agriculture water aspects involving crop production, fisheries management and livestock 
Page  2
development; and (iii) study for an integrated watershed management program with a focus on 
wetlands management, Agro-forestery and water quality management.  
 
The Kagera Basin monograph has been finalized while the contract for conducting the 
investment strategy for the Basin, including the Decision Support System (DSS) has been signed 
in June 2009. The Kagera Basin monograph prioritizes list of projects. This prioritization has 
been agreed following a participatory process that involved consultations at both the national and 
regional levels in the participating countries. Following the consultations, the above-mentioned 
potential investment areas were selected for detailed project preparatory work to be undertaken. 
This selection was agreed upon during the 9th Regional Project steering committee meeting, 
which took place in Kabale, Uganda, in April 02-03, 2009.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building  
 
This component will focus on implementing the Kagera capacity building plan developed with 
funding from SIDA-NORAD. Activities to be implemented will include  
 
(i) 
Human resource development through training of staff at both national and catchment 
levels.  
 
(ii) 
A study tour to one of the trans-boundary basins in Africa as a learning experience.  
 
(iii) 
Augmenting the monitoring network (hydrometerological) stations to ensure 
uninterrupted collection of basic surface water data.  
 
The type of hydrological monititoring stations include: (i) hydrometric stations, (ii) 
groundwater stations, and (iii) climatological stations. It is expected to install about 8 to 10 
stations in the entire Kagera Basin. The type and location of these additional stations involves the 
following offices: (i) Ministry of Water, Environment, Land Management in Burundi; (ii) 
Ministry of Natural Resources in Rwanda; (iii) Kagera Sub Basin Office in Tanzania; and (iv) 
Ministry of Water and Environment in Uganda. These stations will be part of the national 
respective institutions and will be maintained as part of the respective national networks.  
 
Also, the installation of the Hydrometric Stations will be undertaken to ensure that: 1) Stations 
are not located within important natural habitats such as wetlands and known breeding grounds 
or fish spawning areas; 2) Disturbance of river banks and riparian vegetation is minimized in 
time and space, and any such disturbances are rehabilitated and stabilized as soon as possible; 3) 
The duration of in-stream work is minimized to avoid changing the physical and chemical 
properties of the water; 4) Solid and liquid wastes during construction are minimized, and are 
otherwise controlled and collected for disposal off-site at an approved location; 5) Station sites 
do not displace any existing land owners or users; and 6) Construction sites are fully restored to 
provide good drainage, ensure stability of the entire site, and prevent erosion.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Supervision  
 
This component will provide support to the project management unit (PMU), established by the 
SIDA-NORAD funded project, for the supervision of the activity of the proposed Project. The 
Rwandan Ministry of Water and Land (renamed Ministry of Natural Resources) provided the 
Page  3
office space as part of the national contribution.  The proposed project will require the 
supervision of new activities (studies under component 1 and intensive capacity building 
program under component 2).  
 
The PMU will be responsible for implementing the project activities. Project implementation 
will be guided by the Regional Project Steering Committee (RPSC), which includes three experts 
of each of the Kagera Basin countries. National Liaison Officers were appointed and will support 
Project activities at the national level. The NELSAP-CU will coordinate the activities of this 
proposed Project with other NBI bodies, including the Nile-secretariat, NEL Technical Advisory 
Committee, and NEL Council of ministers for Water Affairs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented in the Kagera River Basin, shared by Burundi, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, and Uganda.  
 
During this project, preparatory studies specifically feasibility and pre-feasibility studies will be 
undertaken for key priority investment areas identified by the countries. The feasibility studies 
will identify any potential impacts the proposed projects may have on people and the 
environment and will recommend specific tools to be used to undertake further impact analysis 
during project development such as environmental and social impact assessments.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program-Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU) has 
over the years promoted and undertaken regional studies such as the Strategic Social and 
Environmental Assessment for Power options (SSEA) in addition to building capacity to address 
environmental and social issues through training as well as by recruiting an Environmental 
Advisor, to provide further guidance on handling environmental and social aspects of all the 
institutions activities.  
 
NELSAP CU has prepared the NBI/NELSAP Environmental and Social Management 
Preliminary Framework for Project Preparation and Implementation. This preliminary 
framework is a first step in implementing the NBI Strategy for Environmental and Social 
Safeguards, prepared for the NBI Institutional Support Project (NBI-ISP).The Framework, which 
applies to this project and will be disclosed along with this ISDS, is the next step in the 
establishment of a safeguards regimen for the NBI that addresses both national law and financier 
concerns in preparing and implementing regional investments. Under the Kagera RBM Project, 
NELSAP CU will continue to rely on the World Bank for guidance to ensure that the Framework 
is adequate for addressing environmental and safeguard issues and meeting internationally 
accepted best practices and standards.  
 
While NELSAP operates within the confines of National Environmental legislation in each of 
its member countries, the Framework is designed to ensure consistent use of international best 
practices in its treatment of social and environmental issues.  By doing so, the Framework 
recognizes the laws, regulations as well as national policies and, where necessary, enhances 
(with countervening) them by applying international standards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Mr John Bryant Collier (AFTWR) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the Kagera  project is a technical assistance project, it is aimed at building capacity 
and conducting prefeasibility and feasibility studies to prepare for investment as water supply, 
small hydropower development projects, and irrigation development.  
 
The feasibility studies to be undertaken in preparation of the investment opportunities will 
determine the extent of impacts that the identified projects may have on the environment and 
relevant assessments such as environmental impact assessments will be undertaken per project 
with TORs and deliverables being reviewed by the Bank. In addition, in 2009 NELSAP-CU will 
undertake a strategic social and environmental assessment (SSEA), including the Kagera 
catchment, as a key input to a larger scoping study that will be the foundation of a NEL water 
resources development program. Finally, the preliminary NBI/NELSAP Environmental and 
Social Management Framework for Project Preparation and Implementation, along with the NBI 
Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards, will be the guiding documents for 
any future investment projects. These documents have been finalized and will be disclosed 
through the Infoshop prior to July 20, 2009.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Given the importance of the Kagera to the wild life tourism, NBI will ensure that all project 
preparation activities look specifically at potential impacts on critical natural habitats in the 
Kagera basin.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The physical and cultural resources policy is triggered automatically due to the triggering of 
the Environmental Assessment policy. Additionally, the NBI held a targeted training on this 
policy, with support from the Bank, in May 2009. The training further built capacity at the 
regional and national levels for addressing cultural issues through the EIA process.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although project locations are not known at this stage, feasibilities studies for the identified 
projects will determine the extent of impacts on people and their land. Relevant documents will 
then be prepared by each investment and will avoid to the extent possible any involuntary 
resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Safety of Dams Policy is triggered because the project will conduct feasibility studies of 
multi-purpose storage dams for hydro, irrigation, rural water supply, etc.  While it is not yet clear 
that any of these dams would require the policy to be triggered, it is important that identification 
and feasibility studies assess all of the likely impacts of these dams, with the policy in mind, in 
order to recommend safety and mitigation measures for the design, construction, and operational 
phases.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project will be implemented in the Kagera Basin and will involve mainly project 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
preparatory studies. Notification is not required per the OP.7.5 because the project studies do not 
go beyond the feasibility stage (See Exceptions to notification requirement in OP/BP 7.50 ).  
Terms of Reference for these studies will include examination of any potential riparian issues. It 
should be noted that as a NELSAP project, all project outputs and reports are shared with and 
discussed by all concerned riparians as a part of regular business.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/29/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NELSAP has prepared a preliminary Environment and Social Management Framework, 
which applies to this project, and requested it be disclosed through the World Bank Infoshop. 
This document has been finalized and will be disclosed through the Infoshop prior to July 29, 
2009.  
 
The detailed ESMF, based on the disclosed preliminary version, will be prepared by the 
NBI to cover NELSAP and be disclosed in Bank's InfoShop and locally (in all NBI 
Countries: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, 
Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda) in the second half of 2009 [para 1, pg 1], and will cover the 
budget for Environmental and Social assessments for projects under preparation, future 
investments in water supply, small hydropower development projects, and irrigation 
development. The document will also include the Resettlement Policy Framework as a 
guiding document for preparation of RAPs for those investments, where OP 4.12 is 
applicable.  
 
During each feasibility study, ToRs will be prepared for the appropriate ESIAs, which will 
lead to the preparation of an Implementation Manual for each investment. During the review 
stage of the studies, ESIAs will be appraised and appropriate ESMF/ESMP and RPF/RAP 
will be developed, reviewed together with the Bank#s safeguards specialists, disclosed and 
included in the project monitoring plan prior to the start of project preparation.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Amal Talbi 
07/21/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
