Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3325 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P106369 
Project Name: Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP)  - Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Laurent Besancon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 24, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Regional integration (P);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project development objectives for RCIP 2 are similar to RCIP 1. The RCIP Program, and all 
CIP Projects have one to two of the following development objectives, depending of the 
individual Government’s request: (i) contribute to lower the price of international broadband 
capacity and extend the reach of backbone networks across Eastern and Southern Africa and (ii) 
contribute to improved Government efficiency and transparency through eGovernment 
applications   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
RWANDA OPERATION (CIP4):  
 
Component 1 - Enabling Environment: This component will provide technical capacity building 
and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to the President’s Office (in charge of the ICT 
portfolio) and for Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency (RURA) and comprises several 
subcomponents, as follows: (a) regulatory technical assistance to promote further sector reform 
so as to maximize benefits from access to capacity (regulatory tools to guarantee open access to 
Page  2
national and international infrastructure, cost-modeling, price control mechanisms, 
interconnection, essential facility regulation, policy and regulatory competition law, spectrum 
management, etc); (b) policy and regulatory capacity building, consensus building activities, 
training in the topics mentioned in 1(a) (sector policy and implementation of regulatory reforms); 
(c) support for the development of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) arrangements in the context 
of the national backbone, namely to support the Government of Rwanda in negotiations with the 
telecom operators and other stakeholders; (d) capacity building for Monitoring and Evaluation 
(M&E); (e) design of contracts for purchase of capacity (see subcomponent 2 (c)); (f) 
environmental and social studies consistent with the technical specification and timeframe 
provided by the environmental and social management framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF); (g) project communications; (h) additional technical assistance and 
capacity-building not identified ex-ante.  
 
Component 2 
–
Connectivity:  This component will support connectivity in Rwandathrough 
several subcomponents: (a) support for equipment and construction of a virtual landing station, 
(b) support for the rollout of a national backbone, the Rwanda Backbone System, (c) support for 
purchase of capacity for targeted users. This component will also cover implementation of 
recommendations stemming from the relevant environmental studies. It should be noted that civil 
works will be limited to areas such as existing roads or buildings and this will not include right 
of ways clearing nor inhabitated land acquisition.  
 
Component 3 - Project Management for CIP4:  This component will consist of support to 
finance project management related issues, and namely increased support for RITA the chosen 
implementation agency in terms of technical and M&E capacity, procurement and financial 
management capacity, environmental specialist expertise and audit, as well as office equipment 
and incremental operating costs as needed.  
 
MALAWI OPERATION (CIP5)  
 
Component 1 - Enabling Environment: This component will provide technical capacity building 
and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to the Ministry of Information and Civic 
Education (MICE) and for the Malawi Communications Authority (MACRA) and comprises 
several subcomponents, as follows: (a) regulatory technical assistance to promote further sector 
reform so as to maximize benefits from access to capacity (regulatory tools to guarantee open 
access to national and international infrastructure, cost-modeling, price control mechanisms, 
interconnection, essential facility regulation, policy and regulatory competition law, spectrum 
management, etc) and for assessing  the policy and regulatory environment and suggest possible 
changes; (b) policy and regulatory capacity building, consensus building activities, training in the 
topics mentioned in 1(a) (sector policy and implementation of regulatory reforms) and in 
particular for strengthening the policy making role in the Ministry (ICT department), and 
assisting MACRA to deal with changing environment after privatization;  (c) possibly drafting of 
amendments/new legislation and licensing framework to deal with a converged network 
(including broadcasting aspects)  and “e-legislation” and its corresponding regulatory framework 
to address issues such as e-security, fraud, intellectual property rights (if not already covered 
under PURP);  (d) support for the development of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) 
arrangements in the context of the national backbone, namely to support the Government of 
Malawi in negotiations with the telecom operators and other stakeholders; (e) capacity building 
for M&E; (f) design of contracts for purchase of capacity (see subcomponent 2 (c)); (g) design of 
Government network contract (see subcomponent 2 (d)); (h) support the development of 
interoperability framework and standards for eGovernment applications (i) environmental and 
Page  3
social studies consistent with the technical specification and timeframe provided by the 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); (j) project communications; (k) additional technical assistance and capacity-
building not identified ex-ante.  
 
Component 2 
–
Connectivity:  This component will support connectivity in Malawithrough 
several subcomponents: (a) support for equipment and construction of a virtual landing station , 
(b) support for the setup of rollout of a national backbone, (c) support for purchase of capacity 
for targeted users , (d) support for financing the Governments’ communications network , and (e) 
support for the extension of ICT coverage in rural areas. This component will also cover 
implementation of recommendations stemming from the relevant environmental studies. It 
should be noted that civil works will be limited to areas such as existing roads or buildings and 
this will not include right of ways clearing nor inhabitated land acquisition.  
 
Component 3 – Transparency – eGovernment Applications:  This component will include 
support for targeted eApplications.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management for CIP5:  This component will consist of support to 
finance project management related issues, and namely support for (a) an Executive Secretary, 
(b) a Technical Manager, (c) a Procurement Specialist, (d) a Financial Management Specialist, 
(e) an M&E Specialist, (f) office equipment, (g)  incremental operating costs, (h) audits, and (i) 
environmental specialist expertise.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rwanda and Malawi - This project is national in scope and will focus on reforms to government 
institutions and public-private partnerships throughout the countries of Rwanda and Malawi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At the individual country level, specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities 
during project implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those 
facilities have been identified.  
 
The institutional implementation arrangements are still under dicussion.  The capacity of these 
institution will be reviewed and recommendations will be provided prior to appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The risks associated with the kind of infrastructure under consideration are generally low, 
and the Program was therefore assigned to environmental category B under OP 4.01. This also 
applies to the RCIP Rwanda and Malawi operations.  
 
An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RFP) have been prepared for the overall program and for the countries included in 
the first phase (CIP 1, 2 and 3).  These have been approved and disclosed prior to appraisal of 
RCIP1.  An update of
the ESMF and RFP is being carried out so as to also include Rwanda and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Malawi.  Specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project 
implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities have 
been identified.  The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards 
instruments would lay with the implementing agency of each participating country.  Any specific 
required action for some of the Civil Works will be taken into account during project 
implementation as part of implementation of the relevant RAP and EMP.  Institutional 
responsibilities for implemeting the ESMF and RPF will be defined closely with the Safeguards 
Team.  
 
The team will work in close coordination with (i) the Governments of Rwanda and Malawi, 
(ii) the World Bank Group units involved, to include the Bank's safeguards standards from early 
on into the project preparation schedule and its activities.  
 
In addition, it is not expected that there will be civil works for the first 12 months of project 
implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
For RCIP2, the consultants that are updating the ESMF (Environmental and Social 
Management Framework) and RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework) prepared for RCIP 1, will 
be asked to assess the triggering or not of OP BP 4.04. If triggered appropriate measures have to 
be designed and included in the ESMF.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
For RCIP2, the consultants that are updating the ESMF (Environmental and Social 
Management Framework) and RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework) prepared for RCIP 1, will 
be asked to assess the triggering or not of OP BP 4.11. If triggered appropriate measures have to 
be designed and included in the ESMF.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities (if any) might be needed for virtual landing stations. 
These are likely to be existing telecom-related buildings and therefore not likely to require 
involuntary resettlements.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/03/2008 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard Reporting Intrument(s) and Disclosure - An Environment and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) have been prepared for the 
overall program and for the countries included in the first phase (CIP 1, 2 and 3). These have 
been approved and disclosed prior to appraisal of RCIP1.  An update of the ESMF and RFP 
is being carried out so as to also include Rwanda and Malawi.  Specific costed 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be 
prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project implementation, in line with 
the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities have been identified.  The 
revised ESMF and RPF will be submitted for Bank review and publicly disclosed in Rwanda 
and Malawi and at the Bank's InfoShop prior to appraisal.    
 
This section will be revised at appraisal stage as needed (will stem from the revision of the 
ESMF and RPF for Rwanda and Malawi)  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Besancon 
02/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
02/19/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
