Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4053 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/03/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P112456 
Project Name: Regional Trade Facilitation Project II 
Task Team Leader: Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Export 
development and competitiveness (S);International financial architecture (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
65.00
65.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The Program Development Objective (PDO) remains unchanged from RTFP I and that is 
to facilitate private sector-led trade flows, investment and productive activities for African 
member states through the provision of insurance, coinsurance, reinsurance, financial 
instruments and related services. The key results expected include: (i) Increased trade in and for 
member countries; (ii) Increased investment in participating countries; and (iii) Increased private 
participation through reinsurance and co-insurance partnerships with private and public insurers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
The Regional Trade Facilitation Project (RTFP I) under which the Africa Trade Insurance 
Agency (ATI) was created as the Implementing Agency, was presented to the World Bank Board 
on April 3, 2001.  The project initially consisted of seven member countries (Malawi, Zambia, 
Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania), one regional economic community or REC 
(COMESA) and three private sector businesses (PT Bank, Zep RE and Atradius).  It has since 
been expanded to include five new members: DRC, Madagascar, Eritrea, Sudan and Djibouti.  
Liberia has been accepted as a member but has yet to sign the ATI Treaty.  There is substantial 
Page  2
interest from other IDA and IBRD countries, regional economic communities, and the private 
sector, which have been the driving force to develop a second phase for the project, RTFP II.  
 
3. 
The regional insurance facility (the Facility) that is already managed by ATI will expand 
to include an additional 5-9 countries including Angola, Mozambique, Mauritius, Seychelles, 
Ghana, Cameroon, Benin, Mali and, Nigeria that have initiated discussions with IDA and ATI 
about joining. In addition, the project will provide financing for five countries, including 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Liberia and Madagascar that are already 
members of ATI, having signed the treaty, but either do not have sufficient capital or completely 
lack capital to facilitate new transactions.  These countries and others will be going to Board at 
different times over the IDA15 period in a horizontal APL series. The horizontal APL instrument 
was designed to allow countries to join when they are ready (the amounts and timing are 
provided in Annex I of the PCN). The equity capital that is purchased by its members will 
underpin ATI’s operations to offer a broad line of products which have been requested by the 
private market, including comprehensive cover which was found to be a prerequisite to increase 
trade flows in Africa for most of the traders, suppliers, financiers or trading partners.  ATI will 
cover commercial risk only when it has access the reliable financial information on the company 
involved, and its staff has the necessary underwriting skills.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
4. 
The project will be centrally managed at ATI Headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya. At the 
same time, in order to facilitate marking efforts and business development, field offices have 
been opened in Uganda and Zambia. Additional field offices are planned. Insurance for trade 
facilitation will be provided in the countries that have joined and have been capitalized, and 
where the transactions occur.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
5. 
ATI’s Operations Manual includes an Environment Operations Manual as an annex.  An 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist was recruited on a retainer basis to provide the 
necessary technical support to ATI Staff in evaluating a sub-project’s Safeguard compliance and 
implementing the procedures required by the Environment Operations Manual.  
 
6. 
In preparation of this PAD, a review was conducted to assess how ATI has made use of 
the Environment Operations Manual in managing the environmental and social risks of its 
business, identify what lessons can be drawn from the experience to date, and identify 
improvements, if any, that can be made to ATI’s approachto managing environmental and social 
risk.  Currently, about half of the transactions that ATI has insured are short-term whole turnover 
import/export credit risk transactions.  ATI’s business projections are that the share of business 
overthe next 2 years will move toward about 70% of all insured transactions in the category of 
short-term whole turnover import/export credit risk.   A review of representative projects insured 
by ATI under RTFP I, and discussions with key staff from ATI and their consultants on retainer, 
indicate that ATI has carefully considered environmental and social risk in a manner consistent 
with Bank Safeguard polices and guidelines.  If one of the multilateral institutions, such as IFC, 
or one of the commercial banks that have a reputable Safeguards-based environmental and social 
risk management system set up for their own business (e.g., one of the Equator Banks) is 
involved, ATI relies on environmental and social due diligence by other multilateral institutions, 
Page  3
such as IFC, or on that of the Equator Bank.  This “piggy-back” approach by ATI seems 
reasonable since most of theprojects insured to date are relatively low risk Category B projects, 
or Category C projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
RTFP II proposes giving IDA credits to the prospective member states (once they are deemed 
ready) for the sole purpose of acquiring equity capital in ATI.  ATI, as the implementing agency 
of the insurance scheme, is treated as a financially intermediary for Safeguards purposes, and 
RTFP II is a Category FI.  The Facility’s Operations Manual, which was disclosed on December 
18, 2000, during thepreparation of the RTFP I project, provides a framework that takes this into 
account and allows for appropriate standards to apply to projects of different environmental and 
social risk categories (low, intermediate and high risk).  The Operational Manual clearly 
articulates that, before approving a sub-project, ATI must verify through its own staff, outside 
experts or existing environmental and social safeguard institutions, that the sub-project meets the 
national safeguard requirements, and is consistent with applicable Safeguard Policies of the 
Bank.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
7.  An existing framework in the form of an Environment Operations Manual is in place to 
evaluate and manage Safeguard risks.  It was disclosed on 18 December 2000 during the 
preparation of the RTFP 1 Project.  It will continue to be used, and has served ATI well “as 
is,” and could continue to do so in the new Project.Based on lessons learned, ATI is 
considering three improvements to update ATI’sEnvironment Operations Manual in the near 
term.  First, the Manual will clarify its Safeguards approach between ATI’s business line of 
short-term (<365 day) import/export credit risk insurance and the rest of ATI’s business line.  
A
moreappropriate approach to managing environmental and social risks in this line of 
business is for ATI to apply its Exclusion List, i.e., certain transactions will not be insured.  
This is an approach that IFC has also required of certain types of IFC’s financial 
intermediaries.  Second, ATI intends to adopt the approachtoSafeguards and environmental 
and social risk management that has been adopted by the IFC, MIGA, and the Equator 
Banks.  The reasons are two-fold: the Safeguards approach taken by the IFC, and later 
adopted by the Equator Banks and more recently by MIGA, is more appropriate to ATI’s 
business model; and in some instances ATI finds itself collaborating with the IFC, or MIGA, 
or one of the Equator Banks on a project, and it would be appropriate for ATI to have 
requirements of its client that are identical to those of such partners in the transaction.  
Finally, the Manual will clarify certain circumstances in which ATI, upon completion of its 
environmental and social due diligence, will submit the application and the findings of the 
due diligence to the Bank on a no-objection basis.  Once it is updated, ATI will disclose the 
Environment Operations Manual as an updated Safeguards document in accordance with the 
Bank’s Disclosure Policy. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard 
responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
02/03/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
02/03/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
