Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4271
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P108368 
Project Name:  Central Africa Backbone - APL1A 
Task Team Leader:  Yann Burtin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2009 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (34%);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (33%);Regional integration (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
26.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Central Africa Backbone Program is to extend the 
geographical reach, usage and to reduce prices of regional broadband network services.   
 
3. Project Description 
Providing broadband connectivity in Central Africa to all capital cities, main secondary 
cities and establishing redundancy linkages is estimated at about $700m for the following 
eleven (11) Central African countries: Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Congo, DRC, Equatorial 
Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria, Niger, Sao Tome and Principe and Sudan.  
 
The World Bank Central African Backbone (CAB) Program will contribute a portion of 
the overall cost for broadband connectivity in Central Africa through the connection of 
capital cities and establishment of redundancy links for the ten countries mentioned 
above. The proposed amount of IDA and IBRD contribution for the CAB Program is 
$215m over the ten-year period. The CAB Program is aiming at leveraging additional 
$97.8m from the private sector.  
 
Page  2
Other development partners are included in the process. The African Development Bank 
has been closely involved with the preparation of the CAB Program. The AfDB will 
provide parallel financing to extend the network beyond the capital cities and has also 
financed several preparatory studies for the CAB Program. Missions and respective 
project preparation are done jointly. It is expected that the AfDB will provide 
approximately the same level of financing as the World Bank (about $200 million). The 
African Union is also playing an important role in facilitating inter-governmental 
cooperation and policy harmonization, in conjunction with the CEMAC.  
 
World Bank financed CAB Program  
 
The CAB Program will finance activities included in the following three components:  
 
(i) 
Enabling environment. The program will provide technical assistance to 
implement a strategy of effective regional connectivity, to promote further sector 
liberalization and to resolve market efficiency gaps including the reform of selected state-
owned enterprises.  
 
(ii) 
Connectivity. The program will catalyze and leverage private investment for the 
deployment of regional and national backbone infrastructure to link at competitive prices 
all capital and major cities in Central Africa  
 
(iii) 
eGovernment applications. In selected countries, the program will support the 
deployment of selected key eGovernment applications and services making use of 
improved connectivity in order to increase government efficiency.  
 
The first phase of the CAB (proposed for IDA financing), CAB APL1, will take the 
form of Communications Infrastructure and Technology Projects in Cameroon, Central 
African Republic and Chad for a total IDA of $63.2m. This first phase will include two 
tranches: the first tranche (CAB APL1A) will mainly support the component focused on 
the enabling environment (projects CIT1A, CIT2A and CIT3A for a total amount of 
$26.43m) while the second tranche (CAB APL1B) will support the investment for the 
infrastructure following PPP and open access principles (projects CIT1B, CIT2B and 
CIT3B expected to be approved in April 2010).  
 
To establish the CAB infrastructure in Cameroon, CAR and Chad (that will utilize the 
existing 1000km fiber-optic backbone laid next to the oil Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline), 
$40m will be contributed from the CAB APL1 and additional $27.8m will be mobilized 
from the private sector (private equity, off-take agreements and commercial debt). As 
structured, the World Bank CAB Program and CAB APL1 will not be affected if the 
AfDB financing does not materialize.  
 
The IFC is playing a key role as part of the World Bank Group#s support to the 
CEMAC and to Governments as they finalize an optimal structure for the public-private 
partnership (PPP). The structure of the PPP will be designed to (i) maximize the use of 
private financing (or minimize the use of public financing); (ii) ensure feasibility and 
attractiveness of the transaction; and (iii) secure open access to regional connectivity 
infrastructure and ensure competitive, reasonable tariff of international, regional and 
national capacity.  If needed IFC may also provide part of the private financing.  
Page  3
Subsequent phases will reach the Board based on the readiness of countries applying for 
support under the Program as well as availability and eligibility of IDA/IBRD financing.  
Countries that have already expressed interest for subsequent phases include Congo 
Republic, DRC, Equatorial Guinea (IBRD), Gabon (IBRD) and STP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This regional program will focus on strategy to improve government efficiency through 
the development of connectivity in the concerned countries : Phase 1: Cameroon, Central 
African republic (CAR), and Chad.  
 
The physical components of this Program will mostly be limited to the building of 
national terrestrial backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the landing stations, in the 
few cases where the latter might be required.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The physical components of this CAB Program will mostly be limited to the 
establishment of the regional backbone which consists of terrestrial networks (e.g. fiber-
optic cables laid next to main national roads), rural networks, and landing stations, in the 
few cases where the latter might be required.  
 
The risks associated with the kind of infrastructure financed under this Program are 
generally low, and the project is therefore assigned to environmental category B under 
OP 4.01.  
 
The ESMF has described the main environmental and social challenges in each involved 
country which remain small and very local, among other :  
Page  4
Chad: grass, few palms trees, acacias, crops and marshes  
 
Cameroon: grass, forest trees, crops, marshes, small infrastructures like shops and small 
bridges  
 
CAR:  grass, forest trees, crops, marshes, small infrastructures like shops and small 
bridges  
 
Due to the fact that the project activities will cross cities,  land acquisition for terrestrial 
facilities will be managed in compliance with  OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement 
considerations as described in the RPF..  
 
Since the CAB APL1 project will only finance fiber-optic cables laid next to main 
national roads (no rural networks and landing stations will be financed by CAB APL1), 
OP 4.10 for indigenous peoples, OP 4.36 for Forests and OP 4.11 for Cultural Property 
will not be triggered.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) are currently prepared for CAB Phase 1 (Cameroon, CAR and 
Chad # CAB APL1A and CAB APL1B).  The ESMF and the RPF were  reviewed by the 
Bank and publicly disclosed prior to appraisal in all countries participating in the first 
phase of CAB.  They will be available at the InfoShop.  
 
Specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project 
implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those 
facilities have been identified.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared for the overall program.  The ESMF and the RPF 
were reviewed by the Bank and publicly disclosed prior to appraisal in all countries 
participating in the first phase of CAB.  They will be available at the InfoShop. Specific 
costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) 
will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project implementation, 
in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities have been 
identified.  
 
Page  5
The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards instruments would 
lie with the implementing agency of each participating country. Any specific required 
action for some of the Civil Works will be taken into account during project 
implementation.  
 
The ESMF has clearly identified the Institutional responsibilities at the Regional, 
national and local levels. The scheme is as follow:  
 
Regional Coordination level: CEMAC  
 
National Coordination levels;  
 
Cameroon: Ministry of Post and Telecommunication; Ministry of Environment and 
Protection of Nature through the Environmental Policy and Development Directorate  
 
Central Africa Republic: Ministry of Post, telecommunication and New technologies;  
Ministry of Environment and Ecology through Environmental General Directorate  
 
Chad: Ministry of Post and  New Communication Technologies , Ministry of  
Environment and halieutiques resources  through Environmental Evaluation Department.  
 
Furthermore, the project implementing units will ensure that the decentralized 
collectivities, privates sector, local NGOs and local populations are fully involved.  
 
A
compared analysis of the national legislations applicable to the cases of expropriation 
and related compensation in the three countries with the Policy of the World Bank puts 
forward as well convergences as divergences. Ultimately, the national legislations and the 
OP 4.12 of the World Bank are not always concordant. In some points, there is more or 
less a relatively clear discordance, in particular with regard to the alternatives of 
compensation, the abstract occupants, the management of the complaints, the 
consultations, etc. On these points of discordance, it is recommended that the policy of 
the World Bank OP 4.12 is applied to guide the process of possible resettlement within 
the framework of the implementation of the activities of the project.  
 
Capacity building on safeguard issues and technical assistance are required to help the 
Agencies to implement the ESMF and the RPF accordingly. The relevant budget for the 
mitigation measures will be provided under CAB APL1A (prior to the roll-out of the 
infrastructure partly financed by CAB APL1B expected to be approve in April 2010).  
 
The following budget has been included under the CAB APL1 to conduct additional 
environmental and social studies as required (including EMPs and RAPs):  
 
-
Cameroon -  US$0.15m  
 
-
Central African Republic # US$0.15m  
 
-
Chad # US$0.25m   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders involved in Cameroon, CAR and Chad include : (i) the CAB 
Coordination Units, (ii) Ministries of Environment; (iii) Ministries of 
Telecommunications; (iv) Ministries in charge of Civil Works and Roads; (v) Local 
representatives;   (vi) Telecom operators; (vii) population potentially affected.  
Page  6
During the preparation of the ESMF and RPF, the consultant used the participatory 
approach. The main stakeholders were consulted. The final documents were shared 
within a national workshop where most to the stakeholders were invited and provided 
comments. The workshop was also publicized through local press and the document will 
be post at INFOSHOP.  
 
During the implementation phase, three stand alone EAs will be carried out and the 
consultation process will be the same at the regional, national and local levels. The final 
reports will also be posted at INFOSHOP before the start of civil works.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/13/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/13/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/13/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yann Burtin 
07/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna 
07/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor 
07/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
Page  8
