Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/10/2009 
Report No.:  AC4379
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P106063 
Project Name:  West Africa Regional Fisheries Program 
Task Team Leader:  John Virdin 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P108941 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (67%);Environmental 
policies and institutions (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of this 10-year APL is to sustainably increase the overall 
wealth generated by the exploitation of the targeted marine fish resources in the 
participating countries, and the proportion of that wealth captured by these countries.  
The first phase of the Program would achieve this objective by: (i) strengthening the 
countries capacity to sustainably govern and manage their fisheries, (ii) reducing illegal 
fishing, and (iii) increasing the value and profitability generated by fish resources and the 
proportion of that value captured by the countries.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Program will support the following components and sub-components.  
 
(A) Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries. The objective of 
this component is to build the capacity of Governments and stakeholders to implement a 
shared approach that would ensure that the marine fish resources are used in a manner 
that is environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and economically profitable. This 
component will support the following sub-components: (1) Development of the Capacity, 
Page  2
Rules, Procedures and Practices for Good Governance of the Fisheries; (2) Introduction 
of Fishing Rights; (3) Adjustment of Fishing Effort and Capacity to more Sustainable 
Levels, Introduction of Alternative Livelihoods where Needed; and (4) Social Marketing 
and Communication.  
 
(B) Reduction of Illegal Fishing.  The objective of this component is to reduce the 
illegal fishing activities threatening the sustainable management of the marine fish 
resources. More specifically, this component improves the Monitoring, Control and 
Surveillance (MCS) systems of participating countries and adapts them to the needs of 
fisheries management, within the framework of a coordinated approach between the 
participating countries. This component will support the following sub-components: (1) 
Enabling Environment for Reducing Illegal Fishing; (2) Monitoring, Control and 
Surveillance Systems; and (3) Strengthened Regional Collaboration for MCS.  
 
(C) Increasing the Contribution of the Marine Fish Resources to the Local Economies. 
The objective of this component is to increase the benefits to West Africa from the 
marine fish resources, by increasing the share of the value-added captured in the region. 
This component will support the following sub-components: (1) Fish Landing Site 
Clusters; (2) Fish Product Trade Infrastructure, Information and Systems # Regional 
Minimum Integrated Trade Expansion Platform (MITEP).  
 
(D) Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Program Management.  The objective 
of this component is to support the countries to implement the Program in the context of 
the CSRP Strategic Action Plan, and to monitor and evaluate results. This component 
will support the following sub-components: (1) National Implementation and (2) 
Regional Coordination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed APL1 including Cape Verde, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone will be the 
first of a series of overlapping similar APLs, with each APL involving different 
groupings of countries. Taken together, this series of APLs (i.e. the West Africa Regional 
Fisheries Program) is expected to span 10 to 12 years, at the end of which period it will 
have covered all seven member countries of the CSRP (Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, Senegal and Sierra Leone) plus Liberia and Ghana. The West 
Africa Regional Fisheries Program has a shared objective and approach, meaning that 
each APL in the series presented to the Board would have the same framework, i.e. the 
same components and sub-components, but would be applied to different countries (with 
some different specifics for each country). This overlapping design addresses four key 
considerations: (i) encourage regional integration in the management and development of 
the regions marine fish resources, (ii) allow countries to leverage relatively small regular 
IDA allocations to access much larger regional funds (including GEF grants) to boost 
their resources, (iii) offer long-term support (10 years) to progressively implement 
actions aimed at strengthening collaborative efforts to manage shared fisheries and fish 
resources, and (iv) give flexibility to groups of countries to participate in the WARFP as 
Page  3
they become eligible, rather than wait for the end of the first phase of the initial APL to 
participate.  
 
In order to implement the shared objective and approach, each APL in the West Africa 
Regional Fisheries Program would finance activities that would be implemented 
nationally in each participating country, as well as some activities better implemented at 
the regional level. Each APL would include investments for both physical goods, works 
and services, as well as soft activities such as technical assistance. Most of the physical 
investments would be made at the national level, while soft activities would be 
implemented at both the national and regional level.  
 
The safeguard analysis therefore takes into account the current situation of 
overexploitation of the resources and excess fishing effort by these communities in the 
region as a whole, and in particular in the four targeted countries, and the possible social 
ramifications of reducing fishing effort in certain cases to allow the fish stocks to rebuild.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Carolyn Winter (AFTCS) 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The key safeguard issue for the Program in APL1 as well as subsequent APLs (and the 
reason for which the involuntary resettlement safeguard applies), is the potential 
restriction of traditional access to fish resources that may be introduced by the Program in 
targeted fisheries. Currently, the region fish resources are utilized through a system of 
open access that has allowed essentially more fishers and fishing pressure than the 
resources can sustain. The Program addresses this by supporting the introduction of 
fishing rights through a co-management process. It is from this transition away from open 
access to more regulated fisheries, that the key risks are created. These risks are largely 
Page  4
social, because the implementation of rights-based systems implies that access to specific 
areas or types of fisheries will be controlled or restricted.  
 
The Program-wide instrument to address this risk is the support for alternative 
livelihoods to fishing in component 1.3, which will help fishers in overexploited fisheries 
move out of the fishing sector to pursue alternative, potentially more profitable and 
sustainable livelihoods. This instrument will address these risks wherever they may 
emerge in local Program sites. From a safeguards standpoint, the Program will utilize a 
resettlement process framework prepared during preparation, to ensure that decisions 
concerning restriction of access to fish resources are decided on the basis of consensus of 
stakeholders. The Progam will also utilize the Environmental Management Plan prepared 
through the EA, in order to ensure that any potential impacts arising through the 
construction of small-scale landing site infrastructure will be mitigated, in accordance 
with the environmental assessment safeguard (OP/BP 4.01).   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts could include the reduction of fishers in targeted fisheries that are 
currently overexploited, as a result of increased resource management and the 
encouragement of alternative livelihoods to fishing.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The program considered an approach based on greater command and control of the 
fisheries resources by central Governments, focused on individual licenses as the key to 
controlling access. However, this approach was rejected because of the prohibitive costs 
in trying to control large and diffuse fisheries throughout the region from a few central 
Government locations. Rather, the approach adopted aims to build on fishing 
communities and user groups to enter into partnerships for the sustainable management of 
the fish resources.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The four countries participating in APL 1 all signed the United Nations Convention on 
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) in 1982, while the Republic of Senegal ratified it in 1984, 
the Republic of Cape Verde in 1987 and the Republic of Sierra Leone in 1994. At the 
sub-regional level, the countries recognize at the highest political level, that due to the 
shared nature of the resources, they need to collaborate in order to ensure their 
sustainable management. The seven coastal countries from Mauritania to Sierra Leone 
have clearly expressed their interest in such a regional approach through their 
participation and commitment to the Sub-Regional Fisheries Commission (Commission 
Sous-
Régionale des Pêches - CSRP), and the implementation of its Strategic Action Plan 
(Plan d#Action Stratégique 2002-2010). The sub-regional fisheries commission (CSRP) 
is an intergovernmental organization created on March 29, 1985 by means of a 
convention. The seven member states of the CSRP adopted a Strategic Action Plan for 
Page  5
fisheries that focuses in particular on strengthening resource management and increased 
monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS) activities to reduce illegal fishing.  
 
Through the Program, in cases of overexploited fisheries the Borrowers will implement 
social investments as component 1.3 of the project, to compensate any losses that fishers 
or communities might suffer as a result of strengthened resource management and loss of 
access to fisheries. The resource management measures and reductions in fishing effort 
will be decided by communities in a consensus-based effort, which will be informed by a 
Process Framework prepared by the Borrowers.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project are the fishers and fishing communities in the four 
countries, as well as local processors and persons involved in fish marketing. The Sub-
Regional Fisheries Commission conducted consultations on the draft EA and EMP on 
behalf of the Governments in each of the four countries. Community facilitators working 
in targeted communities will work together with the national Program Implementation 
Unit in each country to ensure that compliance with safeguards issues are monitored 
throughout the program.  
 
Safegards docments have been distributed on the following dates: Cape Verde: July 3; 
Liberia: July 2; Senegal: July 6; Sierra Leone: July 2.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Virdin 
07/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
07/09/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Carolyn Winter 
07/09/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/10/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Herbert Acquay 
07/10/2009 
Comments:   
