Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3554
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P110616 
Project Name:  Nile Basin Initiative Institutional Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader:  Ekaterina Kan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTWR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.91 
 
GERMANY: German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ) 
7.83 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
24.02
33.76 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective of the NBI-ISP is: The NBI has strengthened 
foundation for institutional sustainability, enhanced capacity, and harmonized corporate 
management to more effectively deliver programs and projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
The NBI-ISP consists of a single, integrated package of institutional strengthening to be 
implemented across the three NBI institutions 
–
the umbrella NBI Secretariat (Nile-SEC) 
in Entebbe, Uganda; the Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO) in Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia; and the Coordinating Unit of the Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary 
Action Program (NELSAP-CU) in Kigali, Rwanda.  
 
NBI-ISP comprises five components to be implemented by the three NBI institutions, 
based on a common context, simple principles of organizational design and effectiveness, 
and widely-acknowledged attributes of good integrated river basin management.  
 
The five components are:  
 
1.
Strengthening and harmonizing NBI corporate management and governance (total 
component cost US$8.57 million)  
Page  2
2. 
Enhancing the foundation for knowledge-based water resource management (total 
component cost US$2.37 million)  
 
3.
Enhancing the foundation for water resource development (total component cost 
US$3.37 million)  
 
4.
Strengthening stakeholder participation and communication (total component cost 
US$3.77  million)  
 
5.
Management of SVP projects (total component costs US$2.9 million)  
 
Nile-SEC will be responsible for overall coordination and management of the project, 
including all components.  Responsibility for implementation of specific components will 
vary. Components 1, 2 and 4 will be implemented by all three institutions, while 
Component 3 (where Nile-SEC has no mandate) will be implemented by ENTRO and 
NELSAP-CU.  Component 5 will be implemented by Nile-SEC.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening and Harmonizing NBI Corporate Management and 
Governance (total component cost US$8.57 million)  
 
The outcome targeted under this component is to develop NBI so that it has the 
governance structure and capacity to operate according to its mandate on a sustainable 
basis.  The component will thus develop NBI’s internal capacity and orient its overall 
institutional direction.  The emphasis in developing internal capacity is on: strengthening 
corporate management, adding a strategic planning capability, and moving from a project 
focus to an institutional focus, while at the same time harmonizing and strengthening 
administrative systems and processes.  The emphasis in orienting NBI’s overall 
institutional direction is on consolidating the legal foundation and governance 
arrangements for the current transitional operation, and on preparing for NBI’s future role 
as a river basin organizationunder the Cooperative Framework Agreement.  
 
Specific subcomponents are thus designed to: (1) strengthen corporate management 
capabilities, including strategic planning and results based reporting, and develop and/or 
apply corporate policies on cross-cutting issues such as gender equality; (2) consolidate 
the legal foundation, institutional governance arrangements and operational plans for 
NBI’s future activities; (3) strengthen and harmonize administrative systems and 
functions across all three NBI centers; and (4) strengthen the Nile National Focal Point 
Offices and NBI regional linkages.  
 
Component 2: Enhancing the Foundation for Knowledge-based Water Resource 
Management (total component cost US$2.37 million)  
 
The outcome targeted under this component is to strengthen NBI’s knowledge-based 
integrated water resource management function. This function is key to NBI’s approach 
as it will facilitate sustainable water planning and management built around basin-wide 
benefit sharing strategies.    It is expected that in the longer term NBI will be able to 
develop a full basin sustainability function, capable of developing and reaching 
agreement on basin-wide water resource policies, of providing comprehensive integrated 
data and information on a basin-wide level, and of providing analysis based on scenario 
analysis capabilities supported by hydrology, environmental, economics and sociology 
expertise.  
 
Page  3
Specific subcomponents are designed to: (1) establish NBI’s integrated water resource 
management functions; (2) develop and strengthen knowledge management, integrated 
databases, data sharing, documentation and information functions, (3) introduce common 
basin-wide guidelines and standards for selected IWRM principles, and (4) integrate the 
tools, knowledge and processes developed under the Shared Vision Program into 
permanent operations, including mainstreaming of the Decision Support System .  
 
Of the total component cost of US$9.12 million, US$6.75 million (equivalent of â‚¬4.5 
million) will be financed by GTZ, covering most of the costs of sub-components 2.1, 2.2 
and 2.3 at Nile-SEC .  The remaining costs of the component, amounting to US$2.37 
million and covering the whole cost of sub-component 2.4 together with a small share of 
the costs of sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 at Nile-SEC and all costs of ENTRO and 
NELSAP-CU activities under this component, will be financed by NBTF. In addition 
subcomponent 2.5 will be funded through ongoing SVP projects (such as ATP and 
WRPM), and will be coordinated by the regional project manager of ATP on behalf of 
Nile-SEC. It was agreed that GTZ and the World Bank will jointly supervise component 
2. In line with the funds allocation, GTZ will take the lead on subcomponent 2.1-2.3, and 
the Bank will lead subcomponent 2.4 and 2.5.  
 
Component 3: Enhancing the Foundation for Water Resource Development (total 
component cost US3.37 million)  
 
The outcome targeted under this component is to strengthen NBI’s capability to deliver 
development projects.  This function, which is exercised by ENTRO and NELSAP-CU, 
has proved key to the commitment of member countries and populations to the NBI 
process, providing tangible results ‘on the ground.’ This component is therefore focused 
on ensuring that the necessary technical and other capabilities are strengthened to the 
highest possible levels through capacity building and access to world class expertise.  
 
Specific subcomponents are designed to: (1) strengthen project identification, 
preparation and implementation/facilitation capacities; and (2) strengthen program and 
project management capacities in water development.  
 
Component 4: Strengthening Stakeholder Participation and Communication (total 
component cost US$3.77 million)  
 
The outcome targeted under this component is to inform and build ownership amongst 
key stakeholders so that they are able to meaningfully participate in, and contribute to, 
future activities, policy and vision related to the Nile Basin.  This component will initially 
be implemented by the SVP Confidence Building and Stakeholder Involvement (CBSI) 
project, with the support of UNOPS, but the activities will be fully integrated with the 
NBI-ISP. This implementation structure will continue until the end of 2008, and starting 
January 2009 the project will become an integrated part of the NBI-ISP as component 
4.UNOPS involvement in implementation of CBSI will be gradually phased out in 2009.  
 
Global experience as regards successful international river basin organisations shows 
that it is essential to put serious corporate strategic effort into ensuring that key 
stakeholders (government, key private sector leaders, civil society opinion formers, 
Page  4
media) are engaged, have excellent knowledge, and have a sense of ownership in basin 
management matters.  In the Nile basin, with the CFA at stake, this activity is critically 
important and it is a major strategic issue for senior NBI leadership.  
 
Specific subcomponents are designed to: (1) strengthen stakeholder participation and 
engagement in NBI; (2) enhance knowledge, reputation and acceptance of NBI through 
implementation of the agreed communications strategy; and (3) enhance incorporation of 
social development dimensions in preparation and implementation of NBI investment 
projects, and augment the capacity of NBI and member governments in development 
communications and social development.  
 
Component 5: Management of SVP projects (total component costs US$2.90 million)  
 
Nile-SEC is responsible for management of seven thematic SVP projects.  To date, NBI 
has depended largely on a Management Service Agreement (MSA) with UNOPS for 
administration of these projects, but this arrangement has proved expensive and 
unwieldy. Management fees to UNOPS are paid as a lump sum for all SVP projects by 
the Nile-SEC on a quarterly basis from the SVP Coordination Project (SVP-C).  
Payments are made against UNOPS invoices, planned versus actual UNOPS budget 
reconciliations, and satisfactory submission of reports by UNOPS. As the NBI-ISP is 
taking over the SVP management and coordination (Component 2) from the SVP 
Coordination project, payment of UNOPS MSA fees will be also transferred.  
 
The current MSA is expiring in December 2008, and Nile-SEC is conducting a study of 
how to manage SVP projects in the future (to be presented to the Nile-TAC and NBTF 
Committee in April 2008).  As many SVP projects will be closing in 2009, it might not 
be practical to switch implementation arrangements for the last few months of their 
duration.  However, other projects will be operational for a few more years, and it is 
expected that, with NBI-ISP support, Nile-SEC will have capacity to implement them 
directly.  It is thus anticipated that the MSA with UNOPS will be extended for one more 
year (2009), after which Nile-SEC would assume full implementation responsibilities.  
This component therefore provides for financing of the MSA extension for 2009.  The 
estimated cost of US$2.90 million is based on previous years: the actual amount is 
expected to be less.  
 
Facilitation of CFA ratification  
 
The work on the Cooperative Framework Agreement (CFA) 
–
the first-ever attempt to 
develop an inclusive Nile Treaty - started in 1997. After almost ten years of negotiations, 
the draft text of the CFA was submitted to the Council of Ministers of Water Affairs of 
the Nile Basin States (Nile-COM) for their consideration, and was presented to the Nile-
COM at an Extraordinary Meeting in March 2007. After extensive discussions, the Nile-
COM concluded that the final decision on the CFA should be referred to the Heads of 
State in order to resolve an outstanding issue. Subsequently the CFA would be signed by 
the Heads of State and then transferred to the respective legislatures for ratification.  It is 
expected that ratification will take at least two years, following which the Nile River 
Basin Commission would be established.  
 
Page  5
Currently it is uncertain when the CFA will be signed.  Support to the signature process 
and preparation of a strategy and action plan to support ratification are provided for under 
Component 4 (subcomponent 4.2). An additional component to provide resources for the 
NBI to facilitate the ratification of a signed CFA might be added once the CFA is signed.  
 
The component is expected to include two parts: (i) support for the ratification of the 
CFA, including public communication, and engagement at country level through 
parliamentary briefings and workshops, and (ii) initiation of the establishment of the 
River Basin Commission, including expansion of the institutional design activities (see 
subcomponent 1.2), selection of the preferred institutional option, and start-up work on 
the preparation of critical protocols.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented by NBI offices in three countries:  
 
•
Uganda, Entebbe – location of Nile-SEC  
 
•
Ethiopia, Addis Ababa – location of ENTRO  
 
•
Rwanda, Kigali – location of NELSAP-CU  
 
Coordination will be done by the Nile-SEC in Uganda.  
 
The NBI ISP in itself is an institutional strengthening and capacity building project, and 
no physical investments are included in this project. Therefore the physical characteristics 
of the project locations are not relevant to the safeguard analysis.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The NBI-ISP will not have immediate direct social or environmental impacts as it is a 
technical assistance project for institutional strengthening. However, river basin 
Page  6
management and development interact in multiple ways with the basin environment, and 
NBI has been very active in adopting and promoting high levels of environmental and 
social stewardship.  It has put in place systems and mechanisms to ensure environmental 
and social safeguards in all its interventions both at basin level and at the level of project 
development and implementation. These measures are outlined in the NBI Strategy for 
Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards.  
 
At the basin level, NBI has developed a basin-wide environmental framework, and has 
worked with member governments to ensure that environmental standards are adopted 
and applied throughout the basin.  In particular, the SVP project NTEAP has helped build 
the capacities of national environmental agencies and communities to apply 
environmental legislation.  All basin countries have agreed that Nile-SEC should have 
responsibility for prior notification of any planned national level investment in the basin 
likely to have trans-boundary effects.  
 
At the level of project development and implementation, ENTRO and NELSAP-CU 
have adopted environmental standards which provide an acceptable level of environment 
safeguard.  Nile-SEC is responsible for monitoring and ensuring that these standards are 
complied with.  Strategic trans-boundary environmental guidelines have been developed 
by NTEAP, to provide clear internationally acceptable criteria for environmental 
screening of trans-boundary investment projects.  Trans-boundary environment 
guidelines for power investment projects are being developed by the SVP Regional 
Power Trade Project (RPT).  
 
Global experience from successful international river basin organizations shows that 
ownership and stakeholder confidence are critical to achieving objectives.  Therefore, 
NBI-ISP has been designed to strengthen stakeholder participation and awareness and 
stakeholder involvement at all levels in the basin. Multiple stakeholder networks 
(government, key private sector leaders, civil society opinion formers, media, women, 
lawyers) have also been built up on a local, national and regional basis with the support 
of SVP Confidence Building and Stakeholder Involvement Project (SVP CBSI) and these 
will continue to create stakeholder involvement during the project period. Moreover, the 
ongoing stakeholder database will serve as an important tool in designing future projects.   
 
At the level of the development programs supported by NBI, the project will enhance 
the incorporation of social development dimensions in preparation and implementation of 
NBI investment projects and augment capacity of NBI and member governments in 
development communications and social development in NBI projects. Key actions are 
(i) completion of the stakeholder database at corporate and national levels; (ii) 
development and implementation of the NBI communications strategy; (iii) development 
of project design guidelines (including policy and practice on gender equity), together 
with support to stakeholder consultation on projects; (iv) training of staff and national 
line agency in development communications and social development in NBI projects.  
 
In addition, under the project minor works will be conducted on the offices of Nile-SEC, 
ENTRO, and NELSAP-CU. Since these minor works will only entail internal office 
Page  7
repairs, no social safeguards will be triggered. To cover for environmental safeguards, the 
NBI will ensure that the contractor contracts will include the issues of dust, noise, injury 
to third parties and laborer, etc. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for minor 
works has been prepared and publicly disclosed by the NBI, as an addendum to the NBI 
Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards. This  EMP has been 
adopted by the NBI, and is applicable to all minor works on existing NBI structures, 
including the office repairs financed by the NBI-ISP .   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will include one or more small pre-feasibility studies, e.g. NELSAP-CU will 
prepare a NELSAP catchments multi-sector analysis identifying development potential in 
the region under subcomponent 3.1. ToRs will be developed at a later stage, and will 
include an examination of any potential riparian issues. Hence, the safeguard on 
international waterways is triggered. The project was approved by the Nile-COM, during 
their meeting in June 2007. The PAD was reviewed and approved by Nile-COM at their 
16th meeting in Kinshasa, DRC, on July 21-22, 2008.  The Ministers from all nine 
countries were presented and informed; therefore, no additional notification was needed. 
The project was considered a priority for the NBI, as all riparian countries will benefit 
from institutional strengthening and capacity building activities. The project will ensure 
NBI's due diligence in the preparation and implementation of investment projects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No project alternative were considered related to adverse social and environmental 
impacts, since the project itself does not trigger any safeguards.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Although NBI is a transitional institution and
 doesn’t have strong built in institutional 
capacity for safeguard policies, it performs due diligence and follows international good 
practice for each investment project. In addition, NBI promotes and undertakes regional 
studies and activities, such as the Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment for 
Power Options (SSEA) under the NELSAP, which prepare frameworks and ensure 
adequate practices for the NBI’s investment project portfolio. Nevertheless, there is still a 
need to support NBI in strengthening and harmonizing its capacity to apply adequate 
safeguards practices while developing investment projects and programs.  
 
While NBI-ISP will not finance project preparation and/or implementation it will still 
contribute to the NBI’s project development capacity through institutional development 
and strengthening of NBI project offices (ENTRO and NELSAP-CU) and related 
capacities.  
 
•
Through SVP coordination activities NBI-ISP will ensure that capacities builtby 
SVP, such as Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) and SSEA training for power 
projects prepared by SVP Power Trade Project (RPT) and the SVP Environment Project 
(NTEAP), will be institutionalized and applied to follow good practices.  
Page  8
•
As one of the NBI-ISP objectives is to capture critical SVP results to 
ensuresustainability within the NBI institutions, the project will expand and continue 
financing of environmental and social functions of ENTRO and NELSAP-CU (currently 
financed through SVP NTEAP and CBSI projects).  
 
•
NBI-ISP will directly finance capacity building activities to improve NBI’s 
project management skills, such as targeted training for both ENTRO and NELSAP-CU 
staff.  
 
•
Finally, NBI-ISP will contribute towards harmonization of existing and 
development of new policies.  For example, through monitoring and supervising 
development of the Basin Sustainability Framework (building upon outputs of SVP 
NTEAP).  
 
In order to ensure transparent decision making with regard to safeguards issues within 
the NBI as well as to clarify NBI policies for projects that might not be financed by the 
Bank, the NBI prepared a short document outlining NBI’s approach to safeguards issues, 
related public consultations, and disclosure of documents (Strategy for Addressing 
Environmental and Social Safeguards). A draft of this document was reviewed by the 
Bank team during pre-appraisal mission in February, 2008. The final version was 
disclosed by the NBI and through the World Bank Info shop on April 23, 2008, prior to 
appraisal.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The NBI-ISP itself is expected not to affect any stakeholders. The project intends to 
strengthen NBI's capacity to prepare and implement transboundary investment projects 
according to international standards. The NBI Strategy for Addressing Environmental 
and Social Safeguards describes NBI's approach to safeguards. This document was 
disclosed by the NBI and the Bank prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  9
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The NBI Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards was disclosed by 
the NBI and through the World Bank Info shop by April 30, 2008, prior to appraisal.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ekaterina Kan 
10/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
10/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
10/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
10/20/2008 
Comments:   
