Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3456 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/25/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P108879 
Project Name: Nyika Transfrontier Conservation Area project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 30, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Other financial and 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.82 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.20 
 
NORWAY: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
4.10 
 Foundation/s 
(identified) 
3.00
8.30 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To establish effective transfrontier management of biodiversity and to improve local livelihoods 
in the Malawian-Zambian Nyika Transfrontier Conservation Area (TFCA).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will assist the Malawian and Zambian governments and stakeholders in 
implementing the existing TFCA joint management plan that links border protected areas, 
permanent forest and rural development areas by building the capacity to control resource uses 
and to monitor trends in biodiversity and ecosystem functions through an effective joint law 
enforcement system and a public-private partnership for park management as well as an 
implementation of a cost-effective monitoring system. The project design envisages that 
sustainable binational management structures and funding mechanisms will be in place before 
and during project implementation phase to sustain project achievements in the long term. The 
Page  2
long-term objectives as per the Nyika TFCA bilateral Memorandum of Understanding are to (i) 
foster trans-national collaboration and co-operation between Malawi and Zambia in 
implementing ecosystem and cultural resource management through the establishment and 
development of the proposed TFCA; (ii) promote alliances in the management of biological and 
cultural resources and encourage social, economic and other partnerships among Governments 
and Stakeholders; (iii) enhance ecosystem integrity and natural ecological processes by 
harmonizing wildlife management procedures across the international boundary and strive to 
remove artificial barriers or circumstances that inhibit natural movements of wildlife; (iv) 
develop frameworks and strategies whereby neighbouring communities can participate in, and 
tangibly benefit from, the management and sustainable use of natural and cultural resources that 
occur within the proposed TFCA; and (v) promote cross-border tourism as a means of fostering 
regional socio-economic development.  
 
Component 1. Sustainable institutional framework for TFCA planning and management:  
 
The Project will support the establishment and initial operations of the Nyika TFCA Foundation 
(Nyika Foundation (NF)) which will be operational in 2008 or 2009. The Foundation will be 
equally formed of Board members from Zambia and Malawi foundation with balanced 
representation from Government, Communities, NGOs and reputable personalities.  The Nyika 
Foundation will possess an executive team (Management Unit) lead whose composition and 
structure will be designed during preparation. Peace Park Foundation, who will be responsible 
for managing the preparation grant and phase, is expected to continue to be significantly 
involved but gradually phase out its technical assistance.  The Nyika Foundation will manage the 
Project and be responsible for implementation. Its role will be to orchestrate and monitor the 
intervention of various partners in the mosaic of the TFCA land under various conservation 
regimes.  In particular, special effort will be carried out (1) to build all the management and 
planning instruments for the Foundation, (2) develop a TFCA-wide development plan including 
TFCA-wide transfrontier planning, regulating and resource management tools, and (3) with 
WCS (see COMACO below) lead efforts in setting up a community-
managed “People’s Park” 
on the Zambia side in an area that represents critical biodiversity/watershed resources outside the 
TFCA protected area and to facilitate the economic opportunities derivable from such a park.  
 
Component 2. Management of Protected Areas within TFCA:  
 
The Project will support the implementation of the existing joint management framework for 
the management of the existing (and the proposed new) protected areas within the TFCA.  The 
management of each protected area will be done either by ZAWA or DNPW or through specific 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements.  Identified priorities to increase management 
effectiveness include adequate resource protection, infrastructure development and maintenance, 
adaptive and maintenance training, ecological research and monitoring and monitoring of 
sustainable tourism activities and other wildlife and resource-based uses.  
 
Component 3. Enhancement of Community Livelihoods:  
 
This component will be mostly implemented on the Zambian side of the TFCA.  It will be 
based on an innovative approach to community support called Community Markets for 
Conservation (COMACO), implemented by the NGO Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) and 
largely cofinanced by Norway.  Through this approach the project intends to support: (1) 
Development of a new Community Trading Centre (CTC) to the four chiefdoms of the TFCA, 
Page  3
(2) Co-management program around the northern Lundazi National Forest for improved access 
to honey-derived income in exchange for protecting the forest against settlements, land clearing 
and fires, (3) Expansion of the current poacher transformation program to the entire Nyika TFCA 
area providing a socially acceptable and cost-effective way of reducing the threat of illegal 
hunting, (4) Scaling up of organic cotton to replace pesticide cotton for conservation cotton , (5) 
Organic farming production certification, (6) Continued establishment and training of Producer 
Group Cooperatives and progressive development of land use plans in collaboration with local 
District Authorities, (7) Continued development of community-based extension support, (8) 
Scaling up of product processing to meet the growing consumer demand in urban markets, and 
(9) Extension of community-owned bushcamp in the proposed Nyika TFCA.  
 
On the Malawi side community support is likely to be limited to existing projects mainly 
financed by other donors (e.g. closing USAID COMPASS).  Still, if additional funds are raised, 
WCS intends to expand COMACO in the Malawi side of the TFCA with the view to specifically 
engage the tobacco farmers and stimulate the adoption of better practices.  
 
Component 4. Organization of Sustainable Financing: The intention of this component is to 
develop mechanisms for financial sustainability of the Nyika Foundation and the TFCA. As a 
first step, and on the basis of a preliminary 5-year Business Plan which would include a 
fundraising strategy, the Nyika Foundation, with the assistance of Peace Park Foundation (which 
has an excellent track record in this area) will engage in fund raising, as well as marketing and 
development of tourism concessions and the design and establishment of various funding 
windows including a sinking fund. A proportion of the GEF grant - to be decided at appraisal - 
will be channelled through the sinking fund.  Through this approach the foundation will gain 
lessons on investment planning, financial management and budget monitoring.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Designated Nyika TFCA of Malawi and Zambia (see map in PCN), with a total area of 19,2802, 
consists of Nyika National Park and Vwaza Marsh Wildlife Reserve in Malawi and Nyika 
National Park, Lundazi, Mitengi, Mikuti Forest Reserves and Musalangu Game Management 
Area in Zambia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Both countries have adequate legislations and reasonable capacity to review EAs but not the full 
range of Bank safeguards. Malawi has prepared several Environmental and Social Management 
Frameworks (ESMFs) and EA Reports. National consultants are expected to be recruited to 
prepare the EA and the proposed Wildlife Impact Assessments which will be reviewed and 
approved by Malawi’s Technical Committee on the Environment.  The Peace Park Foundation, 
who is implementing the preparation grant, will organize a team of consultants.  
 
A
process Framework will be prepared to address restricted access to natural resources. 
Activities will include capacity building for better park management, community involvement, 
and increasing opportunities for benefit sharing between affected communities and park 
conservation.  COMACO, established in Zambia, has developed a marketing system whereby 
community groups have access to markets and improved income, through Community Trade 
Centers. This access is directly linked with protection of established park areas and training in 
Page  4
conservation efforts. The COMACO process will try to be replicated in Malawi to improve 
livelihoods and promote community conservation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a conservation operation that seeks to improve the status of biodiversity in the Nyika 
TFCA as well as the food security of communities.  There will be investments such as small 
infrastructures (houses, gravel roads, culverts), and activities such as anti-poaching or support to 
conservation farming, that can affect locally the environment as well as the local communities.  
The impacts of specific investments may be difficult to identify during preparation and may 
materialize only during implementation.  As a consequence, an environmental assessment is 
necessary to identify well the potential impacts and prepare a framework that will enable 
implementers to detect them as they materialize and mitigate them.  The EA report is expected to 
include a Wildlife Impact Assessment which is required under Malawi’s legislation in the event 
that infrastructure investmentsare planned in national parks. Such assessment would determine 
the impact of existing and new infrastructure (e.g. roads, lodge expansions) on the park’s 
wildlife. Linkages to related projects (ADP, ISP, NWDP) active in the same intervention zone 
and their environmental management plans will be assessed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Most of the TFCA is natural habitat such as miombos, mopane and Nyika grassland.  The 
project aims to enhance its conservation but there is possibility that new tracks through sensitive 
areas locally increase the ecosystem disturbance.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The Lundazi Forest in Zambia is included in the TFCA which is currently not managed by 
the Forest Department.  Some of its land area is expected to be upgraded to a higher conservation 
status as part of the project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The planned conservation farming activities, mainly on the Zambian side and outside the 
protected areas, are intended to change currently unsustainable farming and natural resource use 
practices (scaling-up of COMACO approach). The safeguard expert suggests to use assessments 
conducted under the ADP, ISP and possibly the NDP as basis for developing a pest management 
framework.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Like all conservation projects, there is an element of improved resource protection and law 
enforcement which will restrict assess to wildlife from people who were using it before, albeit 
illegally.  Also, partially in a forest reserve and partially in a game management area on the 
Zambian side, the project will facilitate the creation of a protected area of higher conservation 
stat
us. The design process is expected to be fully participatory and the status is expected to be 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
that of "community park" managed by a community organization. Still this process may lead to 
increased limitation in access to natural resources and agriculture land from some of the 
community members.  As a consequence, community engagement needs to follow a process that 
is in accordance with the Bank resettlement policy.  A process framework will be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/16/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
C.Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  
 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
The GEF preparation grant is expected to be available in May 2008.   The EA and 
preparation of process framework will be carried out in the September to December 2008 
period. The entire reporting instruments will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to 
appraisal, in both
 countries and at the Bank’s InfoShop.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Michel G. Pavy 
01/26/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/02/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough 
02/02/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
