Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4024 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/13/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P113167 
Project Name: Enhancing Institutional Capacities on REDD issues for Sustainable Forest 
Management in the Congo Basin 
Task Team Leader: Carole Megevand 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
1.90 
 
World Wildlife Fund 
0.80 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
2.76 
 
Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified) 
4.67 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
1.55
13.18 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the capacities of the 
Congo Basin countries on REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation) issues, and help prepare themselves to take advantage of a future, large-scale, 
system of positive carbon-based incentives for sustainable forest management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Strengthening knowledge on REDD at local, national and regional levels (GEF 
financing US$0.7 million, Total US$3.58 million; Co-financing: FCPF, France, International 
NGOs, Governments)  
Page  2
The project will support the national dialogue on REDD issues and the necessary cross-sectoral 
coordination, as well as strategic analytical works on drivers of deforestation and on potential 
impacts of sectoral policies on forest cover (cf. agricultural subsidies, fiscal policies, 
infrastructure investments).  
 
The project will support an active participation of the local populations (with a specific 
attention given to vulnerable stakeholders, incl. indigenous peoples) through extensive 
consultations at the local level. The GEF contribution will help countries in designing transparent 
mechanisms to manage carbon-related financing and ensure that REDD schemes support pro-
poor and environmentally-sound policies.  
 
The project will support the set-up of a regional platform to create synergies and knowledge 
sharing through active exchanges of technical information and to reinforce the Congo Basin 
countries capacities to negotiate on REDD issues  in the international fora (International 
negotiations on REDD continue well beyond 2009 with the development and approval of 
specific meth
odologies and “rules” that will determine the actual implementation of the post-
2012 framework).  
 
Component 2: Building Technical Capacities for measurement and monitoring of carbon stocks 
in the Congo Basin Forests(GEF financing US$4.20 million, Total US$9.81 million; Co-
financing: FCPF, France, CIRAD and consortium, International NGOs, CEEAC, Governments)  
 
The project will support the generation of allometric equations, based on field data collection 
and modelling exercise (Allometric equations allow a determination of the tree volume (and C 
content) based on easy-to-collect data such as diameter and height). It will carry out the 
development of a reliable methodology to measure and monitor carbon stocks in the Congo 
Basin forests, based on a combination of field surveys and monitoring through satellites images). 
Subsequently, the first comprehensive vegetation/carbon stock map of the Congo Basin area will 
be produced.  
 
Component 3: Mainstream REDD concept within SFM projects (GEF financing US$6.90 
million, Total US$10.24 million; Co-financing: France, UNEP, International NGOs, 
Governments)  
 
This Component will support the operationalisation of the REDD concept at the ground level. 
To do so, it will first assess carbon performance of existing activities on the ground dealing with 
major pressures on forests, such as fuelwood collection, conversion to agriculture, logging 
activities. The project will therefore develop methodologies and technical guidelines to 
mainstream REDD concept in future SFM programs and projects in the Congo Basin: those 
methodologies and guidelines will be developed in close coordination with all stakeholders 
involved in the Congo Basin and then widely disseminated, thereby contributing to strengthen 
partnerships on REDD and its operationalisation on the ground.  
 
Component 4: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (GEF financing US$1.2 
million, Total US$2.25 million; Co-financing: France, International NGOs, Governments)  
 
The detailed institutional arrangements for the proposed project, as well as the financial 
management, will be determined in the course of the preparation. However it is anticipated that 
Page  3
the COMIFAC Secretariat will be responsible for coordinating the regional activities. An 
Advisory Committee will be set up and will comprise representatives of countries and partners.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The geographic scope of the project covers the six countries hosting the tropical forest 
ecosystems of the Congo Basin (i.e. Cameroon, CAR, DRC, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and 
Republic of Congo). Activities under Components 1 and 2 will cover all six countries. Though 
not yet completed defined, it is likely that the activities under the Component 3 will cover 
different forest ecosystems in different geo-climatic areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Governments of the six countries participating in this regional project have differing degrees 
of familiarity with the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies, based on prior experience with other 
Bank funded projects in different sectors. In practice, the capacity for implementing and 
monitoring safeguard compliance remains weak in implementation agencies in most of the six 
countries, in particular CAR, DRC, Equatorial Guinea, and Republic of Congo.  
 
The project team will ensure that the Environmental Annex (Annex 10) of the PAD is drafted in 
partnership with Governments and that it is then disclosed as the project's safeguard instrument. 
The Annex will summarize the project's approach to environmental and social risk management, 
most particularly the management of consultations with key stakeholders.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed regional project focuses on capacity building and the development of improved 
methodologies for forest management. This policy has been triggered due to the fact that the 
project's context is sensitive. Project preparation and implementation will ensure free, prior, and 
informed consultations with key stakeholders, most particularly forest dwelling indigenous 
people, as well as ensure compliance with OP/BP 4.36 on Forests.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The proposed regional project will proceed with an environmental and social evaluation 
during the preparation phase. Based on this evaluation, the following safeguard instruments 
will be prepared: an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP), and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
Studies and consultations, based on which the safeguard documents will be prepared, are 
expected to be launched following pre-appraisal in June 2009. Studies are expected to be 
finalized and safeguard documents ready for disclosure in the countries and by the WB by 
the time of appraisal in January 2010.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Carole Megevand 
02/13/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
02/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christophe Crepin 
02/13/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
