INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/02/2009                         Report No.: AC4140
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa                        Project ID: P096407
Project Name: Abidj an-Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (ALTTFP)
Task Team Leader: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 4,  Estimated Board Date: November 12, 2009
2009
Managing Unit: AFTTR                   Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (87%); Other domestic and international trade (11%);
Health (2%)
Theme: Regional integration (67%); Trade facilitation and market access (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):        0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):       235.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):         0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):         0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                     23.00
Financing Gap                                           0.00
23.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                  Simple []         Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes []  No []
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)
2. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed ALTTFP (APL 1) is to reduce trade and transport barriers
in the ports and on the roads along the Abidjan-Lagos corridor in Ghana, Togo, Benin,
and Nigeria. C8te d'Ivoire will be included as a second phase in APL2.
3. Project Description
(A) Trade Facilitation (US$21 million) will include the sub-components listed below:
(i)   Facilitation of collection and sharing of relevant information and data among
customs agencies along the Corridor.
(ii)   Establishment of a trade facilitation single window within the Recipients' ports of
Lom6, Cotonou, and Lagos, aimed at facilitating the handling of all transactions at
the Recipients' ports in an efficient and speedy manner.
(iii)  Acquisition of equipment, materials, communication tools and technical advisory
services required to: (i) establish ajoint border posts along the Recipients' borders
with the neighboring countries along the corridor; and (ii) strengthen the capacity


﻿of the Recipients' border agencies to discharge their duties and responsibilities
efficiently.
(iv)  Formulation and carrying out of training programs and activities aimed at
enhancing the expertise and the abilities of relevant stakeholders involved in the
implementation of the Project to discharge their responsibilities for the Project
efficiently.
(v)    Streamlining of customs procedures, formulation of customs procedures manuals
and dissemination of the same among the relevant stakeholders.
(vi)   Establislunent of an adequate internal reporting system aimed at improving
management control of customs agencies' operations.
(vii)  Strengthening of the operational capacity of the Recipients' National Road
Transport and Transit Facilitation Committees.
(B) Improvement of the Road Corridor's Infrastructure (US$227 million) will
include the sub-components listed below:
(i)    Carrying out of technical design and detailed engineering studies for the road
improvement and rehabilitation works to be carried out under the Project;
(ii)  Improvement of (a) about 110 kn of road in Ghana on the Agona Junction -
Elubo section along the corridor; (b) about 16.5 km in Benin on the Godomey -
Pahou section along the corridor, and (c) about 8 km of road in Togo on the
Aneho - Hillacondji section along the corridor, including enlargement of the
Aneho bridge; and (d) supervision of the related civil works;
(iii)  Implementation of social and environmental mitigation measures required under
this Component B of the Project; and
(iv)  Provision of technical assistance, material and equipment for road safety.
(C) Project Management and Coordination (US$3.5 million) will include provision of
technical advisory services and logistical support (including office equipment, materials,
supplies and vehicles) required to sustain management and coordination of Project
implementation activities including monitoring and evaluation of progress achieved in the
execution of the Project.
(D) HlIV/AIDS Programs and Corridor Performance Monitoring (US$6 million)
will include the sub-components listed below:
(i)   Formulation and execution of programs of activities aimed at reducing the impact
of H1V/AIDS and preventing the spread of HIV infection among communities
established and/or operating along the portion of the corridor located within the
Recipients' territories.
(ii)  (a) Collection and treatment of data required to measure and monitor performance
in the areas of trade, transport and HIV/AIDS along the Corridor; and (b) wide
dissemination of such data across the Recipients territories and beyond.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project locations consist of the national road between Godomey and Pahou, in Benin;
Aneho bridge and road between Aneho - Savee Codji, in Togo; and Agona junction to


﻿Elubo border post, in Ghana. In addition, the project may finance rest areas/parking lots
at border crossing points as a complement to the EU support to joint border posts. The
focus of the roads civil works will be to rehabilitate the roads. Another country
participating besides the three aforementioned countries is Nigeria, whose project does
not include any infrastructure component.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)             X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Watenvays (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                        X
H1. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Sunnary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The main thrusts in the proposed project is to facilitate transport, transit and trade on the
Abidjan- Lagos corridor; the civil works aim at rehabilitating selected roads along the
corridor. Apart from roads, the civil works might also entail some parking lots/rest areas
at border posts. The project has been categorized as B. This category is based on the
focus and scope of the proposed civil works, which indicate limited adverse
environmental and social impacts. Field assessments have confirmed that the planned
civil works (road improvement, parking lots/rest areas at border posts) will not induce
significant negative impacts during and after project implementation. In particular, the
road improvement works will not require any road re-alignment.
There are no irreversible impacts identified by the EA and the SIA of the project. The
above safeguards policies triggered are due to the potential adverse environmental and
social impacts of the planned road construction operations, including the potential spread
of HIV/AIDS. The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) was triggered as the policy
applies whenever OP 4.01 applies, i.e. whenever there is likely to be significant civil
works; it does, however, not require a separate report. In addition, the draft RAP for the
Benin section of the road identified potential voudun altars to be affected, and the RAP of
Ghana identified a church and a graveyard to be adversely affected. Involuntary


﻿Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has been triggered, as the civil works of the project will
induce land acquisition.
Key environmental safeguards issues are adverse environmental impacts and
Involuntary Resettlement. The impacts are site specific, and limited to the execution of
the following civil works operations: a) Dust and noise due to the road construction
operations b) establishment of base camps for contractors and resident engineers and
opening or re-opening of borrow pits and solid rock quarries, which could result in soil
erosion and pollution and aesthetically undesirable alterations of the landscape; d)
opening of diversions; and d) dumping of construction waste and accidental spillage of
machine oil, lubricants, etc.
Likewise, potential adverse social impacts are also minor, and will be site specific. They
transpire as: a) temporary loss of strips of farmlands along the project roads; b) loss of
selected number of trees and perennial crops along the project roads; c) demolition of
some fences, walls, and houses in some urban sections; d) dislocation of social values,
(resulting in the spread of HIV/AIDS) and e) relocation of public amenities such as water
pipes, electric and telephone poles.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term or cumulative adverse impacts were identified in the EIAs and the RAPs.
The Environment and Management Plans (EMPs) and the Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) have addressed the adverse impacts identified.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not relevant
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared for Benin, Togo and Ghana road
project components. These safeguards instruments address site specific adverse impacts
of the project and enhance its social benefits. In Ghana, the RAP is yet to be finalized
and published.
Environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) studies on the roads to be
rehabilitated in Ghana, Togo and Benin were prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed
both in-country and at the InfoShop, as follows:
- Benin:  ESIA (In country:    03/06/09; InfoShop:  03/24/09); RAP (In country:
08/05/2009; InfoShop: 08/10/2009)
- Ghana: ESIA (In country: 06/11/2009; InfoShop: 07/07/09); RAP (In country:
09/02/2009; Infoshop: 09/02/2009)
- Togo: RAP (In country: 07/08/09; InfoShop: 07/15/09); ESIA (In country: 04/30/09;
InfoShop: 05/20/09)


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The design of the project has been participatory: at national level, at regional level, local
government level and donor community level. At the level of districts, public
consultations were held in local communities along the selected road projects throughout
the environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and social impact assessments (SIAs)
processes.
Key stakeholders include: the regional organizations, ministries of transport and
ministries of transport and public works, road agencies, Environment Protection
Authorities (EPAs), customs and immigration agencies, local governments and local
communities. The preparation of the EIAs and the RAPs included recurrent consultations
with local governments and local communities. Meetings held were documented in the
EIAs and the RAPs with photographs and minutes of meetings. Pursuant national
clearances and disclosures as describes in the EIAs and the RAPs, the safeguards
instruments were subsequently disclosed at the Infoshop of the World Bank.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date (see Section II.A.4 above
for all disclosure dates)
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank:
Date of "in-country" disclosure:
Date of submission to InfoShop:
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EAto the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank:
Date of "in-country" disclosure:
Date of submission to InfoShop:
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank:
Date of "in-country" disclosure:
Date of submission to InfoShop:
Pest Management Plan:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop


﻿* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?    Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)  Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the  Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?  Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential  Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process     Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector  Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the  Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the   Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?


﻿D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by;                       Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:               Ms Anc     MinaD      ecu             September 2 2009
Environmental Specialist:       Mr Affi shogba Oljb                  September 2, 2009
Social Development Specialist   Mr Antne V. Lema                      September 2, 2009
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   s      Teravaninthorn               September 2, 2009
Comments:


