Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3357 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P108583 
Project Name: 3A W/C Africa Air Transport Phase II-B 
Task Team Leader: Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Aviation (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program standardized development objectives are as follows: a) Improve Civil Aviation 
Authorities’ (CAAs) compliance with International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) safety 
standards, b) Increase CAAs’ compliance with ICAO’s security standards, and c) Enhance main 
international airports’ compliance with ICAO’s security standards. These same objectives will be 
used for this phase of the program.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project includes the following components:  
 
•
Component 1 - Strengthening of CAAs’ safety and security oversight capacities: this 
component will finance each country’s CAA technical assistance necessarymainly for: a) the 
adoption and utilization of harmonized aviation code and regulations; b) the training of civil 
aviation staff in the areas of civil aviation security and safety oversights; c) the acquisition of 
basic communications and inspections equipments (e.g., two-ways radios, inspection vehicle, 
computers, etc.), and  d) the procurement of library equipment (e.g., relevant ICAO’s manuals, 
directives, online library, training materials, etc.).  
Page  2
•
Component 2 - Improvements in airport security and safety standards: This activity will 
involve establishing appropriate aviation security legislation, development of security programs 
(national, airports and airlines programs) and provision of security equipment at the main 
international airports. The main areas of focus will be: a) the implementation of measures to 
reinforce security at the various airport access points (identification equipment, security cameras, 
patrol vehicles, communications systems and reorganization of passenger flows); b) the 
rehabilitation and/or construction within existing airport building premises of crisis centers, 
including acquisition of necessary communication and surveillance tools to equip these centers 
as well as an airplane remote parking zone and vehicle patrol route; c) the training of airport 
security personnel; and d) the development of airport security through the acquisition of 
passengers and cargo X-ray machines, when necessary.  
 
•
Component 3 - Management and governance oversight of the project: This activity is 
meant to encompass the financing of project operating costs included, but not limited to, a) 
Project unit’s technical assistance cost in the form of individual consultants’ fees (e.g.; 
procurement, financial management and equipment specialists), b) office rentals and expenses, if 
applicable, c) annual fiduciary audits, and d) day-to-day management of the program.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project location: Headquarters of Civil Aviation Agencies of Senegal and Benin in, respectively, 
Dakar and Cotonou and the airport premises of Dakar and Cotonou 
 
No sensitive environmental or social issues should be raised by the project implementation as 
there will be no construction activities or land acquisition.  The proposed investments are 
essentially for the acquisition of basic communication and inspection equipments and the 
development of safety and security programs.  These investments do not have environmental or 
social safeguard implications; hence there will be no negative impact from the project. No 
environmental or safeguard policies are triggered by investments under the current proposed 
operation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The regulatory framework governing the environmental management of operations at Dakar is 
well known since the Bank has multiple transport projects currently underway in Senegal. In the 
case of operations at Cotonou airport, existing regulations are not known and will need to be 
investigated further. However, due to the nature of the work to be carried out at each airport, no 
environmental or social issues are anticipated as neither airport is experiencing issues related to 
illegal settlement on its premises. No environmental or safeguard policies are triggered by 
investments under the current proposed operation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/23/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
02/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/20/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
