Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  51262 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/28/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P116595 
Project Name: Eastern Nile First Joint Multipurpose Program Identification (JMP1 ID) 
Task Team Leader: Xiaokai Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 28, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Irrigation and 
drainage (30%);Power (30%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Regional integration (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of this Recipient-Executed Technical Assistance project is to assist the three 
Eastern Nile countries in identification of the JMP1 investment package, through a series of 
studies and consultative activities that take into account economic, social and environmental 
sustainability.  By the end of the JMP1 Identification project, ENCOM will be in a position to 
commission detailed preparation for the selected JMP1 investments, as appropriate.  At that time 
and under separate funding, preparation would include full feasibility studies and designs for the 
selected projects, along with detailed impact assessment, financing studies, implementation 
planning, etc.  
 
The key performance indicators for the JMP 1 ID phase are: (i) a credible strategic social and 
environmental assessment of development alternatives is completed in the initial stage of the 
project; (ii) Eastern Nile governments are better informed on the implications and requirements 
of joint development and management of Eastern Nile water resources; and (iii) the first set of 
coordinated investments are identified at the end of the project.  
 
Page  2
The planned main outputs of this technical assistance will include the following:  (i) an 
inclusive and participatory strategic social and environmental assessment of water resources 
development alternatives in the Blue-Main Nile; (ii) identification of a regional Anchor Project, 
taking into account economic, social and environment considerations, including reservoir filling 
and operating rule studies to optimize system benefits and best manage related risks; (iii) 
identification of potential nationally-implemented JMP1 Non-Anchor Projects, including 
irrigation modernization & development and watershed management centered on agricultural 
productivity and livelihoods improvement and watershed sustainability as well as floodplain 
management; (iv) a roadmap for preparation of the first set of investment projects under JMP1; 
and (v) increased capacity of the ENTRO and related agencies in the three countries for  
preparation of the JMP1 investment projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components:  The Project will include two components: (i) JMP1 Identification Studies; 
and (ii) Capacity-Building and Implementation Support. It will build on the previous studies and 
analytical work, and be coordinated closely with other related studies (See Annex 1).  
 
Component 1 
–
JMP1 Identification Studies:  
 
Sub-component 1.1 - Information/Knowledge Base Enhancement:  There are identified gaps in 
the present knowledge and information base pertaining to the development of the Eastern Nile 
Basin. This sub-component aims to bridge the information and knowledge gaps to the extent 
needed to allow confident assessments of decisions on development alternatives. This work will 
build upon the EN ‘One System Inventory’ (OSI), and will be coordinated with modeling and 
information management activities planned under the NBTF-funded ongoing Eastern Nile 
Planning Model (ENPM) and the Nile Basin Water Resources Planning and Management 
Project, which include development of databases and analytical tools for the Eastern Nile and 
overall Nile basins.  
 
Sub-component 1.2 - JMP1 Identification Studies:  Theses studies will build on the related 
analytical work listed in Annex 1. They are intended to: (i) carry out strategic assessment of 
water resources development alternatives (in the form of a Strategic Social and Environmental 
Assessment (SSEA); (ii) identify the optimum cascade development scenario and first priority 
project, and subsequently define an Anchor Project; and (iii) identify the Non-Anchor Projects, 
including high-priority irrigation, watershed and floodplain management interventions in the 
Eastern Nile.  
 
1.2.i.  The Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment (SSEA) will be an inclusive and 
participatory assessment of the environmental and social issues associated with various 
development options, to allow for informed and transparent decision-making in identification 
and selection of investments for water resources development. It will inform two key decision 
making points: (i) strategic analysis of different development alternatives for water resources 
development of Blue-Main Nile, namely, “no JMP” (continued unilateral development), many 
small dams on Blue Nile tributaries and one or more major multipurpose dam(s) on the Blue Nile 
mainstem; on the basis of the JMP Launch Phase studies and (ii) the identification/selection of a 
Cascade Development and Investment Sequencing option. In addition, the SSEA TOR includes 
Page  3
an examination of the environmental and social impacts of alternative power and energy 
development to a JMP investment, such as thermal and renewable options, referring to the 
Eastern Nile Power Trade Study.  
 
Accordingly, the SSEA will be conducted in two distinct and consecutive phases, the first 
focusing on the comparison of development options explored in the Scoping Study, and the 
second focusing on the Cascade Development and Sequencing Study. The SSEA will be 
undertaken in close consultation with key stakeholders in Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. 
Independent reviewers would advise ENTRO and the Consultant throughout the SSEA. The 
results of the first phase will then serve as an input to the Cascade Development and Sequencing 
Study.  
 
1.2.ii. Anchor Project Identification Studies have four parts: (a) cascade and development 
sequencing study; (b) identification of critical hotspot watershed interventions; (c) economic and 
financial analysis of the Anchor Project; and (d) defining the Anchor Project. The studies are 
intended to identify the optimum cascade development scenario for integrated regional water 
resources management providing a high degree of regulation of Blue Nile flows, water loss 
reduction, drought mitigation, flood alleviation along the Blue-Main Nile and reliable energy 
generation. Subsequently the studies will identify the first priority project through a sequencing 
study on the basis of techno-economic comparison of individual projects, under the constraints of 
power generation requirements and acceptable downstream impacts. The studies will be closely 
coordinated with the Norway-supported site-specific feasibility studies to be implemented by the 
Ministry of Water Resources, Ethiopia.  
 
1.2.iii. Non-Anchor Projects Identification Studies will include an irrigation development and 
modernization study, and watershed and floodplain management studies, building on the 
Cooperative Regional Assessments (CRAs) for irrigation and watershed management and the EN 
Flood Preparedness and Early Warning Project studies, among others,. The irrigation studies are 
intended to: (a) develop good practice for designing modern water-efficient irrigation system; (b) 
identify priority irrigation schemes in the region for inclusion under JMP1 for national 
investments; and (c) identify the areas of recession agriculture to be impacted by the first priority 
multipurpose project and the likely costs of mitigation measures. The watershed management 
study is to identify: (a) the most critical ‘hotspot’ watersheds, from a larger area requiring 
watershed interventions recommendedby the CRA, through delineating micro-watersheds within 
the broadly identified critical hotspots, for inclusion in the Anchor Project; and (b) the remaining 
areas requiring watershed interventions, for national government interventions. The floodplain 
management study is to identify: (a) areas prone to flooding and bank erosion downstream of the 
Anchor Project, for possible inclusion in the Anchor Project or national investments under JMP1; 
and (b) impact of Anchor Project operation on downstream flooding, for factoring the impact 
into Anchor Project definition.  
 
Sub-component 1.3- Special Studies.  These studies will be undertaken on need basis, and will 
likely include, among others: (i) studies of water saving measures to minimize system water 
losses; (ii) socio-economic studies on recession agriculture along the Blue Nile in Sudan; (iii) 
studies on financing and institutional arrangements for the Anchor Project.  
 
Page  4
Component 2 
–
Capacity Building and Implementation Support  
 
Sub-component 2.1 -Regional Consultation and Information Sharing:   During the JMP Launch 
Phase, broad consultations with key stakeholder took place at different levels. In the JMP1 
Identification Phase, the geographic/spatial focus will be more specific. The Project will identify, 
in more refined and concrete ways, key stakeholders, develop consultation strategies, 
information sharing mechanisms and instruments, and will incorporate consultative activities and 
information-sharing into the implementation program. The main output for this sub-component is 
a
well-implemented consultation and communication strategy with clear objectives, target 
audiences, timelines, organizational arrangements and activities.  
 
Sub-component 2.2 - Project Management and Capacity-Building:   This sub-component seeks 
to strengthen the capacity of ENTRO and related agencies from the three countries involved in 
the project. To successfully complete JMP 1 Identification and to prepare for subsequent 
investments, ENTRO needs to strengthen its technical and management capacity, and requires a 
dedicated multi-disciplinary project team including a regional project coordinator and technical, 
economics, social, environmental, communication, procurement, financial management and 
financing specialists. The ENTRO and country teams will be directly involved in the project 
implementation and on the job training. Additional training will be organized to train the staff 
from ENTRO and three countries on different aspects of project planning and preparation 
including social and environmental assessment and management.  
 
Sub-component 2.3 - Development of a Roadmap for the Preparation of the JMP1 Investment 
Project(s), which will include a recommended approach, process, time schedule, financing 
options, and implementation modalities and arrangements for preparation. Detailed financing and 
institutional options will be developed to provide sufficient information for potential bi-lateral 
and multi-lateral donors and private investors eventually considering financial assistance or 
investment in JMP1.  
 
The project costs are estimated to be about US$7.6 million, of which the three countries are 
expected to contribute about US$0.6 million in kind, and the remainder will come from the 
NBTF (See Annex 2). The costs will be updated and detailed at the time of project appraisal. The 
project period is two years starting from 2009.  
 
Institutional Arrangements:  The project will be implemented by the Eastern Nile Regional 
Technical Office (ENTRO). ENTRO, acting on behalf of the three Eastern Nile countries, under 
the general auspices of the NBI, will enter into a project Grant Agreement with the World Bank 
for NBTF grant financing. A dedicated JMP team headed by a full-time regional project 
coordinator will be established within ENTRO to manage JMP identification and consultative 
activities, supervise the consultants for the different studies, and coordinate related studies. 
ENTRO will form a regional technical committee, small ad-hoc technical task teams, and 
national reference groups from the Eastern Nile experts in relevant fields to ensure ownership, 
consultations and quality. A JMP national coordinator will be appointed in each country to 
coordinate and oversee activities at the national level. In addition, ENTRO will organize 
consultation and facilitate information sharing for the site-specific feasibility studies of potential 
Page  5
multipurpose dam sites on the Blue Nile to be implemented by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
Ethiopia through Norwegian funding.  
 
A
JMP1 Steering Committee, comprised of three senior decision-making officials representing 
Ministry of Water, Ministry of Finance, and Power Utility, will provide overall strategic and 
technical oversight, clear final JMP1 Identification reports for submission to the ENCOM (and 
relevant Ministers), and ensure country commitment and integration with ongoing national 
programs/projects. ENCOM will provide overall policy guidance and take policy decisions, with 
Joint Ministerial meetings as required. Further, ENTRO has formed a Regional Parliamentarian 
Committee which will continue through the Identification Phase to enhance political 
engagement.  
 
A
panel of independent international reviewers will be engaged to review the technical, 
environmental and social aspects of the identification studies. The World Bank team will 
supervise the implementation of the project and facilitate the review of the consultants’ work, 
provide technical advice to ENTRO team and selectively participate in the consultation process.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located in the Eastern Nile Basin, including Ethiopia, Egypt and Sudan. The region 
is characterized with tremendous poverty and underdevelopment, while there is huge potential 
for cooperative development of shared water resources. Till the present time, uncoordinated 
unilateral development has led to loss of development opportunities and enormous damages, and 
put the basin’s natural resources and populations at risk.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project is to be managed by the Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO), which 
has in place the basic capacity for management of such projects. There are no main concerns 
regarding environmental and social safeguards in the proposed technical assistance as it does not 
involve any physical interventions. ENTRO’s capacity, when augmented with the proposed 
international consultant support, is considered adequate for managing the environmental and 
social aspects of the project implementation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This recipient-executed technical assistance is not expected to have any adverse 
environmental or social impacts. Environmental considerations will be an integrated part of the 
identification studies, therefore this policy is triggered. The technical assistance will help build 
the capacity of ENTRO and related agencies in the three countries to better manage 
environmental and social issues in water resources planning and development.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Eastern Nile, as part of the Nile River, is an international river. Notification will be 
undertaken in a way compatible with the information-sharing mechanism of the Nile Basin 
Initiative,  the official platform for concerned riparians. That is, an official letter from ENTRO 
will be sent before appraisal to all NBI members and Eritrea to inform them of this undertaking.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/31/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
JMP 1 ID is a technical assistance project, and does not include investments.  A ‘Strategy for 
Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards’ was developed under the NBI Institutional 
Strengthening Project, and first disclosed as its safeguards instrument on April 11, 2008 in 
the Eastern Nile, and in the InfoShop on April 23, 2008.  This document is applicable to all 
technical assistance projects that fall under NBI, such as JMP 1 ID.  Thus the Strategy will be 
disclosed again as the primary safeguards instrument for JMP 1 ID in the three participating 
countries and in the InfoShop.  
 
The NBI Institutional Strengthening Project will support the development of a Nile 
safeguards framework that will set the ground rules for investment operations in the Nile 
Basin.  A draft framework is expected before May, 2010.  
 
A
key safeguards measure for the JMP1 ID will be the preparation during project 
implementation of the Strategic Social & Environmental Assessment (SSEA).  The ToRs for 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
the SSEA will be disclosed before appraisal.  In addition, ENTRO will publicly disclose 
executive summaries of final key technical reports and the SSEA reports in English and local 
languages (i.e. Arabic and Amharic).  Multi level consultations and disclosure will be 
supported by implementation of a Consultation and Communication Plan.  
 
The SSEA will be used to broadly examine, in an integrated manner, the linkages and 
cumulative impacts of potential scenarios on physical, biological, socio-economic and 
cultural issues.  Key safeguard issues, such as natural habitats, pest management, physical 
cultural resources, involuntary resettlement and dam safety should be broadly addressed as 
part of the SSEA process. In addition to safeguards assessment and impact mitigation 
measures, the SSEA will also outline mechanisms and options for benefit-sharing among 
countries and local communities in the basin.  It will also inform, and be complemented by, a 
series of project-specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA), detailed resettlement 
actions plans, and other safeguards instruments.  
 
The SSEA would also include in connection with the Cascade Development Study an 
examination of the environmental and social impacts of alternative power and energy 
development to a JMP investment, such as thermal and renewable options, taking into 
account of the results of the Eastern Nile Power Trade Study.  
 
The SSEA will assess the institutional capacities in the three EN countries with regard to 
implementation of environmental and social safeguards. The assessment and analysis will 
draw on previous similar assessments carried out, and will focus on assessing capacity both 
for policy formation and for implementation. The analysis will specifically recommend 
capacity building activities focusing on identified gaps for each institution. The study will 
also assess the current policies and laws on environment and social safeguards and comment 
on any inadequacies therein.  
 
In addition, as part of an earlier stakeholder analysis ENTRO has developed a database of 
JMP stakeholders for the three EN countries. This database is populated with several entries, 
and has national, regional and some local groups and is being updated regularly. This phase 
of JMP1 will narrow the existing database to focus on the most relevant secondary 
stakeholders for the Blue Nile/Main Nile basin. ENTRO is also preparing a Stakeholder 
Consultation and Communication Strategy for JMP1 identification which will outline the 
consultation channels and methods for JMP1 stakeholders with a focus on secondary 
stakeholders for this phase. The document will outline the main stakeholder groups and lay 
out the strategies for consultation. ENTRO will be primarily responsible for delivering this 
plan using partner agencies in the three countries. It is expected that at the end of this phase 
of JMP1, there will be a plan for the subsequent phase of JMP1 with more focus on identified 
primary stakeholders who will be targeted in the next phase of JMP1.   
 
Page  8
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xiaokai Li 
04/27/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/28/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
