Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC501 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P079749 
Project Name: West Africa Regional Transport and Transit Facilitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Fabio Galli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (80%);Other domestic and international trade (11%);General 
transportation sector (9%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
155.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
23.00
23.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the main transport 
corridors in West Africa in order to boost internal and external regional trade which is a key 
factor of growth and therefore contributor to poverty reduction.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will fund works and trade and transit facilitation measures in each country. 
The following major two components will be funded under the proposed project:  
 
3.1 Corridor infrastructure improvement works.  The expected outcome of this component are 
to: (a) rehabilitate key road sections of the Corridor in poor condition; (b) construct rest stop 
areas along the Corridor; (c) implement social and environmental mitigation measures along the 
Corridor; (d) implement a Corridor HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation plan; and (e) 
implement a Corridor road safety action plan.  
 
Page  2
3.2 Corridor transport and transit facilitation measures.  The expected outcomes of this 
component are to: (a) strengthen the capacity of Customs and transport authorities to better 
secure and monitor the movement of transit cargo along the Corridor; (b) upgrade Information 
Communication Technology (ICT) to facilitate the monitoring and securitization of the transit of 
cargo along the Corridor; (c) construct a satellite transit parking facility adjacent to the Port of 
Tema; (d) construct a limited number of transit check points; and (e) fund training, equipment 
and studies. The total estimated project cost is about US$ 178 million of which US$155 million 
will be funded by IDA.  The project activities are broken down by country in the following 
manner.  
 
3.3 Burkina Faso (about US$ 70 million).  The proposed project is expected to support the 
following activities:  (a) Rehabilitation of the Ouagadougou 
–
Sakoinse (about 54 km) road 
Corridor section; (b) construction of two rest stops; (c) design and implementation of the road 
safety action plan on the Burkina Faso section of the Corridor; (d) procurement of ICT 
equipment to extend Automated SYstem for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) customs management 
system to the Ghanaian and Malian borders; (e) interconnect Burkina Faso ASYCUDA system 
with Malian ASYCUDA and Ghanaian  Customs Management System (GCMS); (f) training and 
procurement of equipment to strengthen the capacity of customs and transport authorities to 
better monitor and secure transit traffic along the Corridor; (g) procurement of equipment for 
mobile teams, the cargo tracking system, and the regional transit management system; (h) 
contribute to the implementation of the Joint Border Posts (JBP) at the Mali and Ghana borders; 
(i) implementation of HIV/AIDS action plan for the Burkinabe portion of Corridor; and (j) 
design and implementation of a road safety improvement action plan on Burkinabe portion of 
Corridor.  
 
3.4 Ghana (about US$ 75 million).  The proposed project is expected to fund the following 
activities:  (a) rehabilitation/strengthening of about 80-100 km of the highest priority section of 
the Kintampo – Tamale – Paga Road; (b) design andconstruction of a satellite transit truck 
village near the Port of Tema to complement the activities of the Ghana Gateway Project:  (c) 
design and construction of two transit check points and up to four rest stop areas on the Ghanaian 
section of the Corridor; (d) design and implementation of Corridor road safety action plan; (e) 
strengthen the capacity of customs and transport authorities to better monitor and secure transit 
traffic along the Corridor; (f) ICT equipment to ensure the interconnection of the customs of 
Ghana (GCMS) with the customs systems of Burkina Faso (ASYCUDA) and Mali 
(ASYCUDA); (g) implementation of a HIV/AIDS action plan for the Ghanaian portion of the 
Corridor; and (h) design and implementation of a road safety improvement action plan on the 
Ghanaian portion of the Corridor.  
 
3.5 Mali (about US$ 33 million).  The proposed project is expected to support the following 
activities:  (a) part of the cost of Bamako – Bougouni road works; (b) rehabilitation of the 
multifunctional platform at Faladi (Bamako); (c) construction of two rest stops on the Corridor; 
(d) preparation and implementation of Corridor road safety action plan; (e) ICT, equipment, 
training and studies to strengthen the capacity of Customs and transport authorities to better 
monitor and secure transit traffic along the Corridor; (f) implementation of an HIV/AIDS action 
plan for the Malian portion of the corridor; and (g) design and implementation of a road safety 
improvement action plan on the Malian portion of the Corridor.   
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location consists of the existing Corridor (Tema 
–
Ouagadogou – Bamako road 
transport corridor) in Ghana, Burkina Faso and Mali.  The Corridor is one of the key 
ECOWAS/UEMOA regional road transport routes.  With the exception of the four lane first 
stretch of the Corridor from Tema to Accra, the full length of the Corridor consists primarily of a 
two lane paved road.  The focus of the road works will be to rehabilitate and strengthen priority 
sections of the existing road Corridor.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The three project countries have environmental management units/agencies at transport sector 
level, which have and still address safeguards requirements in Bank financed project. These 
agencies will ensure compliance, supervise the mitigation of the safeguards measures and 
conduct the internal monitoring of the implementation. The National Environmental Protection 
Authority Agencies will ensure the external monitoring.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is particularly the case for peri-urban/urban environments, which are socially dynamic 
and have high population densities. Therefore, the proposed project has been rated Category B 
for environmental impacts, and safeguards policy (OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered.)   However, 
due to the nature of the civil works funded under the proposed project, no major social and 
environmental impacts are anticipated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
No major social and environmental impacts are anticipated. Road rehabilitation, however, 
usually induces varying degrees of physical and social impacts.  This is particularly the case for 
peri-urban/urban environments, which are socially dynamic and have high population densities.   
However, due to the nature of the civil works funded under the proposed project, no major social 
impacts are anticipated.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/11/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard-related documents will be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in 
country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons.  
 
Selection of consultants is expected to start in July 2004 after pre-appraisal and studies are  
 
expected to be finalized before February 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fabio Galli 
02/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/20/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
