Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4421 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/13/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P116273 
Project Name: ECOWAS -  Broadband Connectivity Program 
Task Team Leader: Mavis A. Ampah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 13, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: February 11, 2011 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (50%);Information technology (50%) 
Theme: Regional integration (40%);Regulation and competition policy 
(40%);Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program seeks to contribute to lowering the cost of connectivity by leveraging alternative 
networks. The ultimate objective of the program is to reduce fragmentation of West Africa 
region's economies and support ECOWAS Members to create a more unified regional economic 
space. In order to reach this objective, the project proposes an integrated approach focusing on 
improved connectivity in the region which addresses the missing infrastructure links, 
commercialization of excess capacity, creation of an enabling environment and institutional 
strengthening to remove existing bottlenecks for both regional infrastructure and applications.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed instrument is a Regional IDA horizontal Adaptable Program Loan (APL).  The 
APL phased  approach would allow long-term and sustainable development of ICT infrastructure 
and services in the region, with a focus on building effective public-private partnerships, 
leveraging private capital, developing institutions, building capacity, and deepening sector 
reforms over time.  The scope, scale and timing of inclusion into the second and third Phases 
would depend on the commitment to the sector reforms, the ability of the countries to attract 
Page  2
private capital on their own to develop national and cross-border infrastructure, and availability 
of national IDA. A vertical APL is proposed within the proposed Horizontal APL.  APL 1 A 
would focus on designing a PPP framework and implementation of the business model to be 
used to commercialize WAPP excess fiber and address legal and regulatory issues and 
institutional arrangements for the proposed backhaul. APL 1B would focus on the infrastructure 
component for Ghana, Nigeria, Benin, Togo and any other country which will be ready per 
agreed criteria.  
 
To maximize flexibility and client-responsiveness in a multi-country environment, the program 
has been designed around three preliminary components. APL 1 A would focus exclusively on 
components 1 and 2. APL 1 B and subsequent APLs under the program will target the 
infrastructure component element (component 3).  
 
#
Component 1 - Enabling environment at the regional and national levels: will focus on 
creating an enabling environment to (i) address policy and regulatory bottlenecks at both 
regional and national levels to maximize the benefits of the proposed connectivity agenda, and 
(ii) to enable the proposed regional e-government applications. Infrastructure component:  
 
#
Component 2 - Designing regional PPP framework and Institutional strengthening: will 
focus on transaction design for the commercialization of the excess fiber. Based on detailed 
demand studies and detailed financial analysis, a PPP framework will be designed  dealing with 
structural and ownership questions, management of the network, rights and obligation of 
different players including electricity providers, telecom operators, the private sector and 
different national governments. The PPP framework would focus on principles of open access 
while maximizing the role of the private sector. This component will focus mostly on regional 
institutions and will be supplemented by national strengthening of capacities at national level on 
a
case by case basis.  
 
#
Component 3- Supporting Connectivity for ECOWAS countries:  will focus mainly on 
creating a regional backhaul link leveraging the excess fiber of the West Africa Power Pool 
project. In addition to regional connectivity, and in order to  maximize flexibility, client-
responsiveness and address specific national needs, the ECOWAS Connectivity Program will 
include activities related to international connectivity, especially for countries without access to 
international submarine cable (landlocked countries and fragile/post conflict countries) as well as 
activities to address terrestrial networks ( backbones)  in selected countries. The approach that 
will be used for the infrastructure component will focus on minimizing Government funding and 
leveraging private sector investment.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Ecowas Broadband Connectivity Program includes Ecowas member states countries. 
Phasing will be done according to WAPP Zone A and Zone B. WAPP Zone A comprises of 
Nigeria, B
enin, Togo, Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso and Niger. WAPP Zone  is composed 
of Mali, Senegal, the Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Liberia. The proposed 
APL structure will allow these countries to join the program on a commitment and /or readiness 
basis. The ISDS deals only with the first phase of the Program and will involve Benin, Ghana, 
Nigeria and Togo.  Cote D'Ivoire and Burkina could be considered for phase 1 depending on 
their readiness.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards instruments would lie with 
the implementing agency of each participating country. Any specific required action for some of 
the Civil Works will be taken into account during project implementation. Institutional 
responsibilities for preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be defined closely with the 
Safeguards Team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
Ms Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (AFTEN) 
Mr Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In APL 1A, there is no investment component. APL 1 A would focus on designing a PPP 
framework and implementation of the business model to be used to commercialize WAPP excess 
fiber and address legal and regulatory issues and institutional arrangements for the proposed 
backhaul. APL 1B would focus on the infrastructure component for Ghana, Nigeria, Benin and 
Togo.  
 
In APL 1B: At the Regional level, there is no plan to build any infrastructure.  The project 
will equip the cable already buried for the WAPP power lines.  The WAPP project has prepared 
an   Environmental Management Plan which has been validated.  
 
At the national level, the physical component of the Ecowas Broadband Connectivity 
Program will consist of building missing links between the power stations where the WAPP fiber 
ends and the landing station/national infrastructure as well as building of national terrestrial 
backbones. An ESMF will be prepared and disclosed prior to Appraisal of APL 1 B. 
Consultations will be conducted in all countries in APL 1 B.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
No construction/excavation activities are expected inside protected areas.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Not expected to be triggered.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Not expected to be triggered.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
No significant excavation is anticipated for installation of the backbone.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Not expected to be triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The building of national infrastructure  in APL 1 B may lead to new land acquisition for 
terrestrial facilities and ancillary infrastructure.  However the specific impact resulting from 
planned land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, and their locations have not yet been 
identified.  An RPF will be prepared and disclosed prior to Appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
NOt expected to be triggered.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Not expected to be triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Not expected to be triggered.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/15/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be conducted for the Ecowas Broadband Connectivity Program - at 
national level - prior to Project appraisal. The ESMF and RPF will be reviewed by the World 
Bank and publicly disclosed in all countries participating in the Phase 1 of the Program. A 
specific Environmental, Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared as 
necessary for terrestrial facilities during project implementation, in line with ESMF and RFP, 
once the locations of those facilities have been identified.  
 
The environmental and social Assessment will be prepared by June, 2010.  
 
Civil works for the first 12-18 month of project implementation should be screened for 
environmental and social impacts and  EAs / ESMPs  needed for those sites should be ready 
for disclosure (along with the draft ESMF) before appraisal.  
 
Finally, since the Program will involve PPP schemes, appropriate  technical clauses will be 
prepared and included in the biddings/bindings documents for the Private Entity when 
necessary, to ensure the execution  of agreed environmental and social safeguards measures 
or instruments.  
 
All safeguards instruments prepared for the project should be disclosed 120 days before 
Board presentation.  
 
The Sector Unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguards responibilities   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mavis A. Ampah 
07/13/2009 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
