Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3463 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P110616 
Project Name: Nile Basin Initiative Institutional Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader: Ekaterina Kan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
1.10 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
13.90 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
15.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Building on the significant work to-date under the transitional Nile Basin Initiative, the overall 
development objective of the Nile Basin Institutional Strengthening Project is: to strengthen and 
consolidate a harmonized institutional architecture to effectively coordinate and implement NBI 
programs and projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Based on extensive discussions in the basin and to align with the current institutional structure, 
the project has been designed to consist of a single, coordinated and integrated NBI package with 
three components, one for each principal entity 
–
Nile Basin Secretariat (Nile-SEC), Eastern Nile 
Regional Technical Office (ENTRO) and Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program 
Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU). The components will be implemented by each entity, and 
delivery will be coordinated by the Nile-SEC.   
 
Component 1: Nile-SEC – Key activities for strengthening Nile-SEC include: (a) enhancing the 
capacity of Nile-SEC to efficiently manage its current mandate by strengthening key areas of 
corporate administrative and financial management capabilities, (b) strengthening program 
Page  2
management capabilities to ensure successful coordination, supervision and completion of the 
Shared Vision Program (SVP), and (c) capturing and mainstreaming critical functions of the SVP 
projects, which will be completed over the next couple years, in order to lay a solid foundation 
for water resources planning and management in the basin.  
 
Component 2: ENTRO 
–
The focus of institutional strengthening includes: (a) strengthening the 
executive function with strategic planning and monitoring and evaluation capacity; (b) 
prioritising and filling key technical gaps in project planning and management; (c) strengthening 
finance and administration capacity that helps to harmonise NBI; and (d) providing incremental 
support for further strengthening of knowledge management and information services. This will 
allow ENTRO to more effectively deliver its current work program.  
 
Component 3: NELSAP-CU – The capacity building needs for NELSAP include strengthening 
program and project management, coordination and facilitation; namely, project identification 
and preparation activities. This will assist NELSAP with implementation of its scaling-up 
strategy.  
 
To work towards harmonization, each of the three institutions will focus on the four sub-
components:  
 
Sub-Components 
Principal Elements  
 
NBI Corporate Management • 
Overall NBI governance and coordination  
 
•
Corporate management within NBI bodies  
 
•
Harmonized administrative systems  
 
Water Resource Development 
• 
Project planning, identification and preparation  
 
•
Facilitating implementation – including resource mobilization  
 
•
Operationalizing NBI policies  
 
Knowledge-based Water Resource Management 
• 
Formulation of agreed NBI policies 
on integrated water resources management  
 
•
Consolidated knowledge base – acquisition, management and access  
 
•
Decision support systems, modeling and scenario evaluation  
 
Stakeholder Involvement and Communications 
• 
Basin-level involvement and 
communication  
 
•
Informed dialogue with a confident basin community  
 
•
Sub-basin and program-related communication  
 
•
Project-level community and stakeholder involvement  
 
Nile-SEC, ENTRO, and NELSAP-CU devote slightly different degrees of emphasis to the 
various sub-components (e.g. Nile-SEC on capacity and water resources management function 
and ENTRO and NELSAP-CU on water resources development function).  
 
The project follows on the SVP, takes over the activities of the SVP-Coordination Project, 
ENSAP and NELSAP Institutional Strengthening projects currently under implementation, and 
will focus on the five principles below:  
 
•
Preserve gains made to date  
 
•
Avoid unneeded growth  
Page  3
•
Consolidate the performance of existing functions  
 
•
Prepare for Cooperative Framework Agreement (CFA)  
 
•
Be proactive yet flexible with institutional strengthening  
 
If the CFA is signed it will be desirable to increase the institutional strengthening effort to 
design the process for a permanent river basin institution and to support the ratification of the 
CFA.  
 
NBI ISP is been designed to support NBI institutions in development of their capacity to 
identify, prepare and implement projects. However, no preparation or implementation of any 
investment projects will be undertaken as part of ISP activities, e.g. no feasibility studies or 
similar activities.  
 
The proposed implementation period is July 2008 to June 2011.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by NBI offices in three countries:  
 
•
Uganda, Entebbe – location of Nile-SEC  
 
•
Ethiopia, Addis Ababa – location of ENTRO  
 
•
Rwanda, Kigali – location of NELSAP-CU  
 
Coordination will be done by the Nile-SEC in Uganda.  
 
The NBI ISP in itself is an institutional strengthening and capacity building project, and no 
physical investments are included in this project. Therefore the physical characteristics of the 
project locations are not relevant to the safeguard analysis   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Although NBI is a transitional institution and does not have strong built-in institutional capacity 
for safeguard policies, it performs due diligence and follows international good practice for each 
investment project. In addition, NBI promotes and undertakes regional studies and activities, 
such as Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment for Power Options (SSEA) under the 
NELSAP, which provide adequate frameworks for action.  Nevertheless, there is still a need to 
support NBI in strengthening and harmonizing its capacity to apply adequate safeguards 
practices while developing investment projects and programs.  
 
While NBI ISP will not finance project preparation and/or implementation it will still contribute 
to the NBI’s project development capacity through institutional development and strengthening 
of NBI project offices (ENTRO and NELSAP CU) and related capacities.  
 
•
Through SVP coordination activities NBI ISP will ensure that capacities builtby SVP, 
such as Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) and SSEA training for power projects 
prepared by SVP Power Trade Project (RPT) and the SVP Environment Project (NTEAP), will 
be institutionalized and applied to follow good practices.  
 
•
As one of the NBI ISP objectives is to capture critical SVP results to ensuresustainability 
within the NBI institutions, the project will expand and continue financing of environmental and 
social functions of ENTRO and NELSAP CU (currently financed through SVP NTEAP and 
CBSI projects).  
Page  4
•
NBI ISP will directly finance capacity building activities to improve NBI’s project 
management skills, such as targeted training for both ENTRO and NELSAP-CU staff.  
 
•
Finally, NBI ISP will contribute towards harmonization of existing and development of 
new policies.  For example, through monitoring and supervising development of Strategic 
Environmental Framework (currently financed by SVP NTEAP).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Though the ISP itself is a technical assistance project, its purpose is to strengthen the NBI 
institutions in their ability to identify, prepare, and raise financing for investment projects in the 
Nile Basin.  In order to ensure transparent decision making with regards to safeguards issues as 
well as to clarify NBI policies for projects that might not be financed by the Bank, the NBI will 
prepare a short document outlining their approach to safeguards issues, related public 
consultations, and disclosure of documents.  A draft of this document will be reviewed by the 
Bank team during pre-appraisal and the final document will be approved by the Bank and 
disclosed through the Info-shop prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will be implemented in the Nile Basin, however no physical investments under 
this project are included, therefore, OP/BP 7.50 does not apply here. In addition, the NBI has 
developed an initial system of notification for investment projects, under this project the NBI 
institutions will be supported to further strengthen the system of notification.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Despite the fact that the Nile Basin includes disputed areas, no physical works are under 
taken under this project. The main focus of the project is to coordinate activities among the 
countries of the Nile Basin, hence, OP/BP 7.60 does not apply.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/28/2008 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As indicated above the NBI ISP will strengthen the safeguards function within the NBI 
institutions for project preparation and implementation. Following the advice from ASPEN, 
the NBI, in preparation of the NBI ISP, will document its approach to managing 
environmental and social safeguards. A draft of this document will be reviewed by the Bank 
team during pre-appraisal and the final document will be approved by the Bank and disclosed 
through the Info-shop prior to appraisal. Given that the NBI ISP in it self does not include 
any investments, and no safeguards are triggered by this project no other documents or 
studies will be required, this was agreed upon by ASPEN during the PCN review meeting.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ekaterina Kan 
02/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
02/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
