Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4402 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P114467 
Project Name: Sio-Malaba-Malakisi River Basin Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Berina Uwimbabazi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 5, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTWR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
1.75
1.75 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objective of the proposed project is to support long term investments and 
capacity building, which will ultimately leverage major investment opportunities in the Sio-
Malaba-Malakisi (SMM) River catchments.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1:   Promoting Investment Opportunities through Project Preparation Studies and 
related environment and social assessments  (including pre-feasibility studies, feasibility studies 
and project design) to be undertaken for selected investment opportunities identified in the Sio-
Malaba-Malakisi catchments investment strategy.  
 
The prioritized investment projects selected for preparation include; (i) pre-feasibility study for 
the development of multi-purpose water storage reservoirs; (ii) feasibility study for an 
Infrastructure development Program to include three projects: small hydropower development; 
water supply and sanitation; and irrigation development; (iii) feasibility study for  development 
of the food security program to include - aquaculture development, improved agricultural and 
livestock production, and infrastructure development for market access; and (iv) study for an 
Page  2
environmental management program to include: watershed management; sio-siteko wetland 
management, and water quality management.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Buildin through training of staff at both national and catchments levels. 
A
study tour is also planned to one of the other Transboundary river basins in Africa as a 
learning experience.  
 
Capacity building will also be achieved through the installation of strategic hydro-
meteorological stations. This will ensure uninterrupted collection of basic surface water data for 
use in the planning studies and implementation and operation of water resources projects within 
the basin.  
 
Component 3: Improve monitoring and evaluation of the project by augmenting the existing 
project management and supervision activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be implemented in the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi River Basin which is shared by 
Uganda and Kenya.  
 
During this project, preparatory studies specifically feasibility and pre-feasibility studies will be 
undertaken for key priority investment areas identified by the countries. The feasibility studies 
will identify any potential impacts the proposed projects may have on people and the 
environment and will recommend specific tools to be used to undertake further impact analysis 
during project development such as environmental and social impact assessments. Prior review 
of all project preparation documentation will be insured by ASPEN including clearance/opinion 
on safeguards aspects.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program-Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU) has 
over the years promoted and undertaken regional studies such as the Strategic Social and 
Environmental Assessment for Power options (SSEA) in addition to building capacity to address 
environmental and social issues through training of project staff as well as by recruiting an 
Environmental Advisor, to provide further guidance on handling environmental and social 
aspects of all the institutions activities.  
 
NELSAP CU has prepared a preliminary NBI/NELSAP Environmental and Social Management 
Framework for Project Preparation and Implementation as a first step in implementing the NBI 
Strategy for Environmental and Social Safeguards that was prepared for the NBI Institutional 
Support Project (NBI-ISP).  The Framework, which applies to this project and will be disclosed 
along with this ISDS, is the next step in the establishment of a safeguards regimen for the NBI 
that addresses both national law and financier concerns in preparing and implementing regional 
investments. Under the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi River Basin Management Project, NELSAP CU 
will continue to rely on the World Bank for guidance to ensure that the Framework is adequate 
for addressing environmental and safeguard issues and meeting internationally accepted best 
practices and standards.  
 
Page  3
While NELSAP operates within the confines of National Environmental legislation in each of 
its member countries, the Framework is designed to ensure consistent use of international best 
practices in its treatment of social and environmental issues.  By doing so, the Framework 
recognizes the laws, regulations as well as national policies and, where necessary, enhances 
(with countervening) them by applying international standards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (AFTWR) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Although the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi project is a technical assistance project, it is aimed at 
building capacity and leveraging for investment opportunities, such as water supply, small 
hydropower development projects, and irrigation development. The feasibility studies to be 
undertaken in preparation of the investment opportunities will determine the extent of impacts 
that the identified projects may have on the environment and relevant assessments such as 
environmental impact assessments will be undertaken per project with TORs and deliverables 
being reviewed by the Bank. In addition, in 2009 NELSAP-CU will undertake a strategic social 
and environmental assessment (SSEA), including the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi catchment, as a key 
input to a larger scoping study that will be the foundation of a NEL water resources development 
program. Finally, the preliminary NBI/NELSAP Environmental and Social Management 
Framework for Project Preparation and Implementation, along with the NBI Strategy for 
Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards, will be the guiding documents for any future 
investment projects. These documents have been finalized and will be disclosed through the 
Infoshop prior to July 20, 2009.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Given the proximity of the Mt. Elgon National Park in Uganda and the areas of wetlands in 
both Kenya and Uganda, NBI will ensure that all project preparation activities look specifically 
at potential impacts on critical natural habitats in the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi basin.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The physical and cultural resources policy is triggered automatically due to the triggering of 
the Environmental Assessment policy. Additionally, the NBI held a targeted training on this 
policy, with support from the Bank, in May 2009. The training further built capacity at the 
regional and national levels for addressing cultural issues through the EIA process.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Although project locations are not known at this stage, feasibilities studies for the identified 
projects will determine the extent of impacts on people and their land. Relevant documents will 
then be prepared by each investment and will avoid to the extent possible any involuntary 
resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Safety of Dams Policy is triggered because the project will conduct feasibility studies of 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
multi-purpose storage dams for hydro, irrigation, rural water supply, etc.  While it is not yet clear 
that any of these dams would require the policy to be triggered, it is important that identification 
and feasibility studies assess all of the likely impacts of these dams, with the policy in mind, in 
order to recommend safety and mitigation measures for the design, construction, and operational 
phases.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project will be implemented in the Sio-Malaba-Malakisi basin and will involve mainly 
project preparatory studies. Formal notification is not required under the Projects on 
International Waterways Policy because the project studies do not go beyond the feasibility stage 
(See Exceptions to notification requirement in Op/BP 7.50 ).  Terms of Reference for these 
studies will include examination of any potential riparian issues. It should be noted that as a 
NELSAP project, all project outputs and reports are shared with and discussed by all concerned 
riparians as a part of regular business.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/29/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NELSAP has prepared a preliminary Environment and Social Management Framework, 
which applies to this project, and requested it be disclosed through the World Bank Infoshop. 
This document has been finalized and will be disclosed through the Infoshop prior to July 29, 
2009.  
 
The detailed ESMF, based on the disclosed preliminary version, will be prepared by the 
NBI to cover NELSAP and be disclosed in Bank's InfoShop and locally (in all NBI 
Countries: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, 
Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda) in the second half of 2009 [para 1, pg 1], and will cover the 
budget for Environmental and Social assessments for projects under preparation, future 
investments in water supply, small hydropower development projects, and irrigation 
development. The document will also include the Resettlement Policy Framework as a 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
guiding document for preparation of RAPs for those investments, where OP 4.12 is 
applicable.  
 
During each feasibility study, ToRs will be prepared for the appropriate ESIAs, which will 
lead to the preparation of an Implementation Manual for each investment. During the review 
stage of the studies, ESIAs will be appraised and appropriate ESMF/ESMP and RPF/RAP 
will be developed, reviewed together with the Bank's safeguards specialists, disclosed and 
included in the project monitoring plan prior to the start of project preparation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Berina Uwimbabazi 
07/21/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
