Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2009 
Report No.:  48342
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P100406 
Project Name:  Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Ladisy Komba Chengula 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID: P103298 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 3, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Agricultural extension and research (70%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Biodiversity (P);Other rural development 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.80 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
8.00 
 
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds 
0.00 
 
SWEDEN, Govt. of 
0.00
15.80 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development and global environmental objectives and key indicators:  
 
The Project development and global environmental objectives (PDO/GEO) of APL1 are 
to: (i) improve collaborative management of the transboundary natural resources of the 
Lake Victoria basin (LVB) for the shared benefits of the EAC Partner States; and (ii) 
reduce environmental degradation to improve the livelihoods of communities, which 
depend on the shared natural resources of the LVB.  
 
The key PDO/GEO performance indicators for APL1 are: (i) Adoption of harmonized 
policies, legislations and regulatory frameworks for water and fisheries management; (ii) 
Adoption of basin-wide water and fisheries resources management frameworks; (iii) 
Page  2
percentage reduction in water hyacinth infestation in Lake Victoria; (iv) percentage 
increase in the stock of fish in Lake Victoria and satellite lakes; (v) percentage increase in 
land productivity for households participating in watershed management activities; and 
(vi) percentage reduction in untreated effluent disposed by targeted municipals and 
industries into Lake Victoria.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will comprise the following four main components: (i) Strengthening 
institutional capacity for managing shared water and fishery resources; (ii) Point sources 
pollution control and prevention; (iii) Watershed management; and (iv) Project 
coordination and management.  
 
Component 1:  Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and 
fisheries resources (a total of US$19.5 million).  
 
This component will focus on strengthening the existing institutions to improve the 
cooperative management of shared transboundary natural resources of the LVB, and 
hence contribute to the achievement of the first PDO/GEO.  It will finance the capacity 
building programs, including short and long-term training, technical assistance, and 
provision of equipment to the regional, national, and local institutions responsible for 
coordination, research, management of resources, and enforcement of environmental 
standards. Its objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of key regional and national 
institutions, through harmonization of national policies, legislation, and standards; (ii) 
develop options for long-term mechanisms for financing natural resources management 
interventions; and (iii) develop regional frameworks for the management of key 
transboundary natural resources 
–
water and fisheries.  
 
Sub-component 1.1:  Harmonization of policies, legislations, and regulatory standards 
(GEF US$4.0 million, SIDA US$0.5 million).  
 
The main objective of this sub-component is to improve the policy and regulatory 
framework for the management of water and fisheries resources of the LVB.  It will 
finance national and regional dialogue and technical assistance for review and 
harmonization of policy, legislations, and standards.  This sub-component will also 
finance the development and implementation of regional natural resources and 
environmental management frameworks, based on the harmonized policies, legislations, 
and standards. The management frameworks include: (i) a Water Resource Management 
Plan (WRMP) for the LVB; (ii) an updated Lake Victoria Fisheries Management Plan 
(FMP); and (iii) a basin-wide Watershed Management Strategy (WMS). Finally, it will 
finance the development of sustainable financing mechanisms, including: (i) 
operationalizing the Fish Levy Trust Funds (FLTFs) to finance national fisheries 
management interventions; and (ii) TA to study options for establishing the Lake Victoria 
Environmental Trust Fund (LVETF) to provide long-term financing for management of 
other natural resources.  
 
Page  3
Sub-component 1.2:  Ecosystem monitoring and applied research (IDA US$12.7 
million, GEF US$2.3 million).  
 
This sub-component will finance the strengthening of existing national and developing 
new regional scientific and socio-economic: (a) data gathering protocols; (b) ecosystem 
monitoring tools; and (c) data sharing mechanisms.  The ecosystem monitoring tools to 
be developed or strengthened include: (i) Water Information System (WIS) for 
monitoring surface water, groundwater, and water quality; (ii) Decision Support System 
(DSS) for the basin water resources; (iii) Atmospheric deposition monitoring network; 
(iv) GIS-based database for the land use, hydrology, and biodiversity, and related Lake 
Victoria Dynamic Information Framework (LVDIF); (v) Regional framework for fish 
stocks assessment; and (iv) Water hyacinth surveillance and control strategy.  It will also 
finance continuation of priority water, fisheries, and land research to fill knowledge gaps 
on environmental, social, and economic-related aspects; and use of outcomes to inform 
LVB policy and management decisions.  Priority will be given to regional research 
programs, which are focusing on transboundary issues.  Multi-disciplinary research 
programs, which link physical and biological sciences to social and economic aspects, 
would be emphasized.  Emphasis will also be put on translating scientific research 
outputs generated under LVEMP I into practical and cost-effective management 
interventions.  
 
Component 2:  Point sources pollution control and prevention (a total of US$33.8 
million)  
 
The main objective of this component is to reduce within the lake and its littoral zone 
environmental stresses, through the implementation of mitigation and prevention 
measures, thus contributing to the achievement of the second PDO/GEO. It will finance 
investments aimed at reducing point sources of pollution in priority hotspots, identified 
during LVEMP I. There will be three sub-components: (i) Rehabilitation of wastewater 
treatment facilities; (ii) Promotion of cleaner production technologies; and (iii) Pollution 
risk management and safety of navigation.  
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Rehabilitation of wastewater treatment facilities (IDA US$25.8 
million).  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to reduce point source pollution from municipal 
waste by supporting public investments, including: (i) rehabilitating selected wastewater 
treatment plants to reduce discharge of untreated effluents into the Lake; (ii) connecting 
primary treated effluent discharged to constructed/restored wetlands; and (iii) providing 
ecological sanitary services. It will target highly eutrophic hotspots identified under 
LVEMP I, which include the Winam Gulf (Kenya), Murchison Bay (Uganda), and 
Napoleon and Mwanza Gulfs (Tanzania).It will finance critical repairs of the existing 
sewerage treatment facilities in major urban centers around Lake Victoria - Kisumu, 
Homa Bay, Mwanza, Musoma, Bukoba, Entebbe, Jinja, and Kampala.  It will also 
support investments in low cost liquid waste treatment, such as Waste Stabilization Ponds 
(WSP).  This sub-component will also support municipal authorities in the collection, 
Page  4
treatment, and disposal of sludge in areas not served by the sewerage systems.  In 
addition, it will support the construction of ecological sanitation toilets in poor and 
underserved peri-urban, beach, and rural communities.  Priority will be given to public 
institution facilities, such as schools, health centers, landing beaches, and markets.  
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Promotion of cleaner production technologies (SIDA US$2.7 
million).  
 
The objective of this sub-component is to reduce industrial pollution, by promoting pre-
treatment of factories’ wastes onsite and efficiency in raw material utilization – through 
sorting, reuse, and recycling activities.  The major polluting industries located mainly in 
Kisumu and Migori (Kenya); Mwanza and Bukoba (Tanzania); and Kampala and Jinja 
(Uganda), will be targeted for demonstration of low cost options, such as WSP and 
connection of pre-treated industrial effluents discharge to constructed and/or restored 
wetlands.  This sub-component will finance interventions aimed at reducing pollution 
loads from industrial effluents through: (i) adoption of Cleaner Production Technologies 
(CPT) piloted under LVEMP I; (ii) compliance enforcement on regional effluent 
standards; and (iii) public education and awareness campaigns.  The main activities to be 
supported include: (a) training of targeted industries on cost-effective measures of 
reducing wastes; (b) undertaking cleaner production in-plant assessments; (c) facilitating 
environmentally sound technology assessments and transfers; and (d) assisting industries 
to prepare bankable projects for upgrading their production lines to reduce pollution and 
wastes.  
 
Subcomponent 2.3:  Pollution risk management and safety of navigation (IDA US$1.0 
million, SIDA US$4.3 million).  
 
The main objectives of this sub-component are to: (i) prevent marine vessel accidents, 
which could be major source of pollution, including oil spills; and (ii) improve safety of 
navigation for both cargo and passenger ferries, and fishing vessels.  This sub-component 
will finance: (a) survey and mapping of marine transport routes in Lake Victoria; (b) 
installation of navigation equipment and facilities, such as light houses, lighted buoys, 
radar system, rescue operation equipment, and early warning system; and (c) 
implementation of a contingency plan for the oil spills and hazardous wastes management 
in Lake Victoria.  A total of 194 locations to be equipped with aids to navigation have 
been identified, and out of these, 106 sites are considered as high priority. Both the main 
Lake Victoria transport routes and the local networks to be surveyed and equipped with 
aids to navigation have been identified.  The Project will also finance the installation of 
the lake-wide communication and emergency response systems.  
 
Component 3:  Watershed management (US$42.3 million).  
 
This component seeks to reduce environmental stresses from the lake basin, through the 
implementation of non-point sources pollution mitigation and prevention measures, thus 
directly contributing to the achievement of the second PDO/GEO.  The reduction of the 
non-point sources of pollution (sediment loads, nutrients, and agro-chemicals), by scaling 
up successful models of watershed management practices piloted under LVEMP I will 
Page  5
improve water use efficiency, and generate positive downstream externalities.  The 
Project will support community-driven investments in rehabilitating three (out of 22) 
priority degraded sub-catchments of Lake Victoria.  These include catchments of rivers 
Simiyu (11,577 Km2) in Tanzania; Nyando in Kenya (3,652 Km2); and Katonga (15,244 
Km2) in Uganda.  A total area of 152,000 hectares, which represents 5 percent of the 
total catchments area, will be rehabilitated under this component.  There will be two sub-
components: (i) Natural resources conservation and livelihoods improvement; and (ii) 
Community capacity building and participation.  
 
Sub-component 3.1:  Natural resources conservation and livelihoods improvement (IDA 
US$36.0 million).  
 
The Project will provide matching grants to communities organized under LVEMP I to 
promote local partnerships in addressing degradation of the watershed.  The CDD 
approaches existing in the Partner States will be used to scale up community-driven 
watershed management interventions, co-management of fisheries resources, and water 
hyacinth control measures.  There will be two categories of CDD-type interventions: (i) 
natural resources conservation; and (ii) livelihoods improvement.  
 
Natural resources conservation:  These include interventions generating predominantly 
“public goods” or benefits, with both on-site and downstream benefits, such as 
sustainable soil and water management.  Approximately 107,000 hectares will be brought 
under conservation using CDD approaches.  Typical activities in the upper watershed will 
include rain water harvesting and storage, small water reservoirs, sediment retention 
dams, gully erosion control, planting multipurpose trees, afforestation, and reforestation.  
Littoral zone activities will include biological and manual water hyacinth control, 
wetlands rehabilitation, and co-management of the shared fisheries resources.  
 
Livelihoods improvement:  These interventions are largely household-based, and with 
substantial private benefits.  They will be financed to provide incentives for communities 
to participate in the natural resources conservation activities.  About 45,000 hectares will 
be brought under the livelihoods improvement interventions.  These are aimed at 
intensifying natural resources use and reducing harvesting pressure on the fisheries and 
wetlands resources.  They include support to income-generating activities that benefit the 
poor, such as horticulture, terracing, aquaculture, livestock development, and small scale 
irrigation activities. The Project will also promote private sector development by 
supporting low-cost technologies, which can help reduce post harvest losses of fish, 
horticultural, and livestock products, such as drying, smoking, and cold storage.  
Ecolabeling of the Nile perch would provide quality assurance to international markets, 
and result in an equitable sharing of export benefits.  
 
Sub-component 3.2:  Community capacity building and participation (IDA US$6.3 
million).  
 
This sub-component will focus on mobilizing communities and building their capacity 
in the preparation and implementation of CDD-type subprojects in watershed 
Page  6
management.  It will also create community awareness of the key environmental issues of 
the LVB and the benefits of their participation in the watershed management.  The 
Project will organize public awareness meetings for local communities to promote: (a) 
adoption of non-point pollution mitigation and prevention measures, including soil 
erosion control and the use of ecological toilets; and (b) change of unsustainable natural 
resources utilization behavior.  Therefore, this sub-component will finance: (i) 
development of modules and training on the environmental and socio-economic impacts 
of Lake Victoria’s watershed degradation; (ii) training on the participatory approaches in 
preparation, implementation (community-based procurement and financial management), 
and monitoring and evaluation of CDD subprojects; (iii) development of synergies and 
linkages with existing community awareness and education programs in the LVB; and 
(iv) development of mechanisms for resolving communities’ conflicts on shared or 
common resources use.  
 
Component 4:  Project coordination and management (a total of US$9.2 million).  
 
This component will provide resources necessary for the effective coordination and 
communication, and monitoring and evaluation of the Project activities.  At regional 
level, these tasks will be carried out by the LVBC, while at the national level they will be 
the responsibility of the National Project Coordination Teams (NPCTs).  This component 
will have two sub-components: (i) Project coordination and communication; and (ii) 
Monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Sub-component 4.1:  Project coordination and communication (IDA US$3.5 million, 
GEF US$0.5 million, SIDA US$0.5 million).  
 
This sub-component will finance the incremental operating costs of the various 
organizations responsible for Project implementation, including the Regional Policy 
Steering Committee (RPSC), National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), and the 
National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC).  It will also meet the capital and 
operating costs of the Regional Project Coordination Team (RPCT) to be located in the 
LVBC Secretariat; and the NPCTs to be mainstreamed in the National Focal Point 
Ministries (NFPMs).  It will also finance the development of: (i) an internal 
communications system to facilitate information sharing; and (ii) information sharing 
protocol to enhance exchange of data among LVBC, NFPMs, and main implementing 
agencies. Finally, it will finance the outreach program, which includes: (i) development 
and implementation of regional and national public awareness and education materials 
for the sustainable use of LVB resources; and (ii) outreach activities to seek the support 
of key policy-makers.  The outreach program will target the East African Legislative 
Assembly (EALA), national parliaments, local politicians, donor community, and the 
general public.  
 
Sub-component 4.2:  Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (IDA US$4.7 million).  
 
This sub-component will provide resources for: (i) establishing the regional and national 
GIS-based M&E and Management Information System (MIS); and (ii) collection, 
Page  7
analyses, storage, and dissemination of data and information on the Project’s 
implementation performance, outcomes, and impact, based on the indicators provided in 
the Results Framework.   Sources of data for feeding the M&E system will include: (a) 
Administrative data collected through the Project MIS, such as progress, technical, and 
financial reports; (b) specially designed qualitative and quantitative household survey 
instruments; (c) existing and newly collected geo-referenced data; and (d) scientifically 
collected environmental and ecosystem health data.  The communities participating in 
implementing watershed management interventions will also be involved in Project 
monitoring and evaluation.  Community-based M&E activities will regularly track the 
performance of the CDD subprojects.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented through local governments and authorities in both urban 
and rural areas in the Lake Victoria Basin (LVB).  Lake Victoria, with a surface area of 
68,800 km2 is the second largest freshwater body in the world, and it is a transboundary 
resource shared by Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda.  Rwanda and Burundi are a part of the 
upper watershed that drains into Lake Victoria through the Kagera river.  Its catchment 
area of 194,000 km2 is shared by five countries: Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 percent), 
Rwanda (11 percent), Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda (16 percent).  
 
LVB is home to some 35 million people.  LVB has immense ecological values and is 
greatly valued for its social and economic potential.  The potential based on the human 
resource, rich agricultural soils, abundant water resources, minerals, fisheries, wetlands, 
diverse forest resources, wildlife and tourism potential and a rich biodiversity.  Besides, 
its water serves vital multipurpose functions for domestic uses, hydropower generation, 
agricultural and industrial uses, and medium of transport and climate modulation.  
Despite its potential, the Basin is threatened by ecological and environmental 
degradation, widespread poverty, high population growth and unsustainable pressure on 
existing resources.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
Page  8
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
While the Project is conceived and designed to have significant positive environmental 
and social impacts, construction and/or rehabilitation of investments, and community 
subprojects may pose negative impacts.  Therefore the key safeguards policies issues 
raised by the Project include: water, soil and air pollution; loss of vegetation; loss of 
livelihoods and access to assets, conversion or degradation of natural habitats and 
protected areas like wetlands.  In addition, the Project activities may lead to both 
consumptive and non consumptive use of international waters which may slightly vary 
the quantity, although the Project interventions are in fact likely to improve the quality of 
water through control of pollution in selected hotspots and catchments. None of the 
potential impacts are expected to be significant and/or irreversible as the investments will 
not be on a large scale, and provisions for effective environmental and social 
management have been made under the Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This Project is not expected to incur any potential indirect and or long term impacts due 
to future investments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Project will support part of the East African Community (EAC) Lake Victoria Basin 
Commission Program, therefore a discussion of alternatives would not have been 
relevant.  However, in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity, where existing CDD 
instruments would be used to address the watershed rehabilitation, LVEMP II will seek to 
catalyze and top-up those instruments.  The Project will not create additional and/or 
parallel systems where programs of local government or ongoing CDD instruments, such 
as the Western Kenya Community-Driven Development and Flood Mitigation 
(WKCDD&FM), and Natural Resources Management Projects (NRM), Kenya; Tanzania 
Social Action Fund Phase II (TASAF II), and Participatory Agricultural Development 
Page  9
and Empowerment Project (PADEP), Tanzania; and Local Government Management 
Service Delivery Project (LGMSDP), Uganda; would be adapted to meet the Project’s 
sustainable natural resources and environmental management objectives.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken by borrowers to address safeguard issues include having the relevant 
safeguards documents in place, prior to the appraisal mission.  Since the exact locations 
and types of investments especially those by communities could not be identified prior to 
the appraisal of the Project, the borrowers have each prepared: (i) Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); (iii) 
and Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP).  In addition, Kenya has prepared an 
Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) to ensure that issues of rights to productive 
resources or restriction of participation in and benefit from development by the 
indigenous peoples are effectively dealt with.  The Natural Habitats and Safety of Dams 
policies are covered under each ESMF.  Adhering to the recommendations of the ESMF, 
the Project will support activities designed to enhance the East African countries 
environmental and social management capacity.  It is expected that the experiences and 
capacities in the client countries obtained from implementing other CDD activities will 
be used.  In addition, capacity building activities will be part of the environment and 
social management process in the five countries.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in all the three APL1 countries – Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, 
include Government both at national and local levels, National Environment 
Management Authorities, Development Partners, target communities, NGOs and CBOs 
active in the Lake Victoria basin, and the private sector.  These stakeholder groups were 
consulted during preparations of the relevant safeguards policies documents, and 
additional consultations with the potentially affected persons will be carried out during 
the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the ESMF.  Further, the 
Nile Basin countries were notified of the proposed Project in December 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2008 
 
Page  10
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/15/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/06/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  11
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula 
07/07/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
07/04/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
07/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
07/07/2008 
Comments:   
