                                                                                       42689
                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:




I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Regional (Namibia and Zambia)         Project ID: P097136
                                               AdditionalProject ID: NA
ProjectName: Open Africa North SouthTourism Corridor
Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel Pavy
Estimated Appraisal Date:Nov. 2006             EstimatedBoard Date: February 28,2008
Managing Unit: AFTEN                           Lending Instrument: GEF MSP
Sector:General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%); Generalindustry and trade
sector (50%)
Theme: Biodiversity(P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):NA
IDA Amount (US$m.):NA
GEF Amount (US$in.):$0.54m
PCF Amount (US$m.):NA
Other financing amountsby source: $0.7m (corporatecofinancing)
Environmental Category: C
SimplifiedProcessing                   Simple [ X]              Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project          Yes [X]                  No [l

B. Project Objectives:

Project Developnzent Objective:
Community members living within the OANSTC corridor entered the economic mainstream by leveraging
their tourism opportunities.

                                                               1

Project Global Objective:
Biodiversityis mainstreamed into tourismby communitiesalongthe OANSTCroutes.

C. Project ~escri~tion:'

The Open Africa supportedroute-based tourism2proposed under this project is ecosystem-based and stretches
from northern Zambia to Namibia. This corridor will become part of Afiica's largest transfiontier conservation
area, the emerging Kavango-Zambezi (KAZA) Transfiontier Conservation Area (TFCA) initiative. The
OANSTC project goal is to contribute to mainstreaming biodiversity into pro-poor tourism by communities
along the OANSTC routes through removing identified barriers. The expected slowly progressing tourism
market change will be shaped by the project's incentive-based and unique partnership tourismroute approach,
enhanced awareness, training and capacity-building for current and future local business operators.The project
will focus particularly on bridging the gap between local communities and business operators in the tourism
market. This will be done through supporting the institutionalization of local route development and the
implementation of local biodiversity centered tourism strategies in symbiosis with conservation plans, together
with M&E centered around route specific flagship species. The project design is structured around four
components which will help achieve the objectives in a corridor that passes through an area that is both
biodiversityrich and threatened:

Component 1: Biodiversity-focused Routes (Total $0.455m, GEF $0.332m): The component covers the
developmentand aftercare of eight new biodiversity-focused tourism routes and "greening" of three existing
tourism routes in both countries resulting in better biodiversity management. GEF support focuses on the
"new" route development and follow-up approach (developed and tested during MSP preparation) on
mainstreaming biodiversity into route planning, management, marketing and monitoring and evaluation. The
approach builds on the knowledge of each country, local agencies and affected parties - government, NGO
and private - concernedwith biodiversity conservation in each of the eco-regions identified (see overview of
approach in chart on next page):
                                                                       ,




 Initially, the project has been designed for four countries including also Botswana and SouthAf3ica. However, due to
GEF-4 introduced Resource Allocation Framework restructuring,these two countries were unable to participatein the
finalproject due to insufficientGEF biodiversity resources allocated. Further,the restructuring processput on hold the
preparationprocess for almost one year.


  Route: A route is a destination-levelpartnership clustering tourism attractions (accommodation suppliers, international
and domestictour operators,transport operators, local artisans, guides,food suppliers,other tourism entrepreneurs and
local government). It provides a platformfiom which all levels of the communitycan work together to promote tourism
to their area. A route can be any length, covering varied attractions and can be traversed by any means.A route serves as
a brandinn for the touristuroducts of an area. the benefit of which is crucialto comuetitive marketing.

                                                                                              Route development
                              Community Members              Approach Open Africa
                                                                                                  commences
                                     \                               \

                                                                                          I  Stakeholder meetincl     I
                                                             Open Africa team
                 villages, localtourism&conservation           Route Developer
                   authorities,NPO's,establishedand            Route Networker
                                                            BiodiversityNetworker
                                                            Administration Manager
                                                             OperationsManager
                                                          Marketing& Communications
                                                                                          e
                  Essentiallycomprisedof                        Chief Executive

                I conservationlocally
                 parties interested In tourism &
                                                           Post-launch Route
                                                                Activities                  Participant certification


                Outputs of the Open Africa
                             system
               .Biodiversity is mainstreamed
               into tourism (conservationplan &
               enhanced biodiversity
               management)
               .Structural (institutional)
               development(route forum +
               framework for interaction&
               leveraging supportestablished)
               .Marketing (branded productwith
               effectivechannels to business)
               Capacity Building(dissemination                                             Route website goes live

               of success stories & technical                                                        4%
                                                        1
               advice)
               .Poverty Alleviation (increased                                                 1Route Launch    I
               income & job creation)                    Route support & capacity
                                                                                               I                I
                                                                 building           Step 3




The specificnon-investmentrelated activitiesfor the development of the identified 8 new routes include:
(1) Initial stakeholder consultations and baseline assessments to confm and finalize route selections using
the OA route diagnosismatrix, (2) Seriesof route workshops (two per route) to introduce and launch the new
biodiversity focused methodology and elect a route forum, (3) Biodiversity related data collection, (4)
Participant certification, (5) Installation of PChternet connection for route forum, (6) Development of
brochures and plaques for route launch, (7) Launch of route website as part of the OA website and (8)
Launching event of route. The activities for the 3 up-graded routes include (1) Biodiversity introduction
workshop, (2) Installation of PChternet connection for route forum, (3) Biodiversity related data collection
and (4) Relaunching event of route. All 11routes will receive implementation support from the OA team in
the form of capacity-buildingfor the route biodiversity monitors and mentors and tourism related issues.

Component 2: Targeted Marketing and Communication (Total $0.218m, GEF $0.139m):                                            The
component addressesbarriers to sustainabletourism marketing and promotion for the OA network and specific
routes resulting in effective biodiversity-oriented marketing and related increased income for the route
members within the OANSTC corridor. GEF funds will be used to integrate the mainstreaming of biodiversity
into the enhanced Open Africa marketing and communicationmodel. This requires attendance at tourism and
conservation fairs, "greening" and improving the effectiveness of the web sites as well as development of
route-specificlocal marketing instrumentsat the level of the route themselves.

The specific non-investment related activities include: (1) Marketing trips to the main gateways, (2) Journalist
visits, (3) Supply of uniform brochures and biodiversity marketing tools to route forums, (4) Supporting the
network with marketing and promotion, (5) Exhibiting at local and international trade shows, (6) Optimizing
and promoting the website potential, and (7) Route and participant signage support.

Component 3: Enhanced Monitoring and Evaluation (Total $0.112m, GEP $0.047): The component
establishes a local biodiversity and tourism monitoring and evaluation system at route level based on the

concept of flagship species, providing reliable information for tracking results, drawing lessons and informing
decisions.

GEF support will be used for the following specific non-investmentrelated activities: (1) develop biodiversity
monitoring tools (MOMS), (2) appoint local biodiversity mentors and monitors, (3) appoint a OA biodiversity
networlter, (4) install a MIS, (5) introduce a participant certification and trachng system, (6) carry out route
forum knowledge sharing seminars and capacity building activiies and (7) compile a replication and
knowledge management plan.

Component 4: Project Administration Management (Total $0.387, GEF $0.022m): The component
provides for overall coordination and implementation support through the Open Africa Organization. GEF
funds will support operational expenses and equipment and staffing time and know-how, and will result in
compliance with World Bank audit and WBIGEFreportingrequirements.

This component is expected to include the following activities: (1) Support of operating costs in line with
annual work plan, (2) Annual Audits, and (3) Produce appropriate progress reports and documentation in a
timely and routine manner, (4) Purchase of equipment including printers, vehicle and computers for the
implementingagency, OA, and the participating route forums.

D. Projectlocation and salientphysical characteristicsrelevantto the safeguard analysis (if
known):

Zambia and Namibia were chosen for this project because each of the two countries (1) have identified
tourism as a key industry for economic development and more particularly nature-based tourism and (2) are
endowed with globally significant ecosystems and biodiversity that are under increasing pressure. Tourism
development usually benefits eom well-preservedbiodiversity and contributes to its conservation.

The biodiversity resources within the six ecoregions (see map below #1,2,3,4,5,7) that the 11 selected
OANSTC routes traverse have major global significance. They also cross provincial and national boundaries,
where the economic deprivation threats that apply are similar, as are the limited choices of economic activity.
The cornrnonality of these conditions supports the notion of establishing a network among them, also with
regard to includingPA gateway communitiesin the effortsto promote conservation.

                                     Map 1.Eco-regionmap of OANSTCP

Central Zarnbezian Miornbo woodlands

Zarnbezianflooded grasslands

Zarnbezianand Mopane woodlands

Western Zarnbeziangrasslands

Zarnbezian Baikiaeawoodlands

SouthernAfrica bushveld



Succulent Karoo

The selected 11OANSTCP routes are summarizedin the table below:
 OANSTC Route Selection Matrix

Out of a initial list of 39 newroutes- eitherto be up-gradedor developed- 11routes have been selectedbasedon a definedlist of criteria.
Ail proposedrouteshavebeen assessedon that basis in initial consultativestakeholdermeetingsduring preparation.
Pleasenotethat all routenames are indicativeat this stage.


Selection Criteria             Organizational anchors:     Measuredby presenceof a local business, individualor NGOINPO,local conservationagencyand localtourismauthoritywith a communityor conservationfocus
                                                           that can act as an anchorfor rural development


                               Community Potential:'       Measuredbythe camposition and structureof local communities in the proposedroutearea and the potentialand willingness
                                                           of these communitiesto becomeinvolvedin sustainabletourism in a structuredand organisedmanner.


                               Biodiversity Value:*        Measuredbythe significanceof speciesfound in the proposedroutearea, the protectionstatus of the area,
                                                           and the potentialto mainstreambiodiversityin tourismactivities


                               Supporting Initiatives:     Measuredbythe presenceof other governmentaland non-govemmental initiativesin the area that aim to promotebiodiversityconservationand
                                                           communitydevelopment as well as tourismand SMME, that could becomeroute partners.


                               Potential tourism market:*  Measuredby the existenceand potential of the route product(destinationlevel)to appeal to the sustainableroute tourismmarket.


NOTE: The ratingof these criteria is subjectto final assessmentin stakeholdermeetingsfollowing projecteffectiveness.
'The criteriawill feed into the projecfs m&esystemand be linkedto the trackingtool.


Country I                                                                          BiodiversityValue                         Community Potential      Potential Tourism        Organizational   Supporting
                  Quantity     Route Indicative Name                                                                                                                                                          "Ore
Route status                                                                                                                                                Market               Anchor         Initiatives

                                                            Significance         Status           Mainstreaming       Total

Zambia                       8                                              I
NEW               Z 1          Mpikaand surrounds          High         3   Medium       2      High           3        8    Strong          3           Strong       3    Yes          3     High        3        20
                  Z 2          North Luangwa               High         3   High         3      High           3        9    Average         2           Strong       3    Yes          3     High        3        20
                  Z 3          Kasanka                     High         3   Medium       2      High          3         8    Strong          3          Medium        2    Yes          3     High        3        19
                  Z 4          Southem Kafue Flats         High         3   High         3      High           3        9    Average         2           Strong       3    Yes          3     High        3        20
                  Z 5          EastemKafue                 High         3   Medium       2      High          3         8    Strong          3           Strong       3    Yes          3     High        3        20
                  Z 6          North BarotseTrails 1       Average      2   Low          1      Medium        2              Average         2          Medium        2    No           0     Average     2        11
                  2 7          North BarotseTrails 2       Average      2   Low          1      Medium         2        5    Average         2          Medium        2    No           0     Average     2        11
EXISTING          ZU 1         BarotseTrails               High         3   Low          1      Medium        2         6    Average         2          Medium        2    Yes          3     Average     2        15
Namibia                      31
NEW               N1           K a ~ n g 0Route            High         3   Low-         1      Medium        2         6    Strong          3          Medium        2    Yes          3     Average     2        16
EXISTING          NU1          CapriviWetlands Paradise    High         3   Medium       2      Medium        2         7    Average         2          Medium        2    Yes          3     Average     2        16
                  NU2          Rosh Finah                  Average      2   High         3      Medium         2        7    Strong          3          Medium        2    Yes          3     High        .,       18




E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for SafeguardPolicies:

Open Africa is a registered tax exempt Public Benefit Institution (NGO) obliged to adhere to the Companies Act of south Afiica (see
www.openafiica.org). Its vision is to link the splendours of Africa through a network of tourismroutes, with the mission of doi~g this in a manner
that conserves and nourishes their resource base, for which purpose it devised and is implementing a unique system that funct ons at community
level and utilizes integrated Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Internet technologies. It launched its first route in 19!9 and now has 51
community-basedroutes in the network, which stretches across six countries and includes 1906SMME's that together supportj 1stshort of 20 000
jobs.

Open Africa executive secretariatoperates from Cape Town, SouthAfi-ica. It employs a small team of experts
in communityroute development under the leadership of its chief executive. However, Open Afi-icahas never
managed a World Bank project and has not been exposed to safeguard policies until now. A project review
committeewill be establishedby time of effectiveness.               1




F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

The Bank team is led by Jean-Michel Pavy (senior environment sp.). No social or environmental safeguard
policies are triggered (reconfirmed by ASPEN in February 2008). Thus, there are no environmental or social
safeguard experts on the team. As recommended, the team will ensure that all public consultations will be
carefully documentedduringproject implementation. Other team members besides the fiduciary colleagues are
Gabriele Rechbauer (Consultant environment sp.) and ShaunMann (Consultant tourism sp.).


11. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY




111. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: NA.

B. For simpleprojects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
    An MSP does not require a PAD. The MSP is expected to be submittedto the GEF Secretariat for CEO


C. Time fiame for launching and completingthe safeguard-relatedstudies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing3shouldbe specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: NA.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:                                                      -
                                                                                 1CC
                                                     Jean-MichelPavy                                              February 25,
                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                       _I_


    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards                              WarrenWaters                                                       NA
     Coordinator:
        Comments: C tranfered project does not requireRSC signature

     Sector Manager:                                 Marjory-AnneBromhead                                         February25,
                                                                                                                        2008


        Comments:




3Reminder: The Bank's DisclosurePolicy requires that safeguard-relateddocuments be disclosedbefore appraisal(i) at the InfoShop

and (ii) in-country,at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessibleto potentially affected persons.

