Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4173
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P111432 
Project Name:  RCIP3 - Regional Communications Infrastructure Program - Phase 3 
Task Team Leader:  Doyle Gallegos 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);Information technology (20%);General information 
and communications sector (20%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(P);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
153.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Project development objectives for RCIP 3 are similar to the initial RCIP APL. The RCIP 
Program, and all Projects under RCIP have one to two of the following development 
objectives, depending of the individual Government’s request: (i) contribute to lower the 
price of international broadband capacity and extend the reach of backbone networks 
across Eastern and Southern Africa and (ii) contribute to improved Government 
efficiency and transparency through eGovernment applications   
 
3. Project Description 
RCIP MALAWI PROJECT:  
 
Component 1 - Enabling Environment (US$2million): This component will provide 
support to the overall enabling environment for the project. This includes project-specific 
activities and general support for the sector. Subcomponent 1.1 – Capacity building an 
advisory support to sector agencies. This subcomponent will provide technical capacity 
building and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to the agencies of government 
Page  2
involved in the ICT sector. The key agencies are the PPP Unit (formerly the Privatization 
Commission), the Ministry of Information and Civic Education (MICE) and the Malawi 
Communications Authority (MACRA). The technical capacity building component will 
support a range of activities designed to assist these agencies in project specific work and 
in improving the overall competitive and regulatory environment for the ICT sector. This 
includes the following activities: : (a) support for negotiations with private and public 
agencies relating to cross-border connectivity development, (b) support for regulatory 
technical assistance to maximize benefits from access to capacity (regulatory tools to 
guarantee open access to national and international infrastructure, cost-modeling, price 
control mechanisms, interconnection, essential facility regulation, policy and regulatory 
competition law, spectrum management, etc) and for assessing  the policy and regulatory 
environment and suggest possible changes; (c) policy and regulatory capacity building, 
consensus building activities, training in the topics mentioned in 1(b) (sector policy and 
implementation of regulatory reforms) and in particular for strengthening the policy 
making role in the Ministry (ICT department), (d) drafting a new ICT law, licensing 
framework and related regulations to deal with a converged network (including 
broadcasting aspects), (e) drafting “e-legislation” and its corresponding regulatory 
frameworkto address issues such as e-security, fraud, intellectual property rights (f) 
support for development of legal framework to support the development of Public Private 
Partnerships (PPP) arrangements in the ICT sector, (g) capacity building for M&E; 
Subcomponent 1.2 – Technical support for PPP design and 
implementation.Thissubcomponent will support the PPP design and training aspects of 
the project. It will include all preparatory work for the main investment activities to be 
undertaken by the project, technical advice on aspects of the tender design, technical 
studies, auction design, contract preparation and technical and legal aspects of contract 
supervision. Subcomponent 1.3 – Environmental, Social and Resettlement activities. The 
activities to be undertaken as part of this project are unlikely to have any major 
environmental or resettlement implications. However, as is required under Malawian law, 
the possibility has to be examined as part of the project design and then monitored during 
implementation.  
 
Component 2 – Connectivity (US$14.5 million).  This component will support regional 
and international connectivity in Malawi through two major subcomponents:  
Subcomponent 2.1 Regional connectivity through PPP. This subcomponent will support 
regional connectivity to link Malawi with coastal landing stations of the submarine cables 
which are due to be completed by 2010. This will be implemented through a Public 
Private Partnership in which the Government, in its position as major purchaser of ICT 
services will purchase capacity, thereby reducing the commercial risk to investors in fiber 
optic cable operators. Any infrastructure developed under this project will be owned and 
operated by the private sector as part of competitive markets under the regulatory 
oversight of existing sector institutions. By retaining the option to connect through either 
Mozambique or Tanzania, the project supports a competitive tendering process for the 
provision of services and will promote competition between cables and between landing 
station. Subcomponent 2.2 Establishment of a virtual landing station. The key to the 
success of the project will be ensuring that the private sector in Malawi all have equal 
access to the regional connectivity provided under the project. This will promote 
Page  3
competition between players, maximize the usage of the connectivity and ensure that the 
benefits of lower connectivity are passed on to customers. The key to achieving this will 
be through the PPP contract design, the regulation of the sector and the establishment of a 
neutral point of interconnection to which all operators and ISPs can obtain access. The 
project will support the establishment and operation of this point of interconnection.  
 
Component 3 - Project Management (US$2million):  This component will consist of 
support to finance project management related issues, and namely support for (a) a 
Project Manager, (b) a Technical Expert, (c) a Procurement Specialist, (d) a Financial 
Management Specialist, (e) an M&E Specialist, (f) office equipment, (g) incremental 
operating costs, (h) audits, and (i) environmental specialist expertise.  
 
MOZAMBIQUE EGOVERNMENT AND COMMUNICATIONS 
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT  
 
Component 1 
–
Enabling environment (US$[4.15] million): This component will 
provide technical capacity building and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to 
the Ministry of Science and Technology (MCT), the Technical Unit for Implementation 
of the ICT Policy (UTICT), the Ministry of Transport and Communication (MTC) and 
the National Mozambican Communications Institute (INCM, the telecommunications 
regulator).  
 
Component 2 – Connectivity (US$[8.5] million):  This component will support 
connectivity in Mozambique through several subcomponents: (a) support for the 
establishment of an Internet Exchange Point (IXP); (b) support for purchase of capacity 
on the networks for targeted users (schools, universities, hospitals, eGovernment users, 
other user groups) ; (c) support for financing the Governments’ communications network 
(e.g. extension of GovNet or agreed platform to districts); (d) support for the setup of the 
Mozambique research and Education Network (MoRENet); (e) support for the 
establishment of the National Community Multimedia Centre Program (CMC); and (f) 
support for country-specific innovative demand-stimulation programs (e.g. community 
radios, SMS-based services, MICTI, etc).  This component will also cover 
implementation of recommendations stemming from the relevant environmental studies.  
 
Component 3 – Transparency – eGovernment Applications (US$[8-11] million):  This 
component will include two main areas:  (a) eGovernment Platform to support the 
government’s cross-cutting and underlying activities, and (b) support for targeted 
eGovernment applications.  
 
Component 4 – Project Management Support (US$[2] million):  This component 
willconsist of support to project management related issues, and namely support for 
hiring key staff.  Other expenses under this component will include office equipment, 
incremental operating costs and audits. It is likely that the Procurement Specialist and 
Financial Management Specialist to be hired will be a shared resource with other projects 
at MCT.  
 
Page  4
TANZANIA COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE AND EGOVERNMENT 
PROJECT:  
 
Component 1 
–
Enabling Environment (US$17 million). This component will 
providesupport in the form of technical assistance (TA) and capacity building in order to 
strengthen the policy and regulatory environment and promote further sector reform so as 
to maximize benefits from access to international capacity.  In the area of connectivity 
the following activities will be supported: (i) Strengthening of the ICT policy making 
capacity at the Ministry of Communications, Science, and Technology (MCST); (ii) 
Capacity building for the Tanzania ICT Body (to be confirmed during pre-appraisal 
mission); (iii) TA for development and implementation of the Universal Access strategy; 
(iv) TA for design of contracts for pre-purchase of capacity on the submarine cable(s); (v) 
Capacity building and certification of trainers (“training the trainers”) to enhance ICT use 
within the Government of Tanzania (GoT) through an ICT HR development program; 
(vi) Capacity building to deal with changing environment and fast technology evolution 
in areas such as cost-modeling, interconnection, regulatory tools to guarantee open access 
to national and international infrastructure, essential facility regulation, competition 
policy and regulation, spectrum and other scarce resource management; and (vii) 
Capacity building and technical support for the development and implementation of the 
National ICT Infrastructure Development Program.  
 
The following activities will be supported in the area of eGovernment: (i) TA for 
drafting e-legislation and its corresponding regulatory framework (to be confirmed during 
pre-appraisal mission); (ii) TA on the feasibility of Public Private Partnerships (PPP) 
model for the implementation of eGovernment applications; (iii) TA for feasibility 
studies, development of bidding documents, and support during procurement, contracting 
and implementation of eGovernment applications; and (iv) eGovernment capacity 
building and communications support at Government institutions.  
 
In addition, the following activities will be supported: (i) Capacity building in the area 
of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E); (ii) Environmental and social studies consistent 
with the technical specification and timeframe provided by the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and 
(iii) Additional technical assistance and capacity-building not identified ex-ante.  
 
Component 2 – Connectivity (US$60 million).  This component will provide additional 
funding for the National ICT Infrastructure Development Program in Tanzania through 
several subcomponents: (i) Financing for the construction of the submarine cable(s) 
landing station in Tanzania (US$2-4 million) (to be confirmed during pre-appraisal 
mission); (ii) Support for pre-purchase of international bandwidth for priority targeted 
user groups (US$6-8 million); (iii) Financing for equipment for a virtual Government 
Communications Network (US$20 million) (amount and scope to be confirmed during 
pre-appraisal mission); and (iv) Support for the extension of coverage and access to ICT 
services in rural areas using PPP arrangements (US$30 million).  This component will 
also cover implementation of recommendations stemming from the relevant 
environmental studies.  
 
Page  5
Component 3 
–
eGovernment Applications (US$13 million). This component will 
include support for implementation of targeted eGovernment applications such as: (i) 
eProcurement; (ii) Records and Archive Management; (iii) Support to the Ministry of 
Lands; (iv) Referral System for the Muhimbili Orthopaedic Institute; and (v) Quick-Win 
Mobile (mGovernment) Applications (applications to be confirmed and further detailed 
by appraisal).  
 
Component 4 – Project Management Support (US$3-5 million).  This component 
willconsist of support to finance project management related issues including project 
coordination, procurement, financial management, monitoring & evaluation, project 
communication, and environmental and social safeguards.  Other expenses under this 
component will include office equipment, incremental operating costs, and audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Tanzania, Mozambique, and Malawi - This project is regional in scope and will focus on 
reforms to government institutions and public-private partnerships throughout the 
countries of Tanzania, Mozambique, and Malawi.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Environment Category is B  
 
OP/BP 4.01 - The risks associated with the kind of infrastructure under consideration 
are generally low.  The route in Malawi, Mozambique and Tanzania does not affect any 
group that meet criteria for indigenous people - and none of the impacts would be 
Page  6
significant, sensitive, diverse or unprecedented.  The Project is therefore assigned to 
environmental category B under OP 4.01.  
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities (if any) might be needed for the 
virtual landing station. This is likely to be an existing telecom-related building and 
therefore not likely to require land acquisition.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Draft Environment and Social Management Framework has been prepared and a version 
acceptable to the Association has been disclosed to the countries and at Infoshop for 
Malawi and Mozambique prior to appraisal.  Tanzania's is in process to be disclosed.  
 
Specific costed Environment Management Plans will be prepared as necessary.  
 
Draft Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared and a version acceptable to the 
Association has been disclosed to the countries and at Infoshop for Malawi and 
Mozambique prior to appraisal.  Tanzania's is in process to be disclosed. If it is 
determined that project activities will require land acquisition or impact other assets, a 
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared, approved by the World Bank, and 
implemented prior to initiating civil works   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/13/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
NA   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  8
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Michele Ralisoa Noro 
04/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
04/23/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
04/23/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
04/24/2009 
Comments:   
