Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/23/2008 
Report No.:  AC3982
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P111330 
Project Name:  ENSAP - Watershed Project 
Task Team Leader:  Herbert Acquay 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 16, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (40%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Other rural 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
8.70 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.50 
 
Single Purpose Trust Fund 
15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.50
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective and Global Environment Objective (GEO) are to 
increase the adoption of sustainable land and water management practices in selected 
micro-watersheds in the Eastern Nile Sub-basin. A second GEO is to develop a 
framework for integrated and sustainable management of Lake Nasser/Nubia Sub-basin.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would have the following three components:  
 
(a) Community Watershed Management component is aimed at promoting wider 
adoption of sustainable land and water management practices and technologies to reduce 
land degradation, and increase agricultural productivity and incomes. This component 
would be implemented in the Atbara, Bau (or Ingessana), Dinder, and Lau sub-
watersheds in Sudan.  
Page  2
(b) Knowledge for Cooperative Action component: The objective of this component is 
to strengthen the knowledge base and human resource capacity for cooperative action on 
watershed management in the Eastern Nile sub-basin.  At the regional level, project 
support would focus on facilitating training and exchange of information (including on 
best management practices) and expertise on watershed management in Egypt, Ethiopia, 
and Sudan. Also under this component, the project would support the development of a 
framework (i.e. principles and guidelines) for integrated and sustainable management of 
the land and water resources of Lake Nasser/Nubia basin.  
 
(c) Project Management component: The objective of this component is to finance 
technical and capacity building assistance, and incremental operating costs for existing 
regional, national, and local entities that would be responsible for the implementation of 
the proposed project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The on-the-ground project activities (in Sudan only) would be implemented in the 
Atbara, Bau (or Ingessana), Dinder, and Lau localities. These sub-watersheds were 
selected based on the following criteria: (a) they are the major sources in Sudan of 
sediments that end up in the Nile River; (b) they provide an opportunity to address land 
degradation in representative ecological systems in Sudan 
–
desert, savanna, and 
wetland/forest; and (c) they have the demonstration potential for other watersheds in 
Sudan.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts, 
including helping to: (a) increase the area of degraded cropland and rangeland 
rehabilitated in specific micro watersheds in the Eastern Nile sub-basin; (b) adopt 
sustainable management of land and water resources in the rehabilitated areas; and (c) 
increase agricultural productivity and household incomes.  
 
Project support would comprise mainly capacity building activities and small-scale 
investments such as water harvesting structures, including farm ponds, storage tanks, and 
boreholes. There will be no resettlement of people under the project. The small-scale 
community investments to be supported under the project are not expected to have major 
environmental impacts. Therefore, no separate environmental assessment was conducted.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for 
the project that: (a) establishes clear procedures and methodologies for environmental 
and social assessment, review, approval and implementation of investments to be 
financed under the project; (b) specifies appropriate roles and responsibilities, and 
outlines the necessary reporting procedures, for managing and monitoring environmental 
and social concerns related to project investments; and (c) helps to determine the training, 
capacity building and technical assistance needed to successfully implement the 
provisions of the ESMF.  
 
On the Safeguard Policy on Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), 
Notification Letters were sent to all the 10 riparian countries by the Nile Basin Initiative 
Secretariat on September 3, 2008, following procedures established by the countries. By 
the end of the 60-day notification period, (i.e. November 2, 2008), no adverse response 
had been received.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The ESMF mentioned above would help establish clear procedures and methodologies 
for environmental and social assessment, review interventions to be financed under the 
project and, where necessary, disqualify the proposed intervention or develop and 
incorporate into the design appropriate mitigation measures before it is financed.  
 
Page  4
In term of institutional responsibilities for the ESMF, the Ministry of Environment & 
Physical Development at the National level would have overall responsibility for 
effective implementation of the ESMF.  At the State and locality levels, the 
Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) or representatives of the Higher Councils for 
Environment and Natural Resources would be responsible for the ESMF implementation.  
 
The project would finance capacity building activities on the application of the ESMF 
for relevant national, state, and locality staff.  In cases where the local government's 
capacity to conduct an environmental assessment is limited, the project would finance 
consultants to provide supplementary assistance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakolders include settled farmers and nomadic communities of Atbara, Bau and 
Dinder localities; The Ministry of Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources at the 
National,  State and locality levels.    The ESMF includes very detailed participatory 
procedures for stakeholder identification, consultation, and decision-making.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/03/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Herbert Acquay 
12/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour 
12/23/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
12/23/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
12/23/2008 
Comments:  The team is waiting for written confirmation from Sudan on the disclosure of the 
ESMF. 
