Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4121 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/08/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P115414 
Project Name: NELSAP Regional Agricultural Trade and Productivity TA (Phase II) 
Task Team Leader: Sergiy Zorya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (40%);Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);Crops 
(20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%) 
Theme: Rural markets (P);Global food crisis response (P);Trade facilitation and market 
access (P);Regional integration (P);Water resource management (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
6.80
6.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the knowledge in the Nile Basin on 
agricultural issues for support of economically viable agriculture that uses Basin water resources 
in a sustainable and efficient manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will include the following components:  
 
Component 1: Defining NBI’s core agricultural functions. Component 1 will inform the NBI 
(and its successor RBO) on its potential roles in agricultural development. It will critically assess 
the agriculture-related core functions of other RBOs and the recommendations prepared by the 
first-generation NBI projects. The work under this component will analyze the advantages and 
disadvantages of various mandates (i.e. water resource management vs. development functions) 
to inform the process by which the NBI’s core mandate is defined. It will be very 
closelycoordinated with NBI-ISP, focusing on complementary activities related to agriculture. 
Page  2
This component will also include consultation, communication, and capacity building activities 
for the NBI and other regional stakeholders.  
 
Component 2: Integrating agriculture into Basin strategic water resource planning and 
management. This component includes two activities. First, it will support the collection of the 
basin-wide data on agricultural sector and water use from sector activities (i.e. irrigated systems, 
rain-fed agriculture, livestock, etc.) that will be integrated into the Nile Basin Decision Support 
System (DSS).  DSS is the information system that provides a common and shared basis for NBI 
planning and decision making processes, locally, sub-regionally, and Basin wide. It will provide 
the means to estimate the impact of climate change on agricultural production and water use in 
productive agriculture, as well as to evaluate the impact of agricultural investments on water 
resources and the impact of water costs on the economic viability of emerging investments.  
 
Second, this work will allow modeling of future demand and supply of agricultural products 
and assessment of the implications for Basin water demand. It will provide the DSS and the NBI 
Water Management and Planning Unit with the analytical tools to predict changes in agricultural 
demand and trade, inform riparian countries on required interventions to adjust food supply in 
terms of improvement of water productivity and irrigation expansion, estimate the outlook for 
exports and imports, and assess likely changes in land use and the sectoral product mix.  
 
Component 3: Building capacity to support more productive and economically sustainable 
agriculture in the Basin through promoting regional trade. This component will support three 
activities: assessment of “virtual water” trade, analysis of actual cross-border trade in agricultural 
commodities, and liaison with selected private commodity groups operating within the region. 
First, it will introduce and help operationalize the concept of “virtual water” by emphasizing the 
importance of trade for water resource management. Water is traded in virtual forms, i.e. in 
forms of agricultural commodities. Although invisible, import of virtual water can be an 
effective means for water-scarce countries to preserve their domestic water resources. The 
training and capacity building activities will be prepared together with the World Bank Institute 
that has recently developed the innovative training course of relation between international trade 
and water resource management.  
 
Second, it will finance technical studies on selected cross-border agricultural trade corridors, for 
example those that monitored by the USAID-supported Famine Early Warning System Network 
(FEWSNET) and the World Food Program. These studies will identify opportunities for greater 
trade, document major constraints to trade, both spatial and seasonal, and prepare 
recommendations for public investments and trade facilitation measures. The objective is to 
proactively advocate the importance of promoting regional agricultural trade as a means to 
increase the efficiency of productive water use in the Basin. This work will be done jointly with 
COMESA and EAC; building partnerships with these RECs is critical as they are the venues for 
trade policy discussion and trade reforms at the regional level.  
 
Third, the above work will be complemented by engaging with one or more selected regional 
commodity groups.  The aim is to pilot the NBI relationships with the private sector and civil 
society to participate in policy dialogue on regional trade and in the marketing assessment’s 
work on cross-border trade corridors,andto strengthen agribusiness linkages in the Nile Basin 
Page  3
region. Building partnerships with regional networks such as FEWSNET, the Eastern Africa 
Grain Council, the Horticulture Council of Africa and others is also critical for RATP and the 
NBI in order to engage with private sector and access reliable market information  
 
Component 4: Project management unit. This component will provide support to the project 
management unit, and the monitoring and evaluation of project performance and results. RATP 
will use institutional arrangements similar to those that are currently used in the preparatory 
phase. The Project Management Unit will be responsible for implementing the project activities. 
Project implementation will be guided by the Regional Project Steering Committee, which is 
comprised of two experts from each country, from ministries responsible for irrigation, 
agriculture, and trade. Regional stakeholders such as RECs and the private sector will participate 
as observers in the Steering Committee meetings. National Liaison Officers have been identified 
who will support project activities at the national level. The NELSAP-CU will coordinate RATP 
activities with other NBI bodies, including the Nile-SEC, NELSAP-Technical Advisory 
Committee and NEL Council of Ministers.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by the Nile Equatorial Lake Subsidiary Action Plan 
Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU) based in Kigali, Rwanda. The location of the project 
implementation unit will be determined during the phase I of the project.  
 
RATP is the TA project without any physical investments. It is rated as category C project. All 
its activities will be implemented using the NBI Strategy for Addressing Environment and Social 
Safeguards, the compliance with which will be strengthened through the on-going NBI-
Institutional Strengthening Project. This Strategy describes NBI’s approach to address and 
manage safeguard issues, relatedpublic consultations and disclose documents.   
 
E.  Borrower
’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Although the NELSAP-CU performs due diligence and follows international good practice for 
each investment project, there is still a need to support it (and also NBI) in strengthening and 
harmonizing its capacity to apply adequate safeguards practices while planning strategic actions 
and developing investment projects and programs. The capacity building, therefore, is directly 
built in the on-going NBI Institutional Strengthening Project though the Shared Vision Program 
and other activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ladisy Komba Chengula (AFTEN) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/30/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Project will use and disclose the NBI Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social 
Safeguards. Given that RATP in itself does not include any investment and no safeguards are 
triggered by this project, no other studies and documents will be required as agreed with 
ASPEN.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sergiy Zorya 
03/20/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/08/2009 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/07/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
