Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3918 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P111556 
Project Name: Regional Health Systems Strengthening and TB Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Miriam Schneidman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (34%);Health system performance 
(33%);Tuberculosis (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
140.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve access, quality, and efficiency of TB diagnostic 
services using an integrated approach to laboratory strengthening.  The specific objectives would 
be to: (i) establish additional Supranational Reference Laboratories in strategic locations in urban 
areas to provide quality assurance, training, and capacity building; (ii) introduce modern 
techniques (e.g. liquid culture) for diagnosis of HIV related TB, and increase capacity for drug 
resistance diagnosis and surveillance, ensuring compliance with bio-safety and infection control 
standards in a group of national reference and public health laboratories in priority countries; and 
(iii) develop and test alternative service delivery models to promote private sector involvement.  
The project would also facilitate learning and knowledge sharing across the network of 
participating laboratories and countries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed US$140 Million Regional Health and TB Support Project includes three 
components: 1. Supranational Laboratory Capacity Enhancement component which will finance 
the establishment of regional diagnostic capacity in urban areas and promote knowledge sharing; 
Page  2
2. National Reference and Public Health Laboratory Network Upgrading component which will 
strengthen national diagnostic and surveillance capacity for HIV related TB and drug resistant 
TB; 3. Public Private Partnerships in TB Control component which aims to support the financing 
of partnerships with the private sector and test alternative laboratory service delivery models.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All countries in the region will be eligible to participate with the initial focus on those with a 
high TB/HIV burden, weak laboratory capacity, major funding gaps, and willingness to 
contribute one-third to the total cost from the respective IDA country allocations.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Once the participating countries have been selected, the project will determine the extent of their 
capacity for safe medical waste management, infection control, and develop appropriate medical 
waste and infection control management plan which would build on existing country capacities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This policy is triggered due to  the (i) planned rehabilitation and upgrading of regional 
laboratories; (ii) upgrading and expansion of national laboratories; (iii) generation of medical 
waste at these laboratories; and (iv) infection control methods that need to be addressed. 
Therefore, the project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) to ensure that potential adverse environmental and social impacts of future investments 
are identified and mitigated at the planning stage. The ESMF will include country-specific 
annexes and relevant medical waste management plans. In some countries, existing Medical 
Waste Management Plans prepared in the context of HIV/AIDS operations may be modified and 
adapted to meet the requirements of the proposed project, particularly with regard to the 
management of laboratories and related training.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The civil works is expected to take place at existing facilities, therefore no land will be 
acquired and no involuntary resettlement is expected.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/14/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Starting in early March 2009, the project will prepare an ESMF which will include country 
specific annexes and relevant medical waste management plans. The ESMF is expected to be 
completed by mid-April 2009, and will be disclosed in the participating countries and at the 
Bank's Infoshop by end May 2009. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard 
responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Miriam Schneidman 
11/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz 
11/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
