Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/22/2008 
Report No.:  AC3104
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P079749 
Project Name:  West Africa Regional Transport and Transit Facilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Fabio Galli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 6, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Sector Investment 
and Maintenance Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (80%);Other domestic and international trade 
(11%);General transportation sector (9%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
155.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
23.00
23.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project supports the objectives of the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD) and the UEMOA’s PACITR program.  The program is expected 
to contribute to the strengthening of economic integration and sub regional cooperation of 
the member countries of the UEMOA/ECOWAS block.  More specifically, the program 
seeks to improve the Burkina Faso, Mali’s and Niger’s access to the Ghanaian ports of 
Tema and Takoradi, reduce general transport costs and promote economic activity and 
private sector development.  
 
The project specific objectives are to improve access by Burkina Faso and Mali to 
Ghanaian ports by facilitating the efficient movement of transit traffic along the Tema – 
Ouagadougou – Bamako transport corridor (Corridor).   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will fund works and trade and transit facilitation measures in each 
country. The following major two components will be funded under the proposed project:  
 
Page  2
3.1 Corridor infrastructure improvement works.  The expected outcome of this 
component are to: (a) rehabilitate key road sections of the Corridor in poor condition; (b) 
construct rest stop areas along the Corridor; (c) implement social and environmental 
mitigation measures along the Corridor; (d) implement a Corridor HIV/AIDS prevention 
and mitigation plan; and (e) implement a Corridor road safety action plan.  
 
3.2 Corridor transport and transit facilitation measures.  The expected outcomes of this 
component are to: (a) strengthen the capacity of Customs and transport authorities to 
better secure and monitor the movement of transit cargo along the Corridor; (b) upgrade 
Information Communication Technology (ICT) to facilitate the monitoring and 
securitization of the transit of cargo along the Corridor; (c) construct a satellite transit 
parking facility adjacent to the Port of Tema; (d) construct a limited number of transit 
check points; and (e) fund training, equipment and studies.  
 
The total estimated project cost is about US$ 178 million of which US$155 million will 
be funded by IDA.  The project activities are broken down by country in the following 
manner.  
 
3.3 Burkina Faso (about US$ 70 million).  The proposed project is expected to support 
the following activities:  (a) Rehabilitation of the Ouagadougou 
–
Sakoinse (about 54 km) 
road Corridor section; (b) construction of two rest stops; (c) design and implementation 
of the road safety action plan on the Burkina Faso section of the Corridor; (d) 
procurement of ICT equipment to extend Automated System for Customs Data 
(ASYCUDA) customs management system to the Ghanaian and Malian borders; (e) 
interconnect Burkina Faso ASYCUDA system with Malian ASYCUDA and Ghanaian  
Customs Management System (GCMS); (f) training and procurement of equipment to 
strengthen the capacity of customs and transport authorities to better monitor and secure 
transit traffic along the Corridor; (g) procurement of equipment for mobile teams, the 
cargo tracking system, and the regional transit management system; (h) contribute to the 
implementation of the Joint Border Posts (JBP) at the Mali and Ghana borders; (i) 
implementation of HIV/AIDS action plan for the Burkinabe portion of Corridor; and (j) 
design and implementation of a road safety improvement action plan on Burkinabe 
portion of Corridor.  
 
3.4 Ghana (about US$ 75 million).  The proposed project is expected to fund the 
following activities:  (a) rehabilitation/strengthening of about 80-100 km of the highest 
priority section of the Kintampo – Tamale – Paga Road; (b) design andconstruction of a 
satellite transit truck village near the Port of Tema to complement the activities of the 
Ghana Gateway Project:  (c) design and construction of two transit check points and up to 
four rest stop areas on the Ghanaian section of the Corridor; (d) design and 
implementation of Corridor road safety action plan; (e) strengthen the capacity of 
customs and transport authorities to better monitor and secure transit traffic along the 
Corridor; (f) ICT equipment to ensure the interconnection of the customs of Ghana 
(GCMS) with the customs systems of Burkina Faso (ASYCUDA) and Mali 
(ASYCUDA); (g) implementation of a HIV/AIDS action plan for the Ghanaian portion of 
the Corridor; and (h) design and implementation of a road safety improvement action 
plan on the Ghanaian portion of the Corridor.  
Page  3
3.5 Mali (about US$ 33 million).  The proposed project is expected to support the 
following activities:  (a) part of the cost of Bamako 
–
Bougouni road works; (b) 
rehabilitation of the multifunctional platform at Faladie (Bamako); (c) construction of 
two rest stops on the Corridor; (d) preparation and implementation of Corridor road 
safety action plan; (e) ICT, equipment, training and studies to strengthen the capacity of 
Customs and transport authorities to better monitor and secure transit traffic along the 
Corridor; (f) implementation of an HIV/AIDS action plan for the Malian portion of the 
corridor; and (g) design and implementation of a road safety improvement action plan on 
the Malian portion of the Corridor.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project location consists of the existing Corridor (Tema – Ouagadougou – Bamako 
road transport corridor) in Ghana, Burkina Faso and Mali.  The Corridor is one of the key 
ECOWAS/UEMOA regional road transport routes.  With the exception of the four lane 
first stretch of the Corridor from Tema to Accra, the full length of the Corridor consists 
primarily of a two lane paved road.  The focus of the road works will be to rehabilitate 
and strengthen priority sections of the existing road Corridor.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main focus of the proposed project is to facilitate transport, transit and trade in the 
sub-region. The main focus of the civil works funded under the project is to rehabilitate 
and strengthen within the existing right of way the priority sections of the Corridor.  The 
Page  4
transport sector is a major source of local and global air pollutants (PM, CO, CO2, 
VOCs, O3) that are responsible for poor health and other negative impacts.  
 
Furthermore, road transport/infrastructure investment, usually induce varying degrees of 
physical and social impacts.  This is particularly the case for peri-urban/urban 
environments, which are socially dynamic and have high population densities.  
 
Therefore, the proposed project has been rated Category B for environmental impacts.  
However, due to the nature of the civil works funded under the proposed project, no 
major social and environmental impacts are anticipated. The potential adverse 
environmental impacts for the proposed project are primarily site specific and linked to 
the civil works.  This will include, run off, soil erosion, noise and dust which will induce 
temporary pollution air quality during the construction phase. Anticipated adverse social 
impacts are also expected to be primarily temporary.  
 
The only permanent social impacts are linked to the acquisition of small amounts of 
land along the road.  This will cause some relocation/resettlement, disruption of social 
and cultural cohesion and the potential for increased HIV/AIDS propagation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No cumulative adverse impacts are anticipated. The Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs), Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans 
(RAPs) will address and mitigate the minor adverse impacts identified.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The need to acquire land for minor road realignments, and construction of rest stop areas, 
will be subject to public consultations and review by the environmental desks/units of the 
road agencies of the Ministry of Transports and Public Works as well as the national 
environmental agencies. The right of way requirements, in some sections, may be 
reconsidered as necessary, to minimize as much as possible the impact on private 
properties and public amenities.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The requisite EIAs, EMPs and RAPs have already been prepared for each of the three 
countries (Ghana, Burkina Faso and Mali) involved in the proposed project.The 
Ministries of Transports and Public Works have environmental agencies and staff that 
will ensure the internal monitoring of the implementation of the EIAs/EMPs and RAPs. 
The agencies have been engaged in reviewing EIAs/EMPs and RAPs prepared by design 
and EA consultants. Progress in the implementation of the safeguards mitigation 
measures will be incorporated in the monthly progress report prepared by the supervision 
consultants.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The preparation of the EIAs/EMPs and the RAPs included consultations with all levels of 
civil society including local governments and administrations, NGOs, regional 
governments and sector administrations. The consultations focused on assessing the 
viability of the proposed project, identifying potential areas of conflict between 
stakeholders and define areas of collaboration. Adverse environmental and social impacts 
and mitigation measures were also discussed. The recommendations have been integrated 
into the EIAs/EMPs and the RAPs.  The Ministries of Transport and Public Works 
disclosed the safeguards instruments prior to appraisal and made copies available at their 
head offices, at relevant sector agencies in their countries, and at relevant local 
governments.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/05/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/05/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/25/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/05/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fabio Galli 
02/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
02/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
02/20/2008 
Comments:   
Page  7
