Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/14/2009 
Report No.:  AC4516
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P116745 
Project Name:  SVP-Additional Grant Financing Regional Power Trade - II 
Task Team Leader:  John Bryant Collier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 14, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: August 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTWR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Trade facilitation and market access (40%);Regional integration 
(40%);Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
4.11
4.11 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) Shared Vision Program 
(SVP) Regional Power Trade Project, Phase II (RPT II)is : to facilitate the development 
of regional power markets among the Nile Basin countries .  
 
The long-term goal of the project is to contribute to poverty reduction in the region by 
assisting the NBI countries in developing the tools for improving access to reliable, low 
cost, sustainably generated power.   
 
3. Project Description 
RPT II will have the same three components of Phase I, as follows:  
 
Component 1: Regional Coordination and Project Implementation ($ 1.32 M ).  As 
under Phase I, the Project Management Unit (i) will be responsible for overall 
implementation of the Project components; (ii) will continue promoting the dialogue 
among ministries and utilities responsible for electricity; (iii) will maintain strong 
linkages with other regional bodies (e.g. EAPP, EAC, SINELAC, etc), other SVP 
projects and the Subsidiary Actions Programs; and (iv) will prepare and implement an 
Page  2
exit strategy for RPT in order to actively pass knowledge and activities important to 
power trade to a sustainable, permanent institution.  In addition, in order to further 
strengthen the capacity of the PMU and streamline the procurement process, the 
implementation of the project will be executed by the NBI and directly disbursed by the 
Bank.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Power Trade Development ($ 0.68 M).  During 
this period, four capacity building programs are planned. The themes of these demand-
driven-programs will be selected with the input of the Technical Committee as was the 
case in Phase I; the current themes under consideration include:  
 
i) Generation and transmission expansion planning  
 
ii) Power Market Operations, Settlements and Planning  
 
iii) Power Market Operations - Regulatory and Legal frameworks  
 
iv) Power Market Operations - Tariff Setting for cross boarder power trade  
 
In addition, the capacity building programs will be synchronized with those planed by 
the other regional organizations (SAPs, EAC and EAPP).  
 
Component 3: The Comprehensive Basinwide Study ($2.0 M) and Workshops ($ 
0.11M).  This component will launch a large study in order to inform the planning of 
multipurpose river-basin management and identify potential projects for development 
within the subsidiary action programs of the NBI. In conducting this study, special 
working groups formed out of the Technical Committee, one expert from each of the two 
SAPs, Environment and Water experts from the Nile Secretariat, and experts from 
regional bodies like EAC and EAPP will be utilized as far as possible so as to cut costs 
on Project Management and Consultant fees. The study will follow best practices in 
options analysis, including extensive stakeholder involvement and multi-criteria options 
assessment.  
 
During the implementation of Phase I, the project carried out the Preliminary Basin 
Wide Study and one of the strong recommendations of this Study was that the 
Comprehensive Basin Wide Study (CBWS) should be undertaken. On the other hand, 
EAPP has obtained funds from the African Development Bank (AfDB) of about USD 1 
million and has allocated USD 502,000 to develop a Regional Grid Code and undertake a 
similar study as the CBWS, though narrower in scope. Following the discussions between 
the two institutions supported by the development partners, the Terms of Reference 
(ToR) for the two studies were harmonized such that the EAPP study will concentrate on 
the short term (10 year period) while the CBWS will cover the medium to long term (25 
years); the full scope to be covered by the tow studies will thus be 35 years.  
 
The main outputs of the CBWS include:  
 
i) An Analysis of the status of power supply, interconnectivity, demand and trade 
opportunities in the whole NBI region taking the countries in their entirety.  
 
ii) A sustainable multipurpose water resources management plan integrating optimally 
power infrastructure development. Output (i) will inform the delivery of this plan.  
Page  3
iii) 
A portfolio of regional projects for investment and funding, obtained from a 
screening process based on Multi-criteria analysis of power options of all types of 
generation sources in the region.  
 
iv) Project's implementation and financing structures embracing the concept of Public-
Private Partnership model.  
 
v)
A
detailed long-term strategy for optimal power infrastructure development including 
generation and a high voltage transmission backbone for the whole basin - A Regional 
Optimal Power Development Master Plan.  
 
vi) An identification and analysis of the environmental and social issues raised by the 
long-term strategy for optimal power infrastructure development identified.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is managed for the nine NBI countries by an existing Project Management 
Unit based in Dar Es Salaam hosted by the Government of Tanzania.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr John Bryant Collier (AFTWR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Although RPT II is a technical assistance project, it is aimed at building capacity and 
leveraging for investment opportunities in the power sector.  The Comprehensive 
Basinwide Study aims to inform decision makers, facilitate the planning of multipurpose 
river-basin management, and identify potential projects for development within the 
subsidiary action programs of the NBI.  While the upstream work undertaken by RPT II 
will not determine the extent of impacts that the identified projects may have on the 
environment, the process of identifying those options must take potential environmental 
and social impacts into account.  The preliminary NBI Environmental and Social 
Management Framework for Project Preparation and Implementation, along with the NBI 
Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards, will be the guiding 
Page  4
documents for any future investment projects. These documents, along with the Terms-
of-Reference for the Comprehensive Basinwide Study, have been disclosed through the 
Info-shop in conjunction with RPT II.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The NBI, as a transitional institution, has begun developing its own institutional capacity 
for addressing safeguard policies under the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project (ISP).  
Over the next year, NBI will be formalizing its own Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) for Project Preparation and Implementation, based on a 
preliminary framework prepared by NELSAP.  In order to ensure activities under RPTP 
II fall under the NBI safeguards structure, the NBI Secretariat has modified the NELSAP 
preliminary ESMF and will abide by it for the preparation and implementation of RPTP 
II until such time as the detailed NBI ESMF is adopted.  
 
The Framework is the next step in the establishment of a safeguards regimen for the 
NBI that addresses both national law and financier concerns in preparing and 
implementing regional investments.  While the NBI operates within the confines of 
National Environmental legislation in each of its member countries, the Framework is 
designed to ensure consistent use of international best practices in its treatment of social 
and environmental issues.  By doing so, the Framework recognizes the laws, regulations 
as well as national policies and, where necessary, enhances (with countervening) them by 
applying international standards.  
 
The NBI Secretariat has requested that the preliminary ESMF be disclosed along with 
the NBI Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards, and the Terms-
of-reference for the Comprehensive Basin Wide Study as the key environmental 
documents for RPTP II.  Those documents build on the foundation started with the 
Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment (SSEA) prepared by NELSAP for the 
power sector in 2007 as well as the Guidelines for Environment and Social Impact 
Assessments for Power Projects developed under RPTP I.  
 
The draft Comprehensive Basinwide Study will be submitted to the Bank for safeguards 
review prior to finalization.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive participation of a wide range of stakeholders is an explicit emphasis of the 
entire project. Several of the key stakeholders, in particular the public sector and power 
utilities, are given a direct involvement in the project through their representation on the 
Steering Committee, and the Technical Committee. In addition, working groups will be 
formed during the duration of the project to address specific issues related to power trade.  
 
The Shared Vision Program, (the Regional Power Trade is one of eight projects 
comprising the SVP) has so far exhibited an exemplary multi-country and multi-sectoral 
participatory process led by the Nile-Council of Ministers of Water Affairs of the Nile 
Basin States (Nile-COM) and the Nile-Technical Advisory Committee (Nile-TAC) and 
executed by the NBI Secretariat with involvement of more than 70 national experts from 
nine riparian countries.  This consultative process is expected to continue through Phase 
II and the key stakeholders include users, planners, policymakers, and civil society.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/06/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/07/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
08/14/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
08/14/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
08/14/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
08/14/2009 
Comments:   
Page  7
