Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4377
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P116595 
Project Name:  Eastern Nile First Joint Multipurpose Program Identification (JMP1 ID) 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaokai Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTWR 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Irrigation and 
drainage (30%);Power (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (67%);Regional integration (33%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of this Recipient-Executed Technical Assistance project is to assist the 
three Eastern Nile countries in identification of the JMP1 investment package, through a 
series of studies and consultative activities that take into account economic, social and 
environmental sustainability issues in an integrated manner.  By the end of the JMP1 
Identification project, ENCOM will be in a position to commission detailed preparation 
for the selected JMP1 investments, as appropriate.  At that time and under separate 
funding, preparation would include full feasibility studies and designs for the selected 
projects, along with detailed environmental and social impact assessments, financing 
studies, implementation planning, etc.  
 
The key performance indicators for the JMP 1 ID phase are: (i) the SSEA provides a 
sound basis for the inclusion of social and environmental considerations in the selection 
of projects within the JMP program; (ii) Eastern Nile governments have an improved 
knowledge base to sustainably develop and manage the resources of the Blue and Main-
stem Nile; and (iii) the first set of coordinated investments is identified at the end of the 
project.  
 
Page  2
The planned main outputs of this technical assistance will include the following:  (i) a 
participatory strategic social and environmental assessment of water resources 
development alternatives in the Blue-Main Nile; (ii) identification of a regional Anchor 
Project, taking into account engineering, economic, social and environment 
considerations, including reservoir filling and operating rule studies to optimize system 
benefits and best manage related risks; (iii) identification of potential nationally-
implemented JMP1 Non-Anchor Projects, including irrigation modernization & 
development and watershed management centered on agricultural productivity and 
livelihoods improvement and watershed sustainability as well as floodplain management; 
(iv) a roadmap for preparation of the first set of investment projects under JMP1; and (v) 
increased capacity of the ENTRO and related agencies in the three countries for  
preparation of the JMP1 investment projects and other work related to their mandates.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project Components:  The Project will include two components: (i) JMP1 Identification 
Studies; and (ii) Capacity-Building and Implementation Support. It will build on the 
previous studies and analytical work, and be coordinated closely with other related 
studies as described below.  
 
Component 1 - JMP1 Identification Studies:  
 
Sub-component 1.1 - Information/Knowledge Base Enhancement:  There are identified 
gaps in the present knowledge and information base pertaining to the development of the 
Eastern Nile Basin. This sub-component aims to bridge the information and knowledge 
gaps to the extent needed to allow confident assessments of decisions on development 
alternatives, and adequate studies for identifying the first priority set of investments. This 
work will build upon the EN "One System Inventory" (OSI), and will be coordinated 
with modeling and information management activities planned under the NBTF-funded 
ongoing Eastern Nile Planning Model (ENPM) and the Nile Basin Water Resources 
Planning and Management Project (particularly the Nile Decision Support System (Nile-
DSS) Component), which include development of databases and analytical tools for the 
Eastern Nile and overall Nile basins.  
 
Sub-component 1.2 - JMP1 Identification Studies:  These studies will build on the 
related analytical work listed in Annex 1. They are intended to: (i) carry out strategic 
assessment of water resources development alternatives (in the form of a Strategic Social 
and Environmental Assessment (SSEA); (ii) identify the optimum cascade development 
scenario and first priority project, and subsequently define an Anchor Project; and (iii) 
identify the Non-Anchor Projects, including high-priority irrigation, watershed and 
floodplain management interventions in the Eastern Nile.  
 
1.2.i. The Strategic Social and Environmental Assessment (SSEA) will be a 
participatory assessment of the environmental and social issues associated with various 
development options, to allow for informed and transparent decision-making in 
identification and selection of investments for water resources development. It will 
inform two key decision making points: (i) strategic analysis of different development 
Page  3
alternatives for water resources development of Blue-Main Nile, namely, "no JMP" 
(continued unilateral development), many small dams on Blue Nile tributaries and one or 
more major multipurpose dam(s) on the Blue Nile main-stem, on the basis of the JMP 
Launch Phase studies; and (ii) the identification/selection of a Cascade Development 
Option. Accordingly, the SSEA will be conducted in two distinct and consecutive phases, 
in close consultation with key stakeholders in Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. In addition to 
safeguards assessment and impact mitigation measures, the SSEA will be guided by the 
regional long-term socio-economic development and poverty reduction goals, and 
explore options and mechanisms for benefit-sharing among countries and local 
communities in the basin. The SSEA is designed to inform, and be complemented by, a 
series of project-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESAs), detailed 
resettlement actions plans, and other safeguards instruments. The project-specific ESAs 
as part of investment project design would need to move beyond impact mitigation and 
help identify ways of inclusive development of communities in the project areas, 
although these assessments are outside the scope of JMP1 ID.  Independent reviewers 
would advise ENTRO and the Consultant throughout the SSEA. The results of the first 
phase will then serve as an input to the Cascade Development and Sequencing Study.  
 
1.2.ii. Anchor Project Identification Studies have four parts: (a) cascade and 
development sequencing study; (b) identification of critical hotspot watershed 
interventions; (c) economic and financial analysis of the Anchor Project; and (d) defining 
the Anchor Project. The studies are intended to identify the optimum cascade 
development scenario for integrated regional water resources management providing a 
high degree of regulation of Blue Nile flows, water loss reduction, drought mitigation, 
flood alleviation along the Blue-Main Nile and reliable energy generation. Subsequently 
the studies will identify the first priority project through a sequencing study on the basis 
of techno-economic comparison of individual projects, under the constraints of power 
generation requirements and acceptable downstream impacts. The studies will be closely 
coordinated with the Norway-supported site-specific feasibility studies to be 
implemented by the Ministry of Water Resources, Ethiopia.  
 
1.2.iii. Non-Anchor Projects Identification Studies will include an irrigation 
development and modernization study, and watershed and floodplain management 
studies, building on the Cooperative Regional Assessments (CRAs) for irrigation and 
watershed management and the EN Flood Preparedness and Early Warning Project 
studies, among others. The irrigation studies are intended to: (a) develop good practice 
for designing modern water-efficient irrigation system; (b) identify priority irrigation 
schemes in the region for inclusion under JMP1 for national investments; and (c) identify 
the areas of recession agriculture to be impacted by the first priority multipurpose project 
and the likely costs of mitigation measures. The watershed management study is to 
identify: (a) the most critical "hotspot" watersheds, from a larger area requiring watershed 
interventions recommended by the CRA, through delineating micro-watersheds within 
the broadly identified critical hotspots, for inclusion in the Anchor Project; and (b) the 
remaining areas requiring watershed interventions, for national government interventions. 
The floodplain management study is to identify: (a) areas prone to flooding and bank 
erosion downstream of the Anchor Project, for possible inclusion in the Anchor Project or 
Page  4
national investments under JMP1; and (b) impact of Anchor Project operation on 
downstream flooding, for factoring the impact into Anchor Project definition.  
 
Sub-component 1.3- Special Studies.  These studies will be undertaken on need basis, 
and will likely include, among others: (i) studies of water saving measures to minimize 
system water losses; (ii) socio-economic studies on recession agriculture along the Blue 
Nile in Sudan. This will be coordinated with the on-going Bank-executed EN Strategic 
Economic Assessment as part of the EN Strategic Basin Assessment to ensure both direct 
and indirect benefits and costs are accounted for to the extent practical; and (iii) studies 
on financing and institutional arrangements for the Anchor Project.  Upon completion of 
the SSEA, additional studies on benefit sharing mechanisms may be pursued.  
 
Component 2 - Capacity Building and Implementation Support  
 
Sub-component 2.1 -Regional Consultation and Information Sharing:   During the JMP 
Launch Phase, broad consultations with key stakeholder took place at different levels. In 
the JMP1 Identification Phase, the geographic/spatial focus will be more specific. The 
Project will identify, in more refined and concrete ways, key stakeholders, develop 
consultation strategies, information sharing mechanisms and instruments, and will 
incorporate consultative activities and information-sharing into the implementation 
program. The main output for this sub-component is a well-implemented Stakeholder 
Involvement and Communication Strategy with clear objectives, target audiences, 
timelines, organizational arrangements and activities.  
 
Sub-component 2.2 - Project Management and Capacity-Building:   This sub-
component seeks to strengthen the capacity of ENTRO and related agencies from the 
three countries involved in the project. To successfully complete JMP 1 Identification 
and to prepare for subsequent investments, ENTRO needs to strengthen its technical and 
management capacity, and requires a dedicated multi-disciplinary project team including 
a
regional project coordinator and technical, economics, social, environmental, 
communication, procurement, financial management and financing specialists. The 
ENTRO and country teams will be directly involved in the project implementation and on 
the job training. Additional training will be organized for ENTRO and three countries on 
different aspects of project planning and preparation including social and environmental 
assessment and management.  
 
Sub-component 2.3 - Development of a Roadmap for the Preparation of the JMP1  
 
Investment Project(s): This will include a recommended approach, process, time 
schedule, financing options, and implementation modalities and arrangements for 
preparation. Detailed financing and institutional options will be developed to provide 
sufficient information for potential bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors and private 
investors eventually considering financial assistance or investment in JMP1.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Eastern Nile Basin, including Ethiopia, Egypt and Sudan. 
The region is characterized with tremendous poverty and underdevelopment, while there 
is huge potential for cooperative development of shared water resources. Until the present 
time, uncoordinated unilateral development has led to loss of development opportunities 
and enormous damages, and put the basin's natural resources and populations at risk.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTEN) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This recipient-executed technical assistance, which does not include any investments, is 
not expected to have any adverse environmental or social impacts. Environmental 
considerations will be an integrated part of the identification studies, therefore OP 4.01 is 
triggered. The technical assistance will help build the capacity of ENTRO and related 
agencies in the three countries to better manage environmental and social issues in water 
resources planning and development.  
 
A
"Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards" was developed under 
the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project, and first disclosed as its safeguards 
instrument on April 11, 2008 in the Eastern Nile, and in the InfoShop on April 23, 2008. 
This document is applicable to all technical assistance projects that fall under NBI, such 
as JMP 1 ID.  Thus the Strategy will be disclosed again as the primary safeguards 
instrument for JMP 1 ID in the three participating countries and in the InfoShop.  
 
While OP 7.50 is triggered by JMP1 ID, it is exempt from OP 7.50 notification 
requirements under paragraph 7.b, as the work is upstream in nature and does not include 
engineering studies.  However, given the importance and visibility of the JMP, and in 
Page  6
alignment with NBI information sharing policies, ENTRO will be strongly encouraged to 
distribute project information describing the JMP1 Identification technical assistance 
project and associated studies. In keeping with best practice, this may be accomplished 
through a letter and associated project profile distributed to all Nile riparians by the NBI 
Secretariat. Alternatively, as customary practice, a project profile for the JMP1 
Identification studies may also be minuted at a Nile-COM meeting.  
 
OP 4.37 is not triggered because the JMP1 ID is a technical assistance operation of a 
very upstream nature and, directly it does not support any dam, nor does it include the 
design of any dam.  However, the JMP1 ID is part of a process that may identify a future 
multipurpose dam investment on the Blue Nile. As such, in the spirit of OP 4.37, JMP1 
ID provides for independent review of key outputs of the JMP1 ID Study.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
key safeguards measure for the JMP1 ID will be the preparation during project 
implementation of the Strategic Social & Environmental Assessment (SSEA).  The SSEA 
will broadly examine, in an integrated manner, the linkages and cumulative impacts of 
potential scenarios on physical, biological, socio-economic and cultural issues.  In 
addition to safeguards assessment and impact mitigation measures, the SSEA will also 
outline mechanisms and options for benefit-sharing among countries and local 
communities in the basin.  The SSEA is designed to inform, and be complemented by, a 
series of project-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESAs), detailed 
resettlement actions plans, and other safeguards instruments, although these assessments 
are outside the scope of JMP1 ID.  
 
Key safeguard issues, such as natural habitats, pest management, physical cultural 
resources, involuntary resettlement and dam safety would be broadly addressed as part of 
the SSEA process.  Multi level consultations and disclosure will be supported through 
implementation of a Stakeholder Involvement and Communication Plan.  
 
The ToRs for the SSEA will be disclosed before appraisal.  In addition, ENTRO will 
publicly disclose executive summaries of final key technical reports and the SSEA 
reports in English. Summaries of key technical reports and of SSEA reports will be 
translated into local languages (i.e. Arabic and Amharic) before disclosure.  
 
The NBI Institutional Strengthening Project will support the development of a Nile 
safeguards framework that will set the ground rules for investment operations in the Nile 
Basin.  A draft framework is expected before May, 2010.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The SSEA would also include in connection with the Cascade Development Study an 
examination of the environmental and social impacts of alternative power and energy 
development to a JMP investment, such as thermal and renewable options, taking into 
account of the results of the Eastern Nile Power Trade Study.   
Page  7
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
JMP1 ID is to be managed by the Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO), 
which has in place the basic capacity for management of such projects. There are no main 
concerns regarding environmental and social safeguards in the proposed technical 
assistance as it does not involve any physical interventions. ENTRO's capacity, when 
augmented with the proposed international consultant support, is considered adequate for 
managing the environmental and social aspects of the JMP1 ID.  
 
The SSEA will assess the institutional capacities in the three EN countries with regard 
to implementation of environmental and social safeguards. The assessment and analysis 
will draw on previous similar assessments carried out, and will focus on assessing 
capacity both for policy formation and for implementation. The analysis will specifically 
recommend capacity building activities focusing on identified gaps for each institution. 
The SSEA will also assess the current policies and laws on environment and social 
safeguards and comment on any inadequacies therein.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
ENTRO has developed a "Stakeholder Involvement and Communication Strategy" for 
JMP1 identification, building on the successful experiences and lessons learnt from the 
JMP Launch Phase. This strategy is going to be converted to a stakeholder involvement 
and communication program before the start of the main identification study to ensure 
effective participation of key stakeholders and information-sharing with the stakeholders 
concerned and general public. The program to be synchronized with consultants' work 
schedules will specify the timing, channels, methods and multi-layer stakeholders for 
different consultative, information-sharing and disclosure activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/23/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  9
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xiaokai Li 
06/12/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
06/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
06/15/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ashok K. Subramanian 
06/12/2009 
Comments:   
