Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/23/2009 
Report No.:  AC4265
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P112456 
Project Name:  Regional Trade Facilitation Project II 
Task Team Leader:  Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2010 
Managing Unit:  AFTFE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (33%);Trade facilitation and market access (33%);Export 
development and competitiveness (17%);International financial architecture (17%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
59.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
African Development Bank 
27.50
27.50 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program Development Objective (PDO) remains unchanged from RTFP I and that is 
to facilitate private sector-led trade flows, investment and productive activities for 
African member states through the provision of insurance, coinsurance, reinsurance, 
financial instruments and related services. The key results expected include: (i) Increased 
trade in and for member countries; (ii) Increased investment in participating countries; 
and (iii) Increased private participation through reinsurance and co-insurance 
partnerships with private and public insurers.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Regional Trade Facilitation Project (RTFP I) under which the Africa Trade Insurance 
Agency (ATI) was created as the Implementing Agency, was presented to the World 
Bank Board on April 3, 2001.  The project initially consisted of seven member countries 
(Malawi, Zambia, Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania), one regional 
economic community or REC (COMESA) and three private sector businesses (PT Bank, 
Zep RE and Atradius).  Since its inception, RTFP I was expanded to include five new 
members: DRC, Madagascar, Eritrea, Sudan and Djibouti.  Liberia has been accepted as a 
Page  2
member but has yet to sign the ATI Treaty.  There is substantial interest from other IDA 
and IBRD countries, regional economic communities, and the private sector, which have 
been the driving force to develop a second phase for the project, RTFP II.  
 
The regional insurance facility (the Facility) that is already managed by ATI will 
expand to include an additional 5-9 countries including Angola, Mozambique, Mauritius, 
Seychelles, Ghana, Cameroon, Benin, Mali and, Nigeria that have initiated discussions 
with IDA and ATI about joining. In addition, the project will provide financing for five 
countries, including Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Eritrea, Liberia and 
Madagascar that are already members of ATI, having signed the treaty, but either do not 
have sufficient capital or completely lack capital to facilitate new transactions.  These 
countries and others will be going to Board at different times over the IDA15 period in a 
horizontal APL series. The horizontal APL instrument was designed to allow countries to 
join when they are ready. The equity capital that is purchased by its members will 
underpin ATI’s operations to offer a broad line of products which have been requested by 
the private market, including comprehensive cover which was found to be a prerequisite 
to increase trade flows in Africa for most of the traders, suppliers, financiers or trading 
partners.  ATI will cover commercial risk only when it has access the reliable financial 
information on the company involved, and its staff has the necessary underwriting skills.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be centrally managed at ATI Headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya. At the 
same time, in order to facilitate marking efforts and business development, field offices 
have been opened in Uganda and Zambia. Additional field offices are planned. Insurance 
for trade facilitation will be provided in the countries that have joined and have been 
capitalized, and where the transactions occur.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
RTFP II proposes giving IDA credits to the prospective member states (once they are 
deemed ready) for the sole purpose of acquiring equity capital in ATI.  ATI, as the 
implementing agency of the insurance scheme, is treated as a financially intermediary for 
Safeguards purposes, and RTFP II is a Category FI.  The trade transactions or 
investments that ATI will insure as a result of the Project are demand-driven and not yet 
known.  ATI was required by the first project (RTFP) to establish a mechanism for 
assessing and managing environmental and social risk for transactions that it insures.  It 
did so by preparing an Environment Operations Manual, and arranged to contract for 
expertise to implement the requirements and procedures established by the Environment 
Operations Manual in a manner consistent with WBG policies and guidelines.  It will 
continue to do so in the new Project (RTFP II). Currently, about half of the transactions 
that ATI has insured are short-term whole turnover import/export credit risk transactions.  
ATI’sbusiness projections are that the share of business over the next 2 years will move 
toward about 70% of all insured transactions in the category of short-term whole turnover 
import/export credit risk.   Most of the transactions insured to date are relatively low risk 
Category B projects, or Category C projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
ATI’s Operations Manual includes an Environment Operations Manual (EOM) as an 
annex.  An Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist was recruited on a retainer 
basis to provide the necessary technical support to ATI Staff in evaluating a sub-project’s 
Safeguard compliance and implementing the procedures required by the Environment 
Operations Manual.  
 
In preparation of this project, a review was conducted to assess how ATI has made use 
of the Environment Operations Manual in managing the environmental and social risks of 
its business, identify what lessons can be drawn from the experience to date, and identify 
improvements, if any, that can be made to ATI’s approach to managing environmental 
and social risk.  Currently, about half of the transactions that ATI has insured under 
RTFP I are short-term whole turnover import/export credit risk transactions. ATI’s 
business projections are that the share ofbusiness over the next 2 years will move toward 
Page  4
about 70% of all insured transactions in the category of short-term whole turnover 
import/export credit risk.  A review of representative projects insured by ATI under 
RTFP I, and discussions with key staff from ATI and their consultants on retainer, 
indicate that ATI has carefully considered environmental and social risk in a manner 
consistent with Bank Safeguard polices and guidelines.  If the Bank or the IFC, or one of 
the commercial banks that applies the IFC Safeguards Policies (i.e., one of the banks that 
has adopted the Equator Principles) is involved, ATI relies on environmental and social 
due diligence by the other institution, i.e., the IFC or that of the Equator Bank. This 
“piggy-back” approach by ATI is reasonable since most of the projects insured to date are 
relatively low risk Category B projects, or Category C projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
ATI’s Environment Operations Manual establishes a framework to evaluate and manage 
Safeguard risks, including consultation and disclosure, in a manner commensurate to the 
risks and in accordance with WBG policy and guidelines.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/15/2000 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/17/2000 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/18/2000 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
04/07/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen 
04/08/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gerardo M. Corrochano 
04/17/2009 
Comments:   
