Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3307 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P108368 
Project Name: Central Africa Backbone 
Task Team Leader: Yann Burtin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Central Africa Backbone (CAB) Program and CAB 1, 2 and 3 
Projects is to support population, businesses and governments across the Central Africa region to 
have access to quality and affordable ICT services on open, transparent and non-discriminatory 
terms. The benefits accrued in the targeted countries spill over the Central Africa region by:(i) 
lower cost of international broadband capacity and extend reach of backbone networks across the 
region and (ii) improve Government efficiency and transparency through eGovernment 
applications; and (iii) increase country and regional competitiveness.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To maximize flexibility, client-responsiveness and the specific national situation of each country 
(in terms of existing infrastructure or policy environment), the CAB Program will include a 
customizable components and sub-components drawn from the following focused areas:  
 
Component 1 - Enabling environment at the regional and national levels  
Page  2
-
Modernize and harmonize legal and regulatory framework the Information Communication 
Technology (ICT) sector and the Information Society  
 
-
Strengthen capacity of public key stakeholders (i.e. Ministry and independent regulatory 
agency)  
 
-
Promote a pro-competitive environment (i.e. develop regulatory tools, liberalize the telecom 
sector, restructure and privatize public incumbent operators, PPP promotion) to maximize benefit 
from the regional backbone  
 
-
Strengthen M&E capacity.  
 
Component 2 - Connectivity:  
 
-
Finance the national infrastructure for the CAB including fiber-optic cables, terminal 
equipments, switches, to guarantee the establishment of an open access networks (to all 
operators) on the basis of PPPs, leveraging private sector investment  
 
-
Finance the purchase of capacity on the CAB  to assist rural and underserved areas, as well as 
targeted users (schools, universities, hospitals eGovernment use) with discounted capacity prices  
 
-
Finance the establishment of government Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) to collect all the 
government communication needs (voice and data) to be routed via the CAB and the 
establishment of national and regional Internet Exchange Point (IXP)  
 
-
Support to extend ICT in rural areas on the basis of PPPs with competitive award of subsidies 
(including country-specific innovative demand stimulation programs such as Digital Villages and 
the SMS eService programs).  
 
Component 3 - Good Governance and Transparency - Flagship IT applications:  
 
-
Deploy flagship applications for which country champion and commitment have been 
identified to improve internal systems, deliver services more efficiently and effectively, and 
make information & services more accessible to the population. Applications that could be 
targeted are: customs systems, income taxes, social security benefits, personal documents 
(passport, driving license), car registration, building license, birth and marriage certificates, 
electronic payment (for utilities). The applications will be prioritized as follow: (i) activities that 
will have the greatest impact in terms of transparency and accountability; (ii) activity for which a 
champion and commitment has been identified; (iii) involvement of local communities, NGOs or 
local units of international agencies; (iv) possibility of private sector participation; (v) high 
potential of success with implementation and payback within a few years.  
 
The proposed operation involves three counties (Cameroon, CAR and Chad) in Phase 1 (for an 
estimated total IDA amount of USD45m), and up to eight other countries likely to join in 
subsequent phases (for a total amount of USD160m).  
 
The ISDS deals only with the first phase of the program (CAB Phase 1).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
CAB Phase 1 will involve the participation of up to three countries (Cameroon, Car and Chad). 
The choice of countries in CAB Phase 1 is based on a combination of factors including a credible 
national commitment to reform with a clear timetable, geographic proximity and interest in 
deploying the regional cable project.  
 
Page  3
The ISDS deals only with the first phase of the Program.   
 
E.  Bo
rrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Expert Commission comprising telecom sector ministry representatives from Chad, 
Cameroon, and CAR, the CEMAC, the WB and the AfDB will oversee all preparatory studies 
(including the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF)).  
 
The CEMAC Commission will be responsible for managing the preparation study (including 
ESMF and EMP) and has been involved with the environmental and social for the "CEMAC - 
Transport-Transit Facilitation Project"(P079736).  
 
During preparation, the project team will assess the capacity of all constituancies (Sector 
Ministries and CEMAC).  
 
The Private entity selected (Public Private Partnership) will build and operate the backbone 
infrastructure.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Ms Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The physical component of the CAB Program will be limited to the building of national 
terrestrial backbones and the deployment of rural networks (land acquisition for the construction 
of telecommunications and ancillary infrastructure, such as ducts for laying fibers optic networks 
or access roads). The project will therefore be under Environmental category B (OP 4.01).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
This will be assessed to confirm that there will be no construction/excavation activities inside 
protected areas   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
If significant excavation is anticipated for installation of the backbone, this OP should be 
triggered. The EMF should assess the risk and define procedures if necessary.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The building of national terrestrial backbones and the deployment of rural networks under 
Component 2 of CAB Phase 1 Project will lead to new land acquisition for terrestrial facilities 
and ancillary infrastructure (such as ducts for laying fibers optic networks or access roads) 
trigger OP 4.12 . However the specific impacts resulting from planned land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement, and their locations have not yet been identified.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/18/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be conducted for the CAB program prior to Project appraisal. The 
ESMF and RPF will be reviewed by the World Bank and publicly disclosed in all countries 
participating in CAB Phase1. A specific Environmental, Management Plan and Resettlement 
Action Plan will be prepared as necessary for terrestrial facilities during project 
implementation, in line with ESMF and RFP, once the locations of those facilities have been 
identified.  
 
The environmental and social Assessment will be prepared by June, 2008.  
 
Civil works for the first 12-18 month of project implementation should be screened for 
environmental and social impacts and  EAs / EMPs  needed for those sites should be ready 
for disclosure (along with the draft ESMF) before appraisal.  
 
Finally, since the Program will involve PPP schemes, appropriate  technical clauses will be 
prepared and included in the biddings/bindings documents for the Private Entity when 
necessary, to ensure the execution  of agreed environmental and social safeguards measures 
or instruments.  
 
All safeguards instruments prepared for the project  should be disclosed  120 before Board 
presentation.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yann Burtin 
03/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
03/06/2008 
Comments:   
