Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3863
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P106369 
Project Name:  Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP)  - Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Laurent Besancon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 25, 2008 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);Regional integration (P);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
24.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To contribute to lower prices for international capacity and to extend the geographic 
reach of broadband networks   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 - Enabling environment - Strenghthening the implementation of the Client 
and feasibility studies to prepare implementation of Component 2  
 
Component 2 - Connectivity Component - International telecommunications capacity 
connectivity to link Rwanda to submarine cables landing in East Africa and local 
broadband access for Rwandese institutions  
 
Page  2
Component 3 - Project Management Capability   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project is part of a regional program and is by nature regional.  The project location 
for this phase will be Rwanda. Under the revised and agreed design of the RCIPRW, the 
actual physical components of this project will be limited and comprise (a) the building 
of wireless networks using existing fixed infrastructure (b) indirect financing for the 
laying of some fiber-optic cable and, (c) support for the establishment of a third-party 
virtual landing station in Kigali (a building which houses telecommunications equipment 
and is aimed as a point of interconnection between networks).  The risks associated with 
this kind of infrastructure are generally low, and the project is therefore assigned to 
environmental category B under OP 4.01. Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities would 
only be required in the case of the virtual landing station and would be acquired by the 
entity in charge of operating that facility (not the Government).  This facility is likely to 
be an existing telecom-related building and is therefore not likely to trigger OP 4.12 
Involuntary Resettlement considerations.  The laying of fiber optic will make use of 
existing infrastructure including existing electricity networks and rail roads rights of way 
on existing main roads.  It is therefore assessed that OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) and 
OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) are not triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1- No adverse environmental or social impact is expected from the use of wireless 
networks.  
 
2-
The laying of fiber optic (indirectly financed by the project) will make use of existing 
infrastructure including existing electricity networks and rail roads rights of way on 
Page  3
existing main roads. The risks associated with this kind of infrastructure are generally 
low.  
 
3-
Land acquisition for terrestrial facilities would only be required in the case of the 
virtual landing station and would be acquired by the entity in charge of operating that 
facility (not the Government).  This facility is likely to be an existing telecom-related 
building and is therefore not likely to trigger OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement 
considerations. The tender under this activity will trigger an assessment as to whether the 
implementation of the RPF need to be activated. If so, a Ressettlement Action Plan will 
be formulated and the relevant recommandations of the RPF will apply in full.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
1
-
Indirect Financing of fiber optic - In the unlikely event that OP 4.12 could be 
triggered, a Ressetlement Policy Framework has been developed. Each tender under this 
activity will trigger an assessment as to whether the implementation of the RPF need to 
be activated. If so, a Ressettlement Action Plan will be formulated and the relevant 
recommandations of the RPF will apply in full. Similarly, an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework has been preparaed. Each tender under this activity will trigger 
an assessment as to whether the implementation of the ESMF need to be activated. If so, 
a
Environment Management Plan will be formulated and the relevant recommandations 
of the ESMF will apply in full.  
 
2-
Virtual landing station - The tender under this activity will trigger an assessment as to 
whether the implementation of the RPF need to be activated. If so, a Ressettlement 
Action Plan will be formulated and the relevant recommandations of the RPF will apply 
in full.  
 
We note that an acceptable version of the ESMF and RPF has been adopted and publicly 
disclosed.  Comments received will need to be incorporated and the final version of the 
two documents disclosed again no later than 3 months after effectiveness of the project. 
No works will be carried out until then.  
 
A
budget line has been inserted in the cost table of the project to allow sound 
implementation of both the ESMF and RPF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Rwanda Information Technology Authority (RITA) is the implementing entity for 
the project and has produced and disclosed the ESMF and RPF after consultation with the 
Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA). The documents were diclosed in 
both English and French in-coutry and in Infoshop.   
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/26/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/30/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/26/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
Page  5
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Besancon 
09/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
09/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
09/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Philippe Dongier 
09/02/2008 
Comments:   
