Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2009 
Report No.:  AC4050
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P100203 
Project Name:  African Rift Geothermal Development Program (ARGeo) 
Task Team Leader:  Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (67%);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
13.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
4.75
4.75 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Program’s development objective is to accelerate the development and utilization of 
geothermal resources in the Rift Valley as a pathway to low carbon development in the 
region. The Program’s global objective is to facilitate reductionof the growth rate of 
GHG emissions in the region through geothermal energy development to produce 
electricity.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Risk Mitigation Facility (RMF): The RMF will provide a financial 
instrument to mitigate the most critical risk element of geothermal energy development, 
the exploration and drilling risks.  
 
Component 2: The Technical Assistance Facility (TAF):  This component will primarily 
offer support to address and mitigate the capacity constraints of participating client 
countries and local utility project sponsors to proceed in the post-drilling stage.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The study area is situated in the Assal Rift, the northernmost extension of the East 
African Rift System. The Assal Rift is an active spreading zone, with an impressive 
accumulation of basaltic magma, and seismically active although large earthquakes are 
not common. The geology is characterized by flat lying lava flows which generally erupt 
through vents on an open fissure (Hawaiian eruption). The active volcanic area is 
traversed by the graben of the active spreading rift. The large faults of the rift run from 
the Gulf of Ghoubbet El Kharab in a north-westerly direction to Lake Assal.  
 
The project area is a rough terrain, covered by basaltic lavas, and sporadic lake 
sediments. No actual soil cover is found, and vegetation is limited to thorn bushes, few 
and far between. The area is bound in the south-east by the Ghoubbet El Khalab, Lake 
Assal in the north-west, and by high fault escarpments in south-west and north-east. The 
area is very dry and hot, temperature reaching 50Â°C during the hottest period. Rain is 
negligible and surface run-off therefore limited to short periods, measured in hours. There 
is no fresh surface water in the area. The ground water of the Fiale area is believed to be 
seawater that flows from the bay of Ghoubbet El Kharab to Lake Assal. The drop in 
water level is approximately 150 m and the flow is roughly estimated to be 5,000-8,000 
l/s. Approximately 30-60 l/s of seawater will be taken for drilling from a shallow well 
north east of Lava Lake which is estimated to be an insignificant amount of the total 
ground water flow through the Fiale area.  
 
The vegetation at the proposed drilling sites in the Fiale area is rather drear as the region 
is dry and in many areas covered with lava. During a field survey in early April, 2008 it 
was observed that the vegetation is made up primarily of scattered steppe herbs, acacia 
shrubs and occasional palm trees often in connection with geothermal manifestations.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTEN) 
Ms Heike Lingertat (AFTEG) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The impacts of the proposed project are mainly insignificant or moderate negative on the 
physical and biological environment. The impacts on the socio and cultural environment 
are generally positive or uncertain.  
 
Inaccuracies in understanding the local hydrogeology and improperly installed wells of 
open loop systems can be a path for surface water run-off that carries organic materials 
and other contaminants into underlying aquifers. Improperly handled drilling and well 
testing might lead to contamination of the ground water and potential impact on the Lake 
Assal. In addition, aquifers can be depleted if the water is not re-injected (in particular the 
relationship between freshwater and geothermal horizons). Blowouts can pollute surface 
water; during drilling or flow tests undesirable gases may be discharged into the 
atmosphere.  
 
Reservoir confirmation drilling or re-injection well drilling operations will require 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The ESMF of the overall ARGeo Program 
and the EMP of the first subproject have been prepared, discussed with the stakeholders 
and disclosed locally and in the Infoshop.  
 
Operational Policy on Natural Habitats is triggered due to the proximity of the drilling 
site to Lake Assal. Potential negative impacts of the drilling operation on Lake Assal are 
addressed through implementation of the Environmental Management Plans for drilling 
and well testing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Given the feasibility study confirms sufficient potential of the geothermal reservoir a 
geothermal power plant of 50-150MW will be constructed. The construction and 
operation of a geothermal power plant would be a separate project for which separate 
Safeguards documents would be prepared. Power plant construction activities, if they 
were to occur as part of a separate, future project, would include construction of the 
power plant facility and associated infrastructure, including cooling towers, pipelines, 
and facilities for treatment and reinjection of wastewater and gases. Other activities 
include establishment of settling ponds to support drilling and well testing, and 
construction of access roads, storage yards, and maintenance facilities. Geothermal fluids 
typically contain a number of dissolved metals and gases. Wastewater effluents and gases 
are typically re-injected into the reservoir or its periphery to minimize the potential for 
groundwater contamination. Construction of settling / cooling ponds with lagoon covers 
to capture and scrub gases is sometimes necessary for circumstances in which the 
reinjection of wastewater fluids and gases is not possible.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The drill sites are chosen after carefully considering the location of drilling targets, the 
possibility to exploit any successful well if the feasibility study leads to the development 
of a power plant, and how the site will best be restored if the prospect is not deemed 
suitable for development.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The recipient project sponsor, REI, is an internationally reputable geothermal power 
developer with operating assets in many countries. Its technical and engineering expertise 
are developed through its parent company's 60 years of geothermal operations in Iceland. 
The geological conditions in Iceland are close to the ones in Djibouti, especially with 
respect to the salinity of the geothermal resource and the proximity of a protected lake to 
the drilling site. REI has prepared and EMP which includes a monitoring program of 
discharges from drilling and well testing operations and the period of testing of 
geothermal flows to ensure that these discharges are not adversely affecting the quality of 
the saline groundwater that flows in the direction of Lake Assal. In addition REI is 
working closely with the Djibouti government and its research agency CERD that have 
extensive experience and testing data for the area.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Assal area has not been the site of large population settlements or extensive 
economic activity. It is very hostile for human or animal activities, due to extreme 
weather conditions, lack of water and vegetation. The indigenous inhabitants of the Lake 
Assal region are the Affar herdsmen who bring their stock, mainly goats and camels, 
seasonally to the meager grass land. The main population centers are close to the 
Tadjourah-Lake Assal road junction and by the old road construction camp site at the 
Tadjourah road. The Ministry of Interior has appointed their representative to act as a 
mitigation officer in the Lake Assal area concerning the interests of the local population 
and different projects in order to control and manage the human settlement in the area.  
 
In accordance with the d
raft “Environmental and Social Management Framework forthe 
ARGeo Program” consultations took place based on a draft EMP report on the Assal 
geothermal project. The final version, which addressed the comments received, was 
disclosed locally and in the World Bank Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/05/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2009 
 
Page  5
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  6
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Erik Magnus Fernstrom 
05/01/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul Jonathan Martin 
05/01/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Heike Lingertat 
05/01/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/01/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
05/01/2009 
Comments:   
