Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3645 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/17/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P111432 
Project Name: RCIP3 - Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP) - Phase 
3
Task Team Leader: Laurent Besancon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 20, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (60%);Information technology (20%);General information 
and communications sector (20%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regional integration 
(P);Administrative and civil service reform (S);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
153.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Project development objectives for RCIP 3 are similar to RCIP The RCIP Program, and all 
Projects under RCIP have one to two of the following development objectives, depending of the 
individual Government’s request: (i) contribute to lower the price of international broadband 
capacity and extend the reach of backbone networks across Eastern and Southern Africa and (ii) 
contribute to improved Government efficiency and transparency through eGovernment 
applications   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
TANZANIA COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT (TCIP):  
 
Component 1 – Enabling Environment (US$[17] million): This component will provide support 
in the form of technical assistance (TA) and capacity building in order to (i) accelerate project 
Page  2
implementation (ii) strengthen the policy and regulatory environment and (iii) promote further 
sector reform so as to maximize benefits from access to international capacity.  
 
Component 2 
–
Connectivity (US$[60] million):  This component will support connectivity in 
Tanzania through several subcomponents: (i) Financing for the construction of the submarine 
cable(s) landing station in Tanzania (US$[2-4] million); (ii) Support for pre-purchase of capacity 
on the submarine cable(s) for priority targeted user groups (US$[6-8] million); (iii) Financing for 
equipment for a virtual Government Communications Network (US$[20] million); and (iv) 
Support for the extension of coverage and access to ICT services in rural areas using PPP 
arrangements (US$[30] million).  This component will also cover implementation of 
recommendations stemming from the relevant environmental studies.  
 
Component 3 – eGovernment Applications (US$[13] million):  This component will include 
support for implementation of targeted eGovernment applications such as: (i) eProcurement; (ii) 
Records and Archive Management; and (iii) Quick-Win Mobile (mGovernment) Applications.  
The applications to be supported will be further detailed during project preparation.  
 
Component 4 – Project Management Support (US$[3-5] million):  This componentwill consist 
of support to finance project management related issues, and namely support for (i) a Project 
Coordinator; (ii) a Telecom Specialist/Manager; (iii) an eGovernment Specialist; (iv) an 
Procurement Specialist; (v) an Financial Management Specialist; (vi) a Monitoring & Evaluation 
Specialist; (vii) an Information, Education, and Communications Specialist; (viii) an 
Environmental Specialist; (ix) office equipment; (x) incremental operating costs; and (xi) audits.  
 
MOZAMBIQUE EGOVERNMENT AND COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROJECT (MECIP)  
 
Component 1 – Enabling environment (US$[2] million): This component will provide technical 
capacity building and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to the Ministry of Science 
and Technology (MCT), the Technical Unit for Implementation of the ICT Policy (UTICT), the 
Ministry of Transport and Communication (MTC) and the National Mozambican 
Communications Institute (INCM) and possibly TDM so as to (i) accelerate project 
implementation, (ii) strengthen the policy and regulatory environment and (iii) promote further 
sector reform so as to maximize benefits from access to international capacity.  
 
Component 2 – Connectivity (US$[6] million):  This component will support connectivity in 
Mozambique through several subcomponents: (a) support for equipment and construction of a 
landing station, and for establishment of an Internet Exchange Point (IXP), (b) support for the 
rollout of a national backbone (possible inclusion of extension of backbone to districts and trans-
frontier links), (c) support for purchase of capacity for targeted users (schools, universities, 
hospitals, eGovernment users, other user groups) , (d) support for financing the Governments’ 
communications network (e.g. extension of GovNet or agreed platform todistricts), and (e) 
support for the extension of ICT coverage in rural areas, (f) support for country-specific 
innovative demand-stimulation programs (e.g. community radios, SMS-based services, MICTI, 
etc).  This component will also cover implementation of recommendations stemming from the 
relevant environmental studies.  
 
Component 3 – Transparency – eGovernment Applications (US$[8-23] million):  This 
component will include support for targeted eApplications such as: (a) a Land Information 
Management System, (b) the setup of a Unique Citizen Identity Number (NUIC); (c) an Election 
Information System. The applications to be supported will be further detailed during project 
Page  3
preparation, and chosen according to the following criteria: (i) existence of a champion or 
change agent, (ii) acceptability of PPP approach, (iii) potential for improvement of internal 
efficiency and transparency, (iv) cost-benefit analysis and possibility for quick wins, (v) high 
potential for positive impact for citizens.  
 
Component 4 
–
Project Management Support (US$[2] million):  This component willconsist of 
support to finance project management related issues, and namely support for hiring staff which 
will be found necessary, and which could include (i) a Project Coordinator; (ii) a Lead IT 
architect; (iii) a Procurement Specialist; (iv) a Financial Management Specialist; (v) a 
Monitoring & Evaluation Specialist; (vi) a Communications Specialist; (vii) Environmental 
expertise; (ix) office equipment; (x) incremental operating costs; and (xi) audits.  
 
MALAWI COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT (MCIP)  
 
Component 1 - Enabling Environment: This component will provide technical capacity building 
and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) assistance to the Ministry of Information and Civic 
Education (MICE) and for the Malawi Communications Authority (MACRA) so as to (i) 
accelerate project implementation, (ii) strengthen the policy and regulatory environment and (iii) 
promote further sector reform so as to maximize benefits from access to international capacity.  
 
Component 2 – Connectivity:  This component will support connectivity in Malawithrough 
several subcomponents: (a) support for equipment and construction of a virtual landing station , 
(b) support for the setup of rollout of a national backbone, (c) support for purchase of capacity 
for targeted users , (d) support for financing the Governments’ communications network , and (e) 
support for theextension of ICT coverage in rural areas. This component will also cover 
implementation of recommendations stemming from the relevant environmental studies. It 
should be noted that civil works will be limited to areas such as existing roads or buildings and 
this will not include right of ways clearing nor inhabitated land acquisition.  
 
Component 3 – Transparency – eGovernment Applications:  This component willinclude 
support for targeted eApplications.  
 
Component 4 - Project Management for MCIP:  This component will consist of support to 
finance project management related issues, and namely support for (a) an Executive Secretary, 
(b) a Technical Manager, (c) a Procurement Specialist, (d) a Financial Management Specialist, 
(e) an M&E Specialist, (f) office equipment, (g)  incremental operating costs, (h) audits, and (i) 
environmental specialist expertise.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Tanzania, Mozambique, and Malawi - This project is regional in scope and will focus on reforms 
to government institutions and public-private partnerships throughout the countries of Tanzania, 
Mozambique, and Malawi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At the individual country level, specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities 
during project implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those 
facilities have been identified.  
 
The institutional implementation arrangements are still under discussion.  The capacity of these 
institution will be reviewed and recommendations will be provided during appraisal.   
Page  4
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The risks associated with the kind of infrastructure under consideration are generally low, 
and the Program was therefore assigned to environmental category B under OP 4.01. This also 
applies to the RCIP Tanzania, Mozambique, and Malawi operations.  
 
An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RFP) have been prepared for the overall program and for the countries included in 
the first phase (CIP 1, 2 and 3).  These have been approved and disclosed prior to appraisal of 
RCIP1.  An update of the ESMF and RFP is being carried out so as to also include Tanzania, 
Mozambique and Malawi. Specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities 
during project implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those 
facilities have been identified.  The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various 
safeguards instruments would lay with the implementing agency of each participating country.  
Any specific required action for some of the Civil Works will be taken into account during 
project implementation as part of implementation of the relevant RAP and EMP. Institutional 
responsibilities for implemeting the ESMF and RPF will be defined closely with the Safeguards 
Team.  
 
The team will work in close coordination with (i) the Governments of Tanzania, 
Mozambique, and Malawi, (ii) the World Bank Group units involved, to include the Bank's 
safeguards standards from early on into the project preparation schedule and its activities.  
 
In addition, it is not expected that there will be civil works for the first 12 months of project 
implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
For RCIP3, the consultants that are updating the ESMF (Environmental and Social 
Management Framework) and RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework) prepared for RCIP 1, will 
be asked to assess the triggering or not of OP BP 4.04. If triggered appropriate measures have to 
be designed and included in the ESMF.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
For RCIP3, the consultants that are updating the ESMF (Environmental and Social 
Management Framework) and RPF (Resettlement Policy Framework) prepared for RCIP 1, will 
be asked to assess the triggering or not of OP BP 4.11. If triggered appropriate measures have to 
be designed and included in the ESMF.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquistion for terrestrial facilities (if any) might be needed for virtual landing stations 
as well as national backbone structures. These are likely to be existing telecom-related buildings 
and therefore not likely to require land acquistion. If it is determined that project activities will 
require land acquistion or impact other assets, a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared, 
approved by the World Bank, and implemented prior to initiating civil works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/23/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard Reporting Instrument(s) and Disclosure - An Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) have been 
prepared for the overall program and for the countries included in the first phase (CIP 1, 2 
and 3). These have been approved and disclosed prior to appraisal of RCIP1.  An update of 
the ESMF and RFP is being carried out so as to also include Tanzania, Mozambique, and 
Malawi.  Specific costed Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Resettlement Action 
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as necessary for the terrestrial facilities during project 
implementation, in line with the ESMF and RPF, once the exact locations of those facilities 
have been identified.  The revised ESMF and RPF will be submitted for Bank review and 
publicly disclosed in Tanzania, Mozambique and Malawi and InfoShop prior to appraisal.  
 
The team notes that the above arrangements have worked well for the preparation and early 
implementation of RCIP1 and therefore has not proposed to alter these arrangements for 
RCIP2 and RCIP3.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Besancon 
07/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Deepak T. Bhatia 
07/14/2008 
Comments:   
