Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3214 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P107833 
Project Name: SECONDARY AND LOCAL ROADS 
Task Team Leader: Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(S);Other public sector governance (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
15.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The provisional Project Development Objective is to improve access to essential services and 
economic markets, in the form of reduced user costs, for the resident population in the hinterland 
of the improved secondary and local roads.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project proposes to achieve this objective through the (i) the improvement of priority 
sections of the secondary and local road network across Albania; (ii) the introduction of the 
private sector maintenance contracts for the local road network; (iii) the strengthening of the 
organizations responsible for managing the local road network at Commune level; (iv) the 
consolidation of institutional responsibilities for management and planning in the sector for the 
secondary roads; and (v) recommendations and actions to improve the sustainability of financing 
for the sector.  
 
Two main components are envisioned under the project:  
 
Page  2
(i) 
Rehabilitation and upgrade of priority sections of the secondary and local road network 
across Albania.  
 
(ii) 
Technical assistance aimed at strengthening of the organizations responsible for 
managing the local road network and improving their capacity for planning, financing, 
management and maintenance of local roads.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The secondary and local road sections from across Albania will be selected for rehabilitation and 
improvement under the project on an objective basis, using the World Bank HDM4 and Roads 
Economic Decision (RED) Models, and agreed in a fully participatory approach with the local 
communities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementation will be undertaken by the existing staff of Albanian Development Fund (ADF). 
ADF has been an Implementing Agency for a number of World Bank projects, including the 
Community Works Projects (CW I and CW II), as well as projects funded by other donors, and 
has some of the necessary capacities, although some of the technical skills, such as highway 
engineering, will need to be supplemented during project preparation. World Bank safeguards 
specialists will assess the capacity of ADF during the preparation of the project, for compliance 
with environmental and social safeguards, and if any deficiencies are found, a remedial program 
will be developed to address them.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will involve reconstruction and/or rehabilitation entirely within the right of way, 
but as this will not be known until the entire program is defined, a Environmental Framework 
will be prepared, together with site specific EA and EMP, to mitigate any impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The project will involve reconstruction and/or rehabilitation entirely within the right of way, 
but the selected sections might involve impacts on natural habitats. As this will not be known 
until the entire program is defined, a Environmental Framework will be prepared, together with 
site specific EA and EMP, to mitigate any impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project could, depending on the road sections selected, facilitate an increase in illegal 
logging. The Team will include measures in the Framework document to mitigate this risk.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Whether any of the selected roads impacts on physical cultural resources will not be known 
until the entire program is defined. An Environmental Framework will be prepared to ensure that 
approriate action is implemented at that time.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will involve reconstruction and/or rehabilitation entirely within the right of way, 
but the selected sections might involve impacts on illegal structures and encroachment. As this 
will not be known until the entire program is defined, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be 
prepared to set out policies and procedures to screen subprojects and define subsequent steps to 
be taken, to ensure all subprojects to be supported will comply with the OP4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1. The Borrower will prepare Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and 
Resettlememt Policy Framework (RPF) by the date of the pre-appraisal mission - End 
January 2008;  
 
2. The borrower will have prepared the EMP, where necessary, and undertaken the 
necessary disclosure by Appraisal - April 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
10/23/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/20/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
