Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3467 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P110845 
Project Name: Albania Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project 
Task Team Leader: Alison C. N. Cave 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (100%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.16 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
2.34
3.34 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project for Albania is to 
reduce the vulnerability of the country to natural hazards and reduce human, economic and 
financial losses due to catastrophic events.  This objective will be achieved through: (i) 
strengthening disaster risk management capacities; (ii) increased preparedness and response 
capabilities; (iii) improvements of building code and its enforcement; (iv) catastrophic risk 
insurance; and (v) prompt access to financing of relief and recovery efforts following a major 
disaster.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
It is proposed that the project includes the following components and activities:  
 
Component 1: Disaster Risk Management and Preparedness  
 
The component will support building capacity in emergency response through provision of 
necessary equipment, and strengthening disaster risk mitigation planning.  Following are 
activities proposed to be included in the project:  
 
Page  2
•
Development of the National Disaster Risk Management Strategy and Investment 
Program.  
 
•
Updating the Legislative Framework.  
 
•
Public Awareness and Education.  
 
•
Emergency Response Equipment (e.g., fire engines, personal protective equipment, 
search and rescue tools for specialized response units).  
 
•
Strengthening of Existing Emergency Operations Center (e.g., computers, videodisplays, 
communication equipment, etc.).  
 
•
Feasibility Studies for Establishment of 112 System and Emergency Communications 
System.  
 
•
Development of Emergency Response Procedures.  
 
•
Exercises and Training for First Responders.  
 
Component 2:  Strengthening of Hydro-meteorological Services  
 
The objective of the component is to support disaster risk reduction through provision of 
accurate hydro-meteorological forecasts and services tailored to the needs of disaster risk 
managers in weather-sensitive sectors. It will include the following activities:  
 
•
Increasing accessibility of data (investments in telecom links to assure delivery to Tirana 
data collected at monitoring stations, quality-checking of data, digitization of historical data, 
establishment of a data management system to make present and past data available, and a 
website to make information and forecasts available).  
 
•
Upgrading the monitoring network  (provision of measuring instruments, an upper-air 
sounding station, a satellite dish, a buoy to measure sea conditions)  
 
•
Developing capacity to prepare forecast products tailored to disaster management 
(software, training and computing resources necessary to enhance disaster-related weather 
services).  
 
Component 3: Development and Enforcement of Building Codes  
 
The objective of this component is to reduce seismic risk through development and better 
enforcement of building codes.  The component will support the following activities:  
 
•
Building code development (TA to review building code legislation focusing 
onapplicable earthquake design requirements, and to provide assistance for the adoption of EU 
codes in Albania)  
 
•
Licensing of engineers (development of a system to certify, license and review licenses 
for design and supervision engineers).  
 
•
Training of engineers in new design standards.  
 
Component 4: Catastrophe Insurance  
 
The main objectives of the proposed insurance component of the Loan are three-fold: (i) to 
provide the Albanian homeowners and SMEs with access to affordable and reliable catastrophe 
insurance products that currently do not exist in the local market; (ii) enable the government of 
Albania to reduce its fiscal exposure to natural disasters by transferring its implicit financial 
responsibility for private losses to the private insurance market; (iii) give a boost to the 
development of the Albanian non-life insurance market. The objectives of the component will be 
Page  3
achieved through establishment of the SEE Regional Catastrophe Insurance of which Albania 
will be a shareholder and member.  
 
Component 5: Deferred Drawdown Option  
 
The government has also an option of having access to the contingency funding in a form the 
Catastrophic Risk Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) instrument.  The proposed Cat DDO 
will address the country’s liquidity needs in the aftermath of natural catastrophes. The 
availability of the Cat DDO is contingent upon acceptance of the introduction of the new 
instrument by the Bank Board of Directors which is expected in March 2008. The new 
instrument will serve as a flexible and prompt financial tool to address risks to which the country 
is prone, including natural hazard risks.  The proposed Cat DDO will not be included in the 
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) lending envelope.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Implementation of project activities will take place mostly in Tirana but with the benefits 
spreading throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The project is primarily a technical assistance with limited equipment (components 1-4), and 
does not foresee supporting any civil works for building rehabilitation. As such, the project will 
not trigger any of the Bank Safeguards Policies Therefore, it is proposed to be classified as 
environmental category C.  
 
The TORs for technical assistance will include provisions that any advice provided will be 
consistent with Bank safeguard policies.   
 
Component 5 (Deferred Drawdown Option) is a new Bank instrument in a form of 
Development Policy Lending, covered by OP 8.60 and therefore exempt from the Safeguard 
policies.  
 
If the scope of the level of effort changes during project preparation the project team will 
seek guidance from the safeguards team.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project does not anticipate financing civil works; nor is there going to be retroactive 
application of building codes on existing buildings that may require land take or displacement. 
Thus, OP 4.12 is not triggered. However, as a matter of due diligence, the disaster risk mitigation 
strategy that the Bank helps develop will  identify whether future displacement/resettlement is 
likely to be called for, and if so, should indicate the actions that would be needed to carry this out 
in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Since the proposed project will not trigger any of the Bank Safeguard Policies, no additional 
studies in this area are planned to be carried out during project preparation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alison C. N. Cave 
02/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/04/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
03/05/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
