Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3510
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P107833 
Project Name:  SECONDARY AND LOCAL ROADS 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Martin Humphreys 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(S);Other public sector governance (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 OPEC 
FUND 
15.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to essential services and 
economic markets, via the provision of all weather roads, for the resident population in 
the hinterland of the project roads.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project proposes to achieve this objective through the (i) the improvement of priority 
sections of the secondary (regional) road network across Albania; (ii) the improvement of 
priority sections of the local road network across Albania; (iii) the introduction of the 
private sector in the maintenance of the secondary and local road network; and (iv) 
strengthening of the management of the secondary and local road network.  
 
There will be three main components in the project:  
 
a) 
Component 1 - The civil works associated with the improvement of priority 
sections of the secondary (regional) road network.The component will finance the civil 
works associated with improving selected priority sections of the secondary (regional) 
Page  2
road network. Given the noted poor condition of this network, the interventions under 
this component are expected to be either rehabilitation or reconstruction. Under 
reconstruction, the whole pavement will be rebuilt with new asphalt and the necessary 
sub-layers. For rehabilitation, the works will constitute the construction of a new base 
and the provision of a new asphalt surface, where necessary road safety infrastructure 
will be included as well;  
 
b) 
Component 2 - The civil works associated with the improvement of priority 
sections of the local (commune) road network. The component will finance the civil 
works associated with improving selected priority sections of the local road network. 
Given the noted poor condition of the local road network, the interventions under this 
component are expected to be either rehabilitation or reconstruction. Under 
reconstruction, the whole pavement will be rebuilt with new asphalt and the necessary 
sub-layers. For rehabilitation, the works will constitute of the construction of a new 
granular base and asphalt wearing course, where necessary road safety infrastructure will 
be included as well; and  
 
c) Component 
3 
–
Implementation and Institutional Support. The component will 
finance: (i) the procurement of a firm of international consultants to supervise the civil 
works for the duration of the project; (ii) a technical assistant with a strong background in 
highway engineering for the duration of the project; (iii) Training and operational 
expenditure in the Albanian Development Fund (ADF); (iv) the review of the functional 
classification for all levels of roads, an inventory of the core secondary and local road 
network, the preparation of a strategy and action plan for the development of the 
secondary and local road network, capacity building in the communities to contract and 
undertake maintenance, the establishment of an Asset Management System for secondary 
(regional) and local roads,  and preparation of design and bidding documents for the first 
and second year program; and (v) the preparation of design and bidding documents for 
the remaining project. All activities from point (iv) onwards are being undertaken 
currently by the consultants funded by the Project Preparation Facility (PPF).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will involve the rehabilitation and reconstruction of secondary and local 
roads across Albania.  However, only the first year program is expected to be identified at 
appraisal, with the remaining year program identified during project implementation.  No 
large scale acquisition of private land or demolition of assets is anticipated under the 
Project.  Most civil works to be carried out will be road maintenance within the existing 
Right of Way, but the project will allow works outside the right of way, if undertaken in a 
manner consistent with domestic legislation and safeguard policies of the World Bank.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (ECAVP) 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will carry out the rehabilitation and reconstruction of secondary and local 
roads.  Only the first year program is identified at appraisal and none of the sub-projects 
are expected to cause any major impacts on the environment and are all considered 
Category B. The remaining years program will be identified during project 
implementation. Some sub-projects to be financed in the remaining years program may 
qualify as Category A projects (under the World Bank system) if they trigger World Bank 
policies on natural habitats, cultural property, or forests.  Most sub-projects will likely be 
classified as Category B (under the World Bank system) because they are unlikely to 
cause significant impacts on the environment.  
 
For the first year program, a generic EMP the chief potential environmental issues are 
associated with the construction aspects. These issues include: dust and fumes from 
materials transport (asphalt, sand, gravel etc.), soil erosion, health effects to construction 
workers during construction, land disturbance (construction), water pollution (accidental 
spillage of fuel/lubricants or truck cargo), noise, waste disposal (construction wastes and 
worker household wastes), and chance find of cultural artifacts. All environmental issues 
can be readily mitigated with good engineering design and construction practices.  
 
For the remaining years program, an Environment Safeguards Framework (ESF) has 
been prepared for the project. The ESF will insure future sub projects comply with 
existing laws, regulations and practices in Albania, as well as with the World Bank 
Operation Policies on Environmental Assessment Cultural Property, Natural Habitats, 
and Forestry.  
 
Civil works to be carried out under the Project are expected to be mostly the 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of secondary and local roads within the existing public 
right of way. No major land acquisition is anticipated. First year programs that have 
already been developed are not considered to require any land acquisition. However, the 
public right of way has been significantly encroached upon at many sections of secondary 
Page  4
and local roads, whereby local residents build fences, commercial structures such as 
kiosks and cafes, and vegetables gardens in the ROW. Should a minor expansiton of 
roads or adjustment of alignment prove to be necessary for engineering purposes, such 
structures or vegetable gardens need to be demolished and the encroached land be 
acquired.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The improved road conditions should have positive economic impacts on the local 
residents, making it easier for them to access markets with their produce. There should 
also be reduced travel time and more efficient transport leading to reductions in vehicular 
emissions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared a generic EMP that is acceptable to the World Bank for the 
first year program. This EMP addresses all key issues likely to be identified during 
individual sub-project implementation.  For the remaining years program as indicated 
above an EMF document also acceptable to the World Bank has been prepared. During 
project appraisal the Task Team evaluated the Borrower arrangements to implement 
requirements of the EMF and monitor EMP implementation. The Task Team concluded 
that arrangements made by the Borrower are satisfactory.  
 
Implementation will be undertaken by the existing staff of Albanian Development Fund 
(ADF). ADF has been an Implementing Agency for the World Bank financed 
Community Works Projects (CW I and CW II), as well as projects funded by other 
donors. World Bank safeguards specialists assessed the capacity of ADF during project 
preparation and concluded that it has the necessary capacity, to perform its 
responsibilities defined in the EMF as well as monitoring implementation of sub-project 
EMPs.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed by the ADF that sets out 
policies and procedures to apply when the implementation of a subproject results in the 
acquisition of private land or encroached public right of way, as well as a permanent 
damage to or demolition of private assets. The RPF provides a screening procedure to 
identify subprojects to which OP 4.12 applies and defines subsequent steps to be taken 
should the policy proves to apply. The ADF, together with subproject proponents, will 
prepare a Resettlement Action Plan for a group of subprojects that provides for a detailed 
compensation package for categories of impacts.  The ADF has reviewed the first year 
program and found that no subproject will require acquisition of private land or 
encroached right of way, or demolition of private assets that will trigger OP 4.12.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
For individual sub-projects to be evaluated by the procedures defined in the EMF, the 
responsible Local Government Unit will consult project affected groups and local non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) about the sub-
project’s environmental aspects and 
take their views into account. These requirements are as follows:  
 
Category A:  For Category A sub-projects - public consultation will occur twice: a) after 
environmental screening and before TORs for the EIA are finalized; and b) after the draft 
EIA is prepared, to receive public feedback on the report; and  
 
Category B:  Public consultation will occur on the draft EMP. Findings of the draft 
EMP will be discussed and public views incorporated in the final EMP.  
 
All the documents required for local use and disclosure will be in the Albanian 
language. However, the ADF will provide an Executive Summary in English of the EIA 
and EMP for all Category A sub-projects. ADF will observe and monitor the whole 
process, as appropriate to the level of EA required.  
 
The ADF has disclosed the RPF in its website. Comments that may be provided from 
intersted parties will be considered and incorporated into the RPF if relevant. The ADF 
has a long history of active engagement with local communes and many experienced staff 
in community consultation. The ADF will utilize the existing capacity built during past 
project implementation to ensure the affected community members are sufficiently 
consulted and participate in the planning and implementation of a RAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/13/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/21/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  7
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Martin Humphreys 
03/20/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
03/20/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
03/20/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
03/20/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/21/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
03/21/2008 
Comments:   
