Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/09/2008 
Report No.:  AC3617
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P110845 
Project Name:  Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alison C. N. Cave 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (100%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
3.03 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
6.16 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.01 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
1.01 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of Albania Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adapation Project is to strengthen 
institutional capacities to: (a) reduce Albania’s vulnerability to thenatural and man-made 
hazards; and (b) limit human, economic, and financial losses due to these disasters.   
 
3. Project Description 
The AL-DRMAP is the initial project of the broader regional South Eastern Europe 
Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Program (SEE-DRMAP) framework.  The AL-
DRMAP comprises two phases. The first phase is designed to consolidate and upgrade 
Albania’s capacity to plan for, mitigate and respond to disasters.  This phase will provide 
financing for soft (non-structural) measures consisting of activities and investments that 
will build Government capacity to effectively respond to natural and man-made disasters.  
 
The proposed project will include the following five components and activities:  
 
-- Component 1: Disaster Risk Management and Preparedness (US$4.89 million). The 
component objective is to support capacity building for emergency response mechanism 
Page  2
through provision of necessary equipment, and strengthening disaster risk mitigation 
planning.  
 
-- Component 2:  Strengthening of Hydro-meteorological Services (US$2.09 million). 
The component objective is to support disaster risk reduction through provision of 
accurate hydro-meteorological forecasts and services tailored to the needs of disaster risk 
managers in weather-sensitive sectors.  
 
-- Component 3: Development of Building Codes (US$0.36 million). The component 
objective is to reduce risks from seismic activities through development of improved 
building codes and mechanisms for introduction of improved standards.  
 
-- Component 4: Catastrophe Insurance (US$2.65 million). The component objective is 
provide access to private catastrophe risk insurance to households and small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs).  
 
-- Component 5: Project Management (US$0.19  million). The component will finance 
some project management costs, such as procurement and financial management 
consultants, monitoring and evaluation activities, incremental operating costs of 
managing the project and project reporting and audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The implementation of the project activities will take place mostly in Tirana but with the 
benefits spreading throughout the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The APL1 is technical assistance and will generally procure hydromet equipment and 
emergency vehicles; and will not support any civil works for building rehabilitation. As 
such, the project will not trigger any of the Bank Safeguard policies. Therefore this 
project is classified as a category “C” project.  Overall, the project will not have large 
scale, significant or irreversible impacts. As APL2 activities are defined, which could 
involve civil works, the project team togeher with the project implementation teams will 
define and prepare the appropriate safeguard due diligence documents during the first 
phase.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The terms of reference for technical assistance will include provisions that any advice 
provided will be consistent with Bank safeguard policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  4
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alison C. N. Cave 
05/05/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
05/05/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
05/05/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
05/09/2008 
Comments:   
