Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3962 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/17/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P112242 
Project Name: Privatization of the Electricity Distribution System Operator (OSSH) 
Partial Risk Guarantee 
Task Team Leader: Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 18, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 14, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 IBRD 
Guarantee 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) operation is to facilitate the 
privatization of the Distribution System Operator (DSO) in the context of a new and untested 
regulatory framework, put in place in July 2008, only a few months prior to the privatization, and 
in the absence of a regulatory track record with a private Distribution System Operator and 
current market structure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This operation is expected to be similar to the previous Bank PRG provided for the privatization 
of distribution in Romania. It is proposed that the PRG would backstop the privatized DSO for 
losses of revenue caused by a change or a repeal by the GoA or ERE of, or a non-compliance by 
ERE with, the provisions of the regulatory framework, which result in a loss of revenue to the 
DSO, relating to: (i) the timely approval of tariffs; (ii) the Distribution System Operator and the 
Retail Public Supplier tariff methodologies. These would be defined as the ‘Guaranteed Events’. 
The proposed amount of PRG support is Euro 40-50 million.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Distribution System Operator will operate the electricity distribution system throughout the 
territory of Albania.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Albania is party to the Energy Community treaty. Under this international treaty Albania has 
incorporated the European Union's acquis communautaire related to Directives on the 
environment.  
 
The Distribution System Operator will therefore be subject to Albanian laws and the 
environmental norms under the Energy Community treaty, as incorporated in the Albanian legal 
framework for the environment.  
 
The Ministry of the Environment is responsible for reviewing environmental matters and 
issuing relevant permits.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/23/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No physical works (either rehabilitation, or new investments) will be supported by this World 
Bank Partial Risk Guarantee. Therefore, specific safeguard studies will not be needed for this 
project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Demetrios Papathanasiou 
07/31/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
07/31/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
03/17/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
