Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/06/2008 
Report No.:  AC2792
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  South Eastern Europe and 
Balkans 
Project ID:  P084605 
Project Name:  ALBANIA/MONTENEGRO LAKE SKHODER INTEGRATED 
ECOSYSTEM MANAGE 
Task Team Leader:  Karin Shepardson 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Water resource 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.55 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.74 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
8.57 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
5.90
15.21 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to help establish and strengthen institutional 
mechanisms for transboundary cooperation through joint efforts to improve sustainable 
management of Lake Skadar-Shkoder.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will achieve its objectives through three main components: (i) Capacity 
Building for Improved Understanding and Joint Management of the Lake; (ii) Promoting 
Sustainable Use of the Lake; and (iii) Catalyzing Pollution Reduction Investments. Some 
project-financed activities will be carried out in both countries and some in each country 
but all activities will have lake-wide benefits.  
 
Page  2
Component 1:  Capacity Building for Improved Understanding and Joint Management 
of the Lake (Total: US$3.43 million; GEF: US$1.80 million)  
 
20. 
This component builds capacity to establish and strengthen institutional 
cooperation to operationalize the Bilateral Lake Management Committee. Technical 
working groups will be established to support SAP activities including:  develop a lake-
wide management plan; raise public awareness and conduct public education programs; 
and coordinate tourism planning and marketing. The component will also support 
incremental activities with a transboundary dimension beyond ongoing national-level 
water and ecological monitoring and research on the lake including: (a) create a 
predictive hydrological model of the lake basin; (b) research and monitor to better 
understand impacts of changes in inflowing water quantity and quality; and (c) harmonize 
monitoring on both sides of the lake through a publicly accessible joint database. Under 
this component the project will engage with GEF International Waters Learning 
Exchange and Resource Network IW:LEARN, which includes project promotional 
materials, participation in international workshops, and data exchange. A key output of 
this component will be improved information and coordination for transboundary 
decision-making.  
 
Component 2:  Promoting Sustainable Use of the Lake (Total: US$4.79 million; GEF 
US$1.06 million).  
 
21. 
This component will promote adoption of sustainable approaches to economic 
development of the lake (and its natural resources) by focusing on tourism and fisheries 
where there is high potential for economically significant sustainable use. It will support 
environmentally and socially sustainable tourism by improving nature- and culture-based 
facilities and attractions; raising public awareness; and providing technical assistance to 
local residents considering tourism-based businesses. It will support sustainable fisheries 
management by helping to develop lake-wide stock assessment and fisheries management 
plans and by integrating plan results and recommendations into national plans, 
regulations, and programs. In response to this assessment, the project will provide 
incentives for fishermen to cease illegal fishing methods and help strengthen government 
regulatory and enforcement capacity for fisheries management.  
 
Component 3:  Catalyze Pollution Reduction Investments (Total: US$11.51 million; 
GEF:  US$1.69 million).  
 
22. 
This component will support selected investments to stimulate pollution reduction 
activities: educate and encourage people to replicate demonstration projects of village-
level wastewater treatment and buffer vegetation restoration; and provide TA to catalyze 
remediation of the l
ake’s largest-scale industrial pollution “hotspot.” A demonstration 
pilot project for wastewater treatment, based onconstructed wetlands, is proposed for the 
village of Vranjina in Montenegro, in locations visible along the lake and the main road 
to facilitate education and promote replication. Technical assistance will be provided to 
the Government of Montenegro to prepare for a large-scale remediation investment. The 
government has budgeted an initial â‚¬5.0 million to invest at the site, however the full 
Page  3
costcan be determined only upon completing an inventory, feasibility study, and site 
remediation design. Project TA funds will support an inventory and characterization of 
on-site waste and feasibility study/preliminary design of options study for remediation, 
recycling, and/or disposal. The TA would include an international adviser to assist 
regulatory authorities’ work on the KAP site, and some financial support for an EIA on 
recommended actions from the feasibility study. Restoration of lakeshore buffer 
vegetation to protect against siltation and chemical run-off will be demonstrated in 
Albania. This includes: (a) Restore prioritized lakeside groves (willows and other native 
trees) in erosion-prone areas; (b) Implement stream bank erosion control at one site 
through combined re-vegetation, gabions, and other small infrastructure; and (c) Support 
community-driven vegetation and restoration sites (prioritizing buffer vegetation for fish 
nursery areas   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Lake Skadar-Shkoder, the largest lake on the Balkan peninsula (surface area averages 
475 km2), is located on the border between Montenegro and Albania, south of the 
Dinaric Alps.  The proposed project area consists of the lake and immediately 
surrounding areas.  In Montenegro the entire project area falls within the Lake Skadar 
National park, and in Albania within the Lake Shkoder Managed Nature Reserve.  Water 
quality of the lake is currently good, due in part to economic decline and industrial 
collapse during the 1990s helped to reduce pollution inputs to the lake.  However, 
renewed economic growth in the area threatens to recreate earlier pollution problems 
unless proactive management measures are taken. The lake is an important refuge and 
stopover for migratory birds and has a rich fish fauna, but the area's globally significant 
biodiversity is threatened by over-exploitation (fishing, hunting, tree cutting).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts are expected.  Primary 
impacts would be construction relating to investments in small scale wastewater 
improvements, upgrades to cultural monuments, and construction of park small works 
such as waterfowl monitoring stations, eco-camping facilities and transboundary hiking 
trails.  A small scale wastewater investment along the lake will improve water quality by 
reducing sewage inputs.  Cultural heritage sites will be rehabilitated in coordination with 
the Ministries of Culture.  There is a potential for negative impact on livelihoods 
associated with improving management of the fisheries and by reducing levels of illegal 
(and possibly legal) fishing and increasing areas off-limits to fishing and other uses. A 
process framework has been prepared to address this. The process framework does not 
address resettlement associated with possible demolitions by ongoing government 
programs in accordance with their law. Planning supported under this project only 
addresses natural resources management planning at a regional level which does not 
trigger O.P. 4.12. The project will finance TA and feasibility studies for a contaminated 
land site and and EIA for this which will require close environment supervision.  The 
project hires a technical adviser to help strengthen government’s capacity to work at this 
site.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term negative environmental impacts from project investments are 
expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Resource Access Restriction Process Frameworks have been  prepared by both countries 
to reduce and mitigate any potential negative socio-economic impacts, and a framework 
EIA was prepared to ensure that appropriate EIA is carried out for any on-ground 
investments.  The project includes some basic support (training and equipment) to park 
rangers in both country on improving environmental enforcement since this has been 
recognized as a weak area on capacity.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are communities living within the project area and local authorities.  
More broadly,the international community (given the global significance of the Lake), 
including locally represented NGOs such as the Regional Environment Center and 
Euronatur.  All preparation activities including preparation of the Transboundary 
Page  5
Diagnostic Analysis and Strategic Action Plan have been undertaken with wide 
consultation and resulting documents being made available on the ground and through 
websites. Public consultations on the EIA were held in both countries and minutes of the 
meetings are available.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/11/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  6
credit/loan? 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
03/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
03/09/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/06/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
03/04/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Emilia Battaglini 
03/12/2008 
Comments:  Ms. Battaglini is acting sector manager. 
