Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3354 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/03/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P110481 
Project Name: Energy Community of South East Europe APL Program - APL 5 for 
Albania DAM SAFETY 
Task Team Leader: Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P);Infrastructure services 
for private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.75 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.70 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
7.36 
 Financing 
Gap 
6.99
23.05 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The  development objectives of the project would be to: (i) safeguard the hydroelectric plants of 
Albania; and (ii) improve their operational efficiency within the regional electricity market.  The 
proposed project supports the development of the Energy Community in accordance with the 
objectives of the Energy Community APL.  
 
The project’s main impact would be to prevent a possible catastrophe resulting from a dam 
failure.  Such a catastrophe could result in significant loss of life and damage to property of 
persons living in downstream areas.  It would also cause a major and prolonged fall in 
hydropower production that would severely affect the entire population of Albania.  
 
In addition, the project would assist Albania to maximize its benefits from existing hydropower 
by improving operational practices of existing facilities and enabling more effective participation 
in the regional electricity market. The project will also promote private sector investment in 
hydropower by making available better data and studies on the country’s potential.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would consists of two main components: (a) physical infrastructure investments; and 
(b) technical assistance.  
 
The 2006 Dam Safety Survey recommended a number of investments to improve dam safety 
and operation and categorized them into: (i) high priority (Euro 28m);  and (ii) conditional high 
priority (Euro 153m) measures.  The project would finance the high priority investments, which 
are the most precisely defined and need relatively little further study .  These investments include 
civil works to rehabilitate and ensure the proper functioning of spillways, dredging of canal 
ways, rehabilitate access ways and bridges, instrumentation and monitoring equipment.The 
detailed feasibility study of these interventions has started (financed by SECO) and will serve as 
the basis for the preparation of the project.  An already approved PHRD grant will finance the 
preparation of the social and environmental assessment of the investments. The need and 
alternative approaches for category (ii) investments will be assessed during project preparation 
and, if necessary, through project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will take place on the existing dams along the Drin and Matt River cascades of 
Albania.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
KESH is a current Bank borrower.  Its performance under the ongoing projects is satisfactory 
and its capacity to handle the proposed new project is expected to be adequate. An 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared on the basis of the EIA.The 
environmental and social impacts are expected to be small.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Mr Alessandro Palmieri (OPCQC) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
These investments include civil works to rehabilitate and ensure the proper functioning of 
spillways, dredging of canal ways, rehabilitate access ways and bridges, instrumentation and 
monitoring equipment. These works are not expected to cause any major alterations in the 
existing dams. An environemtnal impact assessment for these works will be carried out during 
preparation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Currently a hydrology study and a detailed feasibility study is underway.  If this study 
determines that there is a flood risk to certain areas downstream areas the Involuntary 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Resettlement policy may be triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The project aims to apply international standards of Dam Safety in Albania and aims to assist 
the country in complying with the policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
draft EIA will be prepared and disclosed in public consultations in March 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Demetrios Papathanasiou 
01/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
