Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2008 
Report No.:  AC3608
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P110481 
Project Name:  Energy Community of South East Europe APL Program - APL 5 for 
Albania DAM SAFETY 
Task Team Leader:  Demetrios Papathanasiou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 15, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (50%);Renewable energy (50%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Infrastructure services 
for private sector development (S);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.75 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.70 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
7.36
16.06 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of the ECSEE APL5 Dam Safety project are to: (i) 
contribute to safeguarding the major hydroelectric dams of Albania; and (ii) improve 
their operational efficiency and enhance the stability of power supply for the regional 
electricity market.  The proposed project supports the development of the Energy 
Community in accordance with the objectives of the Energy Community APL.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of two main components: (1) physical infrastructure investments; 
and (2) technical assistance.  
 
Physical infrastructure investments include: (i) the specification and implementation of 
water alarm systems in the Drin and Mat River basins, and specification of an Emergency 
Action Plan; (ii) Rehabilitation of spillways on Fierza, Koman and Vau i Dejes dams on 
the Drin river; (iii) rehabilitation of electromechanical equipment in the Koman dam; and 
(iv) implementation of Load Frequency Control system in Vau i Dejes and Fierza Dams.  
Page  2
The technical assistance component will finance: (i) hydrology studies and water 
management; (ii) implementation consultants; (iii) studies for new hydropower 
development; (iv) financial management systems capacity building; and (v) international 
panel of experts on Safety of Dams   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project activities will be located on, or inside, the facilities of the hydropower dams 
in the Drin and Mat Rivers.  The project is not expected to cause any changes in water 
management beyond the normal operational characteristics of the dams.  
 
All civil works financed under the project are limited to areas on the dams owned by 
KESH, therefore none of these activities require land acquisition.  The locations of the 
dams and the project works are not associated with any of the sometimes illegal and 
uncontrolled construction activities that sometimes take place elsewhere in Albania.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
Ms Natasa Vetma (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is rated category B.  The program’s environmental impact is overallpositive 
as it aims to prevent a dam failure and any accompanying environmental disaster.  
 
Its focus on improving hydrological analysis and monitoring and better water 
management will result in further positive environmental impacts, such as increased 
power generation from hydro resources.  
 
Page  3
Some of the Technical Assistance studies to be provided on water resources 
management will yield knowledge to make better predictions about downstream flooding 
following heavy rains. While such studies do not trigger OP 4.12, they would provide 
knowledge on whether any future displacement/resettlement may be likely to be called 
for, and if so, the technical assistance should indicate the actions that would be needed 
for this to be carried out in compliance with the requirements of OP 4.12  
 
The project's physical infrastructure investments are of limited scope and will not 
change the existing levels of the dams. Potential environmental impacts concern mainly 
the management and disposal of limited waste during rehabilitation works.  
 
Changes in reservoir levels during plant shutdowns for rehabilitation works would be 
within normal operating levels. As a result of staying within normal operating levels,  
there will be no release of water in amounts that would require displacement of any 
people or structures.  
 
All civil works financed under the project are limited to areas on the dams owned by 
KESH, therefore none of these activities require land acquisition.  The locations of the 
dams and the project works are not associated with any of the sometimes illegal and 
uncontrolled construction activities that sometimes take place elsewhere in Albania. The 
project team has ascertained that there are no structures (residential or commercial, legal 
or illegal)  which would need to be removed for purposes of the project.  
 
The project will support Technical Assistance for potential new hydropower 
development. The Bank team will ensure that the Terms of Reference for these studies 
include analysis of potential environmental and social impacts, and that outputs and 
recommendations are consistent with the Bank's Safeguard policies and will not 
recommend developments which would result in substantial and irreversible 
environmental damage.  The studies will also incorporate costs of mitigating potential 
environmental and social impacts  into analysis of "least cost" development scenarios.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no expected potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated 
future activities in the project area of dam safety investments.  
 
For the studies on potential new hydropower development, as mentioned above, the 
project team will ensure --through supervision activities during project implementation-- 
that outputs and recommendations are consistent with the Bank's Safeguards policies.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are no relevant project alternatives as the main project activities are related with 
enhancing the safety of the hydropower dams.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an envifonmental management framework specifying how the 
impacts during works will be managed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The hydropower dams of the project are located in generally remote and isolated areas of 
Albania, which are sparsely populated. The community of Ulza on the Mat River is by 
the Ulza lake created by the dam, while the communities of Vau i Dejes and Fierza are 
near the dams with the same names on the Drin River.  In Koman there is a small number 
of persons living near the dam.  KESH disclosed by April 30, 2008 the environmental 
documents prepared in the above mentioned communities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
N/A 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Demetrios Papathanasiou 
04/21/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Natasa Vetma 
05/05/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
05/15/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
05/19/2008 
Comments:   
