Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC2661
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Andean Countries 
Project ID:  P098248 
Project Name:  Adaptation to the Impact of Rapid Glacier Retreat in the Tropical Andes 
Task Team Leader:  Walter Vergara 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 18, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);General energy 
sector (20%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.49 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
16.94 
 
UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
1.00 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
0.86 
 Bilateral 
Agencies 
(unidentified) 
8.03 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
1.20
28.03 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the resilience of local 
ecosystems and economies to the impacts of glaciers retreat in the Tropical Andes, 
through the implementation of specific pilot adaptation activities that illustrate the costs 
and benefits of adaptation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed regional project seeks to better document climate, climate variability, and 
climate change and their impacts in glacier-dependent regions of the participating 
countries; this documentation is required for the proper formulation and long-term 
monitoring of adaptation measures. In addition, the project will support national 
institutions and stakeholders in the formulation and implementation of adaptation 
Page  2
programs and pilot measures. Preliminary adaptation programs and pilot measures 
include: (i) the development and implementation of a climate change adaptation strategy 
for water supply to the metropolitan area of Quito (this includes surrounding parroquias ), 
(ii) the design and implementation of an Integrated Catchment Management Plan in the 
Antisana and on the Bolivian Plateau, (iii) the design of an Agricultural Production Plan 
and an agro-meteorological system to help increase food security in selected sub-basins 
in Peru, and (iv) the development of a climate observation network as an element of an 
early warning system for the occurrence of extreme climate events in the Mantaro River 
basin. The project will provide support for the design and implementation of the 
corresponding monitoring and evaluation systems to identify trends and assess the 
effectiveness of adopted measures. The project’s technical design is based on technical 
studies implemented during project preparation, partially funded through a PDF-B grant.  
 
Description of project components  
 
Component 1 (Planning). Detailed design of key selected adaptation measures (GEF 
contribution US$0.4 million; total cost US$1.1 million): the objective of this component 
is to complete the design of at least six strategic adaptation measures to be implemented 
under component 2. This component is integrated by the following sub-components: 1.1) 
design of glacierized basin impacts map, 1.2) detailed design of specific adaptation 
measures, 1.3) public outreach and dissemination of information.  
 
Outcome: Integration of the issue of glacier retreat in the regional/local planning of 
relevant glacierized basins.  
 
Component 2 (Investment). Implementation of pilot adaptation measures (GEF 
contribution US$5.94 million; total cost US$ 30.95 million): Most of the funding of the 
project will go into investments in specific adaptation measures addressing the most 
pressing priorities in each country, on a pilot basis. The component includes the 
following activities by countries:  
 
Ecuador: (1) Increasing water supply resilience for Quito (Compensation of regulation 
loss in the Antisana watershed, GEF contribution US$ 0.668 million; total cost US$ 
10.668 million); (2) Integrated Watershed Management Plan on the Antisana 
microcatchments to better cope with the impacts associated with glacier retreat (GEF 
contribution US$ 1.282 million; total cost US$ 2.027 million).  
 
Peru: (1) Implementation of a Water Management Plan aimed to: (i) improve water use 
practices in the agricultural and livestock sectors and (ii) improve water storage 
infrastructure at selected basin’s head waters to address negative effects caused by 
temporary increase in runoff. (GEF contribution US$1.690 million; total cost US$ 11.015 
million); (2) Implementation of an Agricultural Production Plan that compensates for 
reduction of water availability to the agricultural sector as a result of rapid glacier retreat 
(GEF contribution US$0.30 million; total cost US$ 0.9 million); (3) Implementation of an 
Integral Water Management Plan that incorporates reductions in glacier run off 
contributions in Huancayo. (GEF contribution US$0.10 million; total cost US$ 0.895 
million).  
 
Bolivia: (1) Integrated watershed management in Tuni and Condoriri basins 
incorporating the impact of rapid glacier retreat (GEF contribution US$1.2 million; total 
Page  3
cost US$ 2.873 million); (2) Integrated Pilot Catchment Management Plan for watersheds 
affected by rapid glacier retreat in the Bolivian Plateau and High Valleys. (GEF 
contribution US$0.75 million; total cost US$ 1.1 million); (3) Mainstreaming adaptive 
river defense for Huayhuasi & El Palomar settlements (WB US$0.427 million; total cost 
US$ 0.477 million).  
 
Component 3 (Scientific support). Monitoring of glacier retreat in the region. (GEF 
contribution US$ 0.450 million; total cost US$ 2.37 million).  The first two 
subcomponents (3.1 Design and set up of field stations for monitoring of tropical glaciers 
of economic relevance; and 3.2 Use of high precision remote sensing to monitor tropical 
glaciers and associated ecosystems through the use of the Japanese Space Agency ALOS 
satellite) would support, primarily with assistance from a Climate Change 
Implementation Grant and other technical and scientific institutions, the installation and 
operation of a monitoring network to measure the gradual process of glacier retreat in the 
region in order to enable better long-term planning for further adaptation policy and 
interventions.  The third subcomponent (3.3 Analysis and monitoring of the behavior of 
tropical glaciers and its associated mountain wetlands to climate change) is financed by 
GEF and is aimed at analyzing and monitoring tropical glaciers and related wetlands 
behavior to climate change. Component 3 will not only be supported by GEF and CCIG 
grants but it will also receive contributions from the Japanese Space Agency, NOAA and 
IRD.  
 
Component 4: Project management. (GEF contribution US$0.65 million; total cost US$ 
1.77 million): This component will support the overall technical coordination of Project 
Activities (including the implementation of a technical monitoring system) as well as the 
administrative and financial management of the Project. It will include goods; 
consultancy services; travel; and operating costs undertaken by the Project Management. 
Specifically this component will finance the project coordinator, the procurement 
specialist, other required personnel for the project management, and the project external 
audits. Incremental GEF co-financing will be used for goods; consultancy services; 
travel; and operating costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Bolivia: The Altiplano, La Paz River micro-catchment, and El Alto micro-catchment.  
 
Ecuador: Quito, the micro-catchments of Papallacta, Jeringa, Quijos and Antisana 
Rivers.  
 
Peru: The Urubamba-Vilcanota and Mantaro Basins.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Walter Vergara (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment:  This is a category B project as no major adverse 
environmental impacts are anticipated. Minor environmental impacts may be expected 
from some on-the-ground investments. The project is designed to be entirely positive 
from an environmental point of view, particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems 
from the impact of GCC. Some expected direct positive impacts include: (i) reduced 
vulnerability of the high mountain ecosystems in the immediate vicinity of the pilot 
measures; (ii) reduced uncertainty of impacts of GCC; (iii) mitigation of impacts of 
unsustainable agricultural practices, and development and implementation of sustainable 
alternatives; (iv) reduced vulnerability of and planning and management of water supply 
in selected urban areas; and (v) increased public awareness of adaptation needs and 
increased social and institutional capacity to manage the ecosystems. An Environmental 
framework has been prepared for all pilots to be implemented under component 2 and it 
is presented in Annex 20.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats: Project adaptation measures include activities such as 
improved streamside conservation and management, and improved management of 
glacier buffer zones. An EA framework has been developed to set forth the major issues, 
impacts, and mitigation measures (e.g., criteria for selecting pilot sites and determining 
the need for additional environmental work).  
 
OP 4.36 Forests:  The project triggers Forests Operational Policies (OP/BP 4.36) 
contingent on the development of plantation schemes with commercial purposes.The 
forestry policy is triggered by projects with the potential to impact the health and quality 
of forests or the rights and welfare of people and their level of dependence upon or 
interaction with forests; or aim to bring about changes in the management, protection or 
utilization of natural forests or plantations. The specific adaptation to climate change 
pilots under component 2 for Peru and Ecuador will include some forest protection, 
reforestation and forest regeneration activities aimed mostly at conserving, preserving 
and contributing to increase the resilience of forest ecosystems to the impacts of climate 
Page  5
change. It is expected that the activities planned will have an overall positive impact on 
forests and contribute to its sustainability. Please see Annex 4 of the PAD for further 
information.  
 
OP 4.09 Pest Management.  Additionally a Pest Management Plan has been developed 
and is included in the project Operations Manual. An Environmental Assessment will be 
performed as part of the preparation of the adaptation measures. The Pest Management 
Plan has been disclosed in each participating country.  
 
OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples.  The project triggers OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) 
however the project is not expected to have adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples. On 
the contrary the project will benefit Indigenous Peoples because it will be implemented 
with their active participation and also because of the nature of the pilot activities to be 
supported. In Bolivia the project will be implemented among four Aymara communities 
both in the Altiplano as well as in the valleys. In Ecuador one of the three rural 
communities where the project will intervene is a Quichua community called El Tambo. 
In Peru some Indigenous Peoples have been identified and consulted in the basin of Santa 
Teresa in lowland Cusco. Indigenous Project Plans have been prepared and have been 
disclosed in each country.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The three countries have identified the areas for project implementation and the direct 
communities that will benefit from the project. The three countries have prepared social 
assessments for all project areas and, whenever relevant, also Indigenous Peoples Plans in 
consultation with the Indigenous communities (one for Ecuador and one for Peru, in the 
case of Bolivia the entire project will be implemented with Indigenous Peoples). Special 
efforts have been made to consult with the Indigenous communities and written 
agreements have been reached to ensure their active participation in the project.  
 
The project implementation strategy includes, as first year key activities, the final 
detailed design of all identified pilot interventions. It is considered that each proposed 
adaptation measure has an adequate feasibility analysis, but that detailed engineering 
designs are required before implementation, schedule to take place during years 2 and 3 
of project implementation. The first component is therefore dedicated to the final analysis 
and design of pilot adaptation measures as studied during project preparation. The 
project’s environmental analysis(EA) indicated that under this work schedule, is an 
Environmental Framework (EF) that will guide the first year design phase (component 1) 
Page  6
and will provide the basis for the development and implementation of specific 
environmental management plans, as required for each intervention. This EF has been 
included in the PAD as Annex 20.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project will benefit farmers and rural communities in the three countries through the 
implementation of interventions such as reforestation, forestation, livestock management, 
water resource management, irrigation infrastructure, improved agriculture, etc. Some of 
these communities are Indigenous Peoples, in which case the countries involved have 
prepared social assessments and Indigenous Peoples Plans in consultation with the 
beneficiaries. A summary of the findings from the social assessments, the IPPs and the 
consultation processes is in Annex 10 of the PAD.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2007 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/17/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/01/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
12/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Walter Vergara 
12/03/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis 
12/04/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:  Category B project. Approval from Regional safeguards coordinator is not required 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
12/14/2007 
Comments:   
