Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3640 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Angola 
Project ID: P105101 
Project Name: Local Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Stefania Blotta Abakerli Baptista 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (40%);General education sector 
(15%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%);Health (15%);Other 
social services (15%) 
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (P);Decentralization (P);Social risk 
mitigation (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
83.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
37.00
120.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Angola Social Action Fund IV (FAS IV) is to strengthen a 
local development and participatory governance system through: (i) enhanced local 
administrations’ technical and institutional capacities to prepare,implement and manage local 
development plans; (ii) strengthened community engagement in decision making processes and 
basic goods and services oversight; and (iii) improved access, use and quality of basic goods and 
services provision at municipal level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Specifically, the proposed project would comprise three components:  
 
Component 1 – Local Planning, Management and Investment would focus on strengthening the 
supply side of local development and governance, to ensure more effective and sustainable use 
of public resources as well as participatory decision making.  Component activities would target 
Page  2
selected local administrations, and would finance: (i) technical assistance to improve their 
organizational and technical capacities to plan, implement and manage local development plans 
and investments in a participatory and accountable manner; and (ii) matching grants to execute 
basic public goods and services defined in the local participatory development plans, such as 
social and economic infrastructure at the community level.  
 
Component 2 
–
Social Accountability would focus on enhancing the demand side oflocal 
development and governance, aiming to increase communities’ capacity to access information, 
engaging in decision making, and increasing governments’ accountability to citizens’ 
preferences.  Component activities would target existingcivic engagement bodies (Municipal 
Forums/CACS and Communal Forums), improving their functionality to increase membership 
and voice, increasing citizen’s budget literacy, developing further their capacities to improve 
representation, quality of participation, negotiation skills and oversight of local policymaking 
and expenditure management processes.  
 
Component 3 – Quality of Basic Services Provision would refine and pilot tools and 
mechanisms to improve the quality of provision of health and education services at the local 
level.   In principle, this component would try to create an improved nexus between the more 
traditional orientation of the social fund on access to basic services with the broader dimensions 
of the quality of service provision.  Component activities would include grants to municipal 
administrations, community organizations and neighborhood health/education committees and 
the like to implement selected interventions to achieve specific service delivery outcomes/results, 
such as improve student enrollments, retention, teaching quality, immunization rates, etc.  The 
component would pilot accountability-promotion activities, such as school-based management, 
the improvement of information provision to school or clinic stakeholders, and/or teacher or 
nurse contracting.  Activities are expected to be included in the local development plans and/or 
annual workplans of NGOs/CBOs or relevant partner organization.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is national in scale and will target municipalities and poor communities in peri-urban 
and rural areas in all provinces in Angola.  The physical characteristics of the target areas vary 
between provinces, with more densely populated settlements in coastal provinces and sparse 
settlements in the hinterlands.  No San are present in the areas targeted by the project.  The San 
population lives in isolation, following their particular socioeconomic traditional organization, 
which is distinct from the rural populations targeted by the project.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Implementing Agency:  Despite more than a decade of experience managing Bank-financed 
operations, the FAS Implementing Agency remains weak in terms of implementing and 
supervising Bank safeguard policies and standards at the local level.  
 
The Bank team is making a concerted effort to address this capacity gap through a series of 
targeted training sessions on Bank safeguard policies focusing on the purpose, use and 
application of the project’s safeguards tools.  This training will be offered at regular intervals 
throughout the life of the project.  
 
Page  3
In addition, the Bank and Borrower are carrying out a thorough audit of all infrastructure 
investments financed in FAS I, II and III to pinpoint where the major gaps in safeguard 
compliance exist.  This extensive audit will afford the Bank and Borrower with the necessary 
information to ameliorate the capacity at the central, provincial and district levels to ensure 
compliance with Bank safeguard policies throughout the life of FAS IV.  
 
Community members: Community members are involved in the FAS IV planning process 
including prioritizing investments, construction and, in some instances, operation of basic 
infrastructure.  As such, and based on FAS experience to date, at each subproject phase 
community members will be informed of the purpose and application of safeguard tools, and 
relevant responsibilities for mitigation of any adverse social and environmental impacts.  
 
Municipal government: Municipal administrations will be trained in the purpose, use and 
application of the project’s safeguard tools, procedures, requirements and considerations as part 
of FAS IV Capacity Development Program.  This training will be offered at regular intervals 
throughout the life of the project.  
 
Provincial and Central government: Representatives from the Ministry of Urban Affairs and the 
Ministry of Environment on the FAS National Coordination Committee will participate in the 
social and environmental site review  and assessment for FAS IV.  Such participation is a 
continuation of the role carried out by the representative of the ex-Ministry of Urban Affairs and 
Environment during earlier phases of the project.  This best practice will be enforced during FAS 
IV to ensure appropriate oversight of the application of the project’s safeguard tools and 
compliance with Bank safeguard policies.  Such representation will also be expanded to include 
other key ministries, in particular the Ministry of Planning and Ministry of Administration of the 
Territory (MAT).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Based on the FAS I, II and III experience, the Bank’s safeguard policies on Environmental 
Assessment and Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered since the project will support 
rehabilitation and construction of community-based infrastructure investments with the potential 
for temporary and localized adverse environmental and social impacts.  The impacts are expected 
to be minimal and can be adequately mitigated.  
 
To ensure that the investments avoid and/or mitigate any adverse environmental and social 
impacts, the Borrower will prepare an updated Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) based on the FAS III ESMF since many of the elements and investments 
remain the same. The revised ESMF will incorporate the new project components and 
investment activities, in particular the set of local economic development activities.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Since health clinics are part of the positive list of infrastructure investment activities to be 
financed by the project, the ESMF and RPF will include specific measures to ensure appropriate 
disposal of medical waste produced by the health clinics.  The project team will ensure that the 
medical waste plan developed for the project and embedded in the ESMF is in line with any 
national, provincial and district level regulations and measures to manage and treat medical 
waste.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will also be prepared based on the FAS III RPF.  
The FAS IV RPF will identify the procedures required to avoid any involuntary resettlement 
and/or properly carry it out when unavoidable and voluntary.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/24/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The updated ESMF and RPF will be disclosed prior to appraisal in-country as well as at the 
World Bank Info Shop.  
 
The FAS LDP ESMF and RPF will be incorporated into the Project’s Operational Manual 
detailing the procedures and guidelines to be followed to ensure that all elements of the 
project remain in compliance with Bank safeguard policies throughout the life of the project.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
The audit of past environmental and social results and the medical waste management plan 
will be completed by March 30, 2009.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Stefania Blotta Abakerli Baptista 
03/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/24/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
03/24/2009 
Comments:   
