Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3730 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/26/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Angola 
Project ID: P111840 
Project Name: Health Service Delivery Project (HSDP) 
Task Team Leader: Jean J. De St Antoine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Other communicable diseases (S);Health system performance 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Th
e
first objective of the project is to improve the population’s access to health services in four 
selected provinces by: (i) strengthening community-based service delivery; (ii) scaling up 
outreach services; and (iii) improving and expanding facility-based services. The proposed 
project would bring Angola closer to the MDGs by helping to reduce child mortality (goal 4); 
and maternal mortality (goal 5). It would help introduce an effective health service delivery 
model that the government could implement throughout the country, thus increasing the 
effectiveness of health spending. The second objective is to contribute to the control of malaria. 
The third is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Health (MOH).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would have four components: (i) improving service delivery in four selected 
provinces (Benguela, Cabinda, Namibe, and part of Luanda (US$15.0 million); (ii) pilot testing 
of conditional cash transfers (CCTs) to increase institutional deliveries (US$2.0 million); (iii) 
boosting of national malaria control (US$4.0 million); and (iv) strengthening the capacity of the 
MOH (US$1.0 million). It would have a life of five years.   
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
Improving service delivery would take place in four selected provinces (Benguela, Cabinda, 
Namibe, and part of Luanda and the malaria component would be country-wide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An important issue is the management of hospital waste. An assessment was carried out under 
the HAMSET project and an Environmental Management Plan was developed, that would be 
updated for the proposed project. As for the malaria component, the Bank will review a 
safeguard analysis on vector control and management that was conducted for PMI, and assess 
whether it needs to be updated.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ENV) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Potential environmental impact from handling medical waste. To be addressed through a 
Health Care Waste Management Plan (already developed under the HAMSET project)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Potential environmental impact from handling toxic chemical pesticides for vector control. 
To be addressed through a Vector Management Plan for indoor residual spraying (IRS) for 
malaria control.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/04/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  3
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The health care waste management plan already exists and will be updated, including the 
implementation plan. The Vector Management Plan also exists and will be assessed, together 
with its implementation plan, early during project preparation. Both will be disclosed in 
Angola and at Infoshop before appraisal. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the 
safguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean J. De St Antoine 
06/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/26/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
06/26/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
