Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/05/2009 
Report No.:  AC4195
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Angola 
Project ID:  P111840 
Project Name:  Municipal Health Service Strengthening (Revital
ização) 
Task Team Leader:  Jean J. De St Antoine 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Child health (50%);Other communicable diseases (25%);Health system 
performance (25%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to improve the population#s access to and 
quality of maternal and child health care services.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has three components: (i) improving service delivery in the five provinces of 
Bengo, Malange, Lunda Norte, Moxico, and Uige in 18 municipalities (US$72.8million); 
(ii) piloting of demand-side incentives to encourage institutional deliveries (US$0.8 
million); and (iii) strengthening the capacity of the MOH and municipalities (US$18.2 
million). It will have a life of five years.  
 
3.
Component 1 - Improvement in service delivery (US$72.8 million). This includes:  
 
(i) 
Strengthening of municipal health services at the primary level through training 
and provision of drugs and supplies;  
 
(ii) 
Scaling up of population-based outreached services;  
 
(iii) 
Improving community interventions through training;  
 
(iv) 
Improving obstetric care through rehabilitation and construction of delivery 
rooms in health centers and posts, construction of houses for health professionals at 
provincial and municipal levels, goods and equipment for pre-natal care, family planning, 
Page  2
and delivery rooms, and delivery kits; and improving hospital waste management 
disposal.  
 
4. 
Component 2 # Piloting of demand-side incentives to encourage institutional 
deliveries (US$0.8 million). This component will pilot vouchers to encourage pregnant 
women to deliver in a health facility. These consist of: (i) transport voucher subsidies; 
and (ii) direct subsidies for pregnant women.  
 
5.
Component 3 # Strengthening the Capacity of the Ministry of Health at the 
Central, Provincial, and Municipal Levels (US$18.2 million). This component will have 
three subcomponents: (i) strengthening program management; (ii) strengthening the 
capacity of the Department of Planning of the MOH; and (iii) strengthening of 
monitoring and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Angola, with a focus on five provinces: Bengo, Malanje, Lunda Norte, Moxico, and 
Uige.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ENV) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The MHSS is classified as Category #B# for environmental screening purposes. A partial 
environmental and social analysis is considered appropriate to address specific 
environmental and social issues associated with the provision of medical supplies, which 
triggers concerns about healthcare waste management and the construction of staff 
housing, which triggers concerns about land acquisition and resettlement.  
 
An assessment of current health care waste management and disposal systems, carried 
out under the HAMSET project, showed that the current state of waste management 
Page  3
system is inadequate. Current practices in health care waste and contaminated health care 
waste handling, storage and disposal, in particular, raise environmental and social 
concerns. The need for sound management and disposal of contaminated health care 
waste is of paramount importance because health-related activities produce waste on 
daily basis as a result of preventive and curative service delivery. Waste produced is in 
the form of sharps (needles, syringes, bistouries etc.), non-sharps, blood and other 
infected and non-infected materials, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and medical devices. 
Health workers, waste handlers, users of health facilities and the general public are all 
exposed to health care related waste and may become infected, as a result of poor 
management.  
 
The government developed a national HCWMP that will be implemented under the 
MHSS project.  
 
During the November 2008 preparation mission, the government asked the Bank to 
remove the malaria control component as the MOH has sufficient financing from other 
donors, thus no need for a Pest Management Plan for the project under its new design.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Poor practices in healthcare waste management can lead to negative effects such as 
hospital acquired infections, development of drug resistant bacteria; disease transmission 
from dirty needles; or negative health effects from the release of toxic substances.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project activities themselves have no direct or indirect adverse impacts on 
the project area. However, working in medical care facilities requires dealing with the 
existing problem of medical waste. The strategy is to take advantage of the project to help 
the government improve healthcare waste disposal in the project area and throughout the 
country.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
thorough assessment of health care waste management and disposal, with a particular 
focus on management of waste from HIV/AIDS, other sexually transmitted diseases, 
malaria and tuberculosis was conducted and the government developed a national Health 
Care Waste Management Plan. HAMSET facilitated the implementation of the plan, 
including capacity building, mitigation measures and their timely monitoring. Financing 
for priority actions of the Plan were included in the HAMSET project. The MHSS project 
proposes to build on the success achieved under HAMSET and increase the financial 
support to promote wider implementation of the HCWM Plan.  
 
The HCWM Plan was updated in March 2009, and revised to reflect the current realities 
faced in the targeted provinces. It will be applied through the life of the MHSS project. It 
involves fairly intensive training and capacity building activities, review of legal and 
Page  4
institutional framework, and provision of protective clothing and biosafety kits, provision 
of basic equipments and technical support, and specific monitoring actions. Financing for 
activities of the HCWM Plan are included under the MHSS under Subcomponent 3 # 
Improvement of hospital waste disposal. MHSS is committing up to US$ 995,000 to 
facilitate the implementation o f the plan. This is significantly higher (over four times) 
than the allocated budget under the HAMSET project. Additional sources of financing 
would also be sought, including from the government budget itself.  
 
The MHSS project is proposing to build houses for medical staff in various 
municipalities (Five municipalities).  In discussions with Government officials, the team 
has been assured that all houses would be either built within hospital grounds or in 
Government land reserves designated for such purpose.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Urbanism and Environment, Provinces of Bengo, 
Malanje, Lunda Norte, Moxico, and Uige, and municipalities within these provinces, 
health facility directors, health workers, and patients are the key stakeholders under this 
project. The project will undertake a consultation process with all stakeholders and 
people that will potentially be affected by the project.Input from the affected people and 
the general public (civil society) will be sought through disclosure of draft project 
documents (in this case draft HCWMP)  on the official websites of the respective 
Ministries (Health, Environment, Urban Development) and on the National 
Information/Documentation Center to make sure documents are accessible to the general 
public. Announcement of disclosure will be published in local papers to give the general 
public and civil society representatives the opportunity to comment. Comments and 
inputs from the general public and key stakeholders will be incorporated in the final draft 
that is also disclosed to the public.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean J. De St Antoine 
05/05/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui 
03/09/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
05/05/2009 
Comments:   
