Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2468 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/29/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Angola 
Project ID: P096360 
Project Name: Water Sector Institutional Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (50%);Water supply (25%);Health (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
56.70 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project would be to improve the quality and sustainability of urban water 
supply and sanitation services provided by improving the institutional capacity of the water 
supply and sanitation utilities in the pilot cities and by rehabilitating existing water supply and 
sanitation systems in selected major urban centers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be implemented over a period of five years and consist of the 
following activities:  
 
Component 1: Institutional Support to Water Supply and Sanitation Utilities. This component 
will be piloted in Kuito, Huambo, Malanje, N'Dalatando, Uige, and Lubango and it will support 
the newly created water supply and sanitation utilities (WSS) by financing needed equipment, 
furniture, spare parts, and supplies. In addition, the project will finance, on a declining scale, the 
salaries of the staff and other recurrent costs. An increasing share of these costs will be financed 
from internally generated resources due to increased tariff levels and improved management and 
collection procedures.  
 
Page  2
The component would finance technical assistance to: (i) implement needed commercial 
accounting systems, contract management and related management systems and procedures. This 
consultancy would also provide related training support for these systems; (ii) design a system to 
monitor and evaluate the performance of these newly created companies and based on this 
experience assist the National Directorate of Water (DNA) in designing similar WSS companies 
in the other provincial capitals; and (iii) support the development of a longer term strategy for the 
management of the various water supply and sanitation systems which emphasizes the use of 
local private sector.  
 
Component 2:  Development of the Institutions in the Water Sector. This component will assist 
the Ministry of Energy and Water in the implementation of the newly established Water 
Resource Management Institute. This support would include financing for basic equipment for 
the Institute.  
 
This component will also assist the DNA in designing and implementing an effective legal and 
regulatory framework for the water supply and sanitation sector based on the best practice 
experiences from other African countries. The project will also strengthen the capacity of DNA 
to monitor and evaluate the performance in the sector and to assist in the management of the 
proposed project.  
 
Component 3: Rehabilitation of Urban Water Supply Systems. The project will finance the 
rehabilitation of the existing water supply and sanitation systems in the cities of M'Banza Congo, 
Menongue, Lubango and Luena. This work would be based on the master plans that have been 
developed by DNA for these cities.  
 
Component 4: Capacity Building. This component would finance two separate formal training 
activities to support the water sector, and a program of Learning-By-Doing. For the pilot WSS 
companies, the component would finance a supply driven training program designed to ensure 
that the operating units are filled with staff which have the minimum technical qualifications.  
This program would be based on a training needs assessment and the various master plans. The 
component will assist the DNA in the design of this program, but the implementation would be 
done by local schools and training providers.  
 
This component would also finance a demand driven training activity for the newly created 
Water Resource Management Institute and for the new Water Supply and Sanitation Regulatory 
Agency. This program would be agreed upon on an annual basis and would focus on ensuring 
that these agencies have staff with appropriate professional qualifications.  
 
For the pilot water and sanitation utilities, this component will provide funding for a small scale 
infrastructure to enable the companies to extend the tertiary networks and provide more stand 
posts in poverty affected areas. The works would be designed and supervised internally and 
contracted to local companies. The location of the networks and the stand posts would be 
developed in consultation with communities and NGOs.  This activity would support the formal 
training program and would represent practical applications for the training received (Learning - 
By - Doing).   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
Component 1: Institutional Support to Water Supply and Sanitation Utilities, will include the 
following cities: Kuito, Huambo, Malanje, N'Dalatando, Uige and Lubango.  
 
Component 3: Rehabilitation of Urban Water Supply Systems, will include the following cities: 
M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, and Luena.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional and human resources capacity to effectively address and mitigate environmental 
and social safeguard aspects is limited at both central and local levels. .  In the context of 
Component 4, Capacity Building, the project envisions to implement a training program 
designed to ensure that the operating units are filled with staff which have the minimum 
technical qualifications, including the adequate treatment of environmental and social aspects 
arising from project activities.  In addition, all demand-driven training activities for the newly 
created Water Resource Management Institute and for the new Water Supply and Sanitation 
Regulatory Agency will be financed.  Finally, the project plans to strictly follow institutional and 
human resources capacity strengthening measures that will be identified in the forthcoming 
safeguard instruments.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project due to its planned rehabilitation of existing parts 
of the networks. No new major works are expected, but some small tertiary lines may be 
extended from the networks to some of the poorer sections of the cities. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF)will be prepared and the document will be disclosed 
prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Since the project will focus on rehabilitation of the existing water supply and sanitation 
systems, the Natural Habitats Policy would not be triggered. However, the triggering of this 
policy will be determined during the project preparation, especially in the context of forthcoming 
ESMF study.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Since the project will focus on rehabilitation of the existing water supply and sanitation 
systems, the Physical Cultural Resources Policy would not be triggered. However, the triggering 
of this policy will be determined/confirmed during the project preparation, especially in the 
context of forthcoming ESMF study.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP/BP 4.12 has been triggered be
cause of the planned construction and rehabilitation works.  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Because neither the scope of work nor the location of sub-projects are known at this stage, a 
Resettlement policy Framework will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.  During 
implementation when sub-projects become known, they will be screened and where appropriate, 
Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared and implementation in line with Bank's 
requirements.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/15/2007 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
(1) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)- April 15, 2007.  
 
(2) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)(if required) - April 15, 2007.  
 
The sector unit agrees to accept transfer of safeguard responsibility.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lance Morrell 
09/08/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
09/11/2006 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
09/08/2006 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
