Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3359
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Angola 
Project ID:  P096360 
Project Name:  Water Sector Institutional Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (75%);Sanitation (25%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Water resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
57.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
56.20
56.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the institutional capacity and 
efficiency of agencies in the water sector to improve access and reliability of water 
service delivery.  The achievement of the PDO will be measured in terms of the 
following indicators: (i) 66% of PWSUs achieving annual profitability targets; (ii) 80%  
of hydrometric stations operational; and (iii) 72,000 households with connections to the 
piped water supply network managed by the utilities in the target cities.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will finance the following four components:  
 
Component 1 - Development of Institutions in the Water Supply Sub-Sector (US$21.7 
million)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional framework for the 
water supply sub-sector at both the central and regional levels.  The objective will be 
achieved through the implementation of three related subcomponents: (1.1) development 
of the Asset Management Unit; (1.2) creation of Provincial Water Supply and Sanitation 
Page  2
Utilities; and (1.3) development of a Regulatory Agency for the water supply and 
sanitation sub-sector.  
 
Subcomponent 1.1 will develop an Asset Management Unit (AMU) under MINEA for 
Provincial towns and cities. The AMU will manage assets, plan and oversee execution of 
investments and engage third party operators in cities and towns.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2 will facilitate creation of Autonomous Provincial Water and 
Sanitation Utilities (PWSUs) that will be responsible for operating water assets of 
participating cities and towns at the provincial level. The AMU will delegate 
responsibility for contracting and supervising service operators to the PWSUs through 
performance based contracts. This arrangement will further the decentralization and 
devolution process and promote provincial involvement in and "ownership" of the 
utilities. The PWSUs will also provide opportunities to capture economies of scale and 
will create a mechanism for more transparent and effective consultation between central 
and local levels regarding the planning and implementation of investments.  The PWSUs 
will be public corporations created under the project pursuant to provisions of the Public 
Enterprise Law 9/95.  
 
Subcomponent 1.3 will support development and establishment of a Regulatory Agency 
for the water supply sub-sector. The project will support technical assistance to create a 
regulatory agency; and continuing support to the operational work, capacity building, and 
technical assistance for the Regulatory Agency.  
 
Component 2 - Water Resources Management (US$12 million)  
 
This component will support the strengthening of the institutional framework for the 
water resources management sub-sector.  This objective will be achieved through three 
sub-components which are:  (2.1) development of an institution for water resources 
management; (2.2) development of systems for water resources management; and (2.3) 
rehabilitation of water resources management systems.  
 
Subcomponent 2.1 will finance studies and technical assistance to create a National 
Water Resources Institute building on the existing work done by the GOA.  Included in 
this work would be the preparation of an infrastructure investment analysis to define the 
minimum infrastructure platform required to facilitate the potential contribution of water 
resources to sustainable economic development.In addition, technical assistance will be 
provided to begin the review/study of the safety of the country’s existing dams.  
 
Subcomponent 2.2 will support development of appropriate instruments to integrate 
sector water demands, ensure sustainable management of water resources and increase 
productive use of the country’s water resources by piloting two Integrated Basin 
Management Plans (IBMPs) in the Cuanza and Cubango river basins.  
 
Page  3
Subcomponent 2.3 will increase the capacity to effectively manage water resources by 
continuing to support rehabilitation of the hydrometric network, which was abandoned 
during the war, and the development of information management systems.  
 
Component 3 - Rehabilitation of Water Supply Systems (US$51.8 million)  
 
This component will support the physical rehabilitation of selected urban water supply 
systems due to the critical need to reverse many years of inadequate investments and 
maintenance.  These investments will be implemented in two phases.Phase 1 will finance 
investments in the 5 cities piloting the PWSUs (likely to be Malange, Kuito, 
N'Dalatando, Huambo, and Uige) and thus also support the economic sustainability of 
those PWSUs.  Phase 2 will finance investments in up to 4 additional cities (likely to be 
M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, and Luena) and will begin when the 5 PWSUs 
have been established, are operational with the first annual financial statements issued 
and the rehabilitation works in those 5 cities are underway.  The component has two 
subcomponents.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1 will finance approximately 240 kilometers of water supply networks 
and some 72,000 domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas in the five likely 
phase 1 cities of: Malange, Kuito, N'Dalatando, Huambo, and Uige, and in the four likely 
phase 2 cities of: M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, and Luena .  These investments 
are important to provide needed water supply services to the population, and to support 
the economic sustainability of the PWSUs formed in each of the nine cities.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2 will finance a technical cadastre for about 72,000 new connections 
and implement an information system for measuring water consumption, processing and 
emitting bills to customers, and recording customer payments. This sub-component will 
also support the PWSUs by financing the operating costs of these entities.  
 
Component 4 - Capacity Building and Change Management (US$11.0 million)  
 
This component will strengthen the ability of government to improve efficiency of water 
supply in Angola by engaging stakeholders, managing and communicating change, and 
improving the abilities of individuals to play their parts, especially at management and 
technical levels.  The objectives will be achieved through three sub-components:  (4.1) 
capacity-building at the national and provincial levels; (4.2) capacity building and 
training at the utility level; and (4.3) technical assistance to facilitate change management 
and good governance.  
 
Subcomponent 4.1 will build capacity at the national and provincial levels and engage 
senior national (ministerial) and provincial officials on the proposed institutional changes 
for the sector. At the national level, the sub-component will support training in 
management for DNA/AMU staff as well as the efforts of DNA to rehabilitate and equip 
the Centro de Investigacao e Pesquisa de Onga Zanga (CIPOZ). At the provincial level, 
the sub-component will support social mobilization (communication) and training for 
Page  4
sector functions to be delegated to provincial departments of water (DPAs).  This sub-
component will support the implementation of the ESMF and the RPF.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2 will provide specific, targeted training to members of the Boards of 
Directors of PWSUs concerning company organization, basic financial analysis and 
funds flow, duties and responsibilities for oversight and public communication.  It will 
also offer training in leadership, management, finance, communications, and planning to 
staff of the PWSUs. This subcomponent will pilot a “Learn by Doing” program to apply a 
successful institutional development method to the new PWSUs.  The pilot will use funds 
to build institutional capacities and support activities benefiting the poor in peri-urban 
areas (for example small tertiary network expansion or the construction of water points 
managed by private operators).  Essentially, this means developing the capacity of the 
PWSUs to prepare and implement a peri-urban expansion strategy to improve the level of 
service to the areas currently not being served by the utilities. Companies would carry-out 
tasks including sub-contracting, with some training and support, thereby improving both 
human and institutional capacity.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3 will support the efforts of MINEA, PWSUs, and provincial water 
departments to change the direction and focus of the sector by strengthening on-going 
and planned communication programs to improve the link with the communities and to 
encourage feedback from them. The sub-component will also support the improved 
management of the sector by developing and updating a risk management plan and 
implementing the governance and accountability action plan.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support physical works associated with the water supply network in nine 
cities: M'Banza Congo, Menongue, Lubango, Luena, Malange, Kuito, N'Dalatando, 
Huambo, and Uige.  
 
The project will also support physical works at approximately 189 hydrometric stations 
nationwide along with the physical rehabilitation of up to ten buildings in an area located 
in the outskirts of Luanda.  
 
It is envisaged that project activities under Subcomponent 2.3 (rehabilitation of the 
national hydrometric network), Subcomponent 3.1 (installation of approximately 240 
kilometers of piped water supply networks and some 72,000 new domestic connections in 
urban and peri-urban areas in the 9 target cities), Subcomponent 3.2 (purchase of 
chemicals for water treatment), Subcomponents 4.1 (rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga 
Investigation and Research Center CIPOZ) and 4.2 (funding for small civil works 
projects to serve peri-urban areas) may generate adverse environmental and social 
impacts.  
 
The nature of the civil works and project activities associated with each of the 
aforementioned subcomponents are as follows:  
 
Page  5
Subcomponent 2.3 - Rehabilitation of the hydrometric network  
 
A. GAUGING STANDARD STATIONS  
 
-
Improve existing access to the station.  
 
-
Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing station.  
 
-
Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructure (restore damaged concrete pillars, replace 
metal pipe, replace and weld metal supports, replace cover sheets in the shelter, apply 
anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged scales).  
 
-
Install water meter devices on river banks inside shelter that use12v batteries or photo 
voltaic cells.  
 
B. WEIRS  
 
-
Removal and disposal of damaged components of the existing weir.  
 
-
Repair damaged or destroyed infrastructure (restore damaged concrete foundation and 
wall, weld metal supports, apply anticorrosive paints, repair or replace damaged scales).  
 
Subcomponent 3.1 - Installation of water supply networks and household connections in 
urban and peri-urban areas in nine cities.  
 
-
Prepare alternative accesses during construction.  
 
-
Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install HDPE tubing and cover with soil.  
 
-
Connect selected households to distribution network and install water meters and back 
yard taps.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2 - Purchase of chemicals for water treatment  
 
-
Supply of chlorine, aluminum sulfate and caustic soda  
 
-
Construction of adequate storage for annual supply of chemicals.  
 
-
Handling of chemicals and packaging.  
 
-
Disposal of empty chemical packaging.  
 
Subcomponent 4.1 - Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Investigation and Research 
Center CIPOZ.  
 
-
Removal and disposal of debris of the existing buildings.  
 
-
Rehabilitate existing buildings: concrete repairs, wall repairs, cover sheets 
replacement, wood and glass repairs and replacement, plastering, painting, plumbing, 
electrical works, etc.  
 
-
Rehabilitate water supply, sewerage and electrical components of the buildings.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2 - Small water projects that will extend networks and standposts to 
serve peri-urban areas.  
 
-
Prepare alternative access.  
 
-
Dig trenches (approximately 1 m deep), install plastic HDPE pipe and fittings, connect 
pipe to existing network and cover trench with soil.  
 
-
Construct water points (chafarizes/fontenarios) and connect to distribution system; dig 
foundations, reinforce concrete works, plumbing works and drainage system.  
 
It is important to note that the project activities will complement water supply network 
investments already being financed through the World Bank's Emergency Multi-Sector 
Page  6
Recovery Program and projects financed by the Government of China in a number of the 
target cities. This project will build on these works and, as such, may contribute to the 
generation of cumulative adverse environmental and social impacts. The Bank and the 
borrower are aware of the need to coordinate oversight and management of the various 
projects to ensure compliance with national laws and Bank safeguard policies and to 
minimize any cumulative impacts that the various projects may have on the environment 
and local communities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project was reviewed and screened at Project Concept Note stage and designated as a 
Category B project consistent with the provisions of OP/BP/GP 4.01. Safeguard policies 
triggered by the Project include: i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01); and, (ii) 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).  
 
The project will finance extension of water supply distribution networks and metering in 
select cities (construction and rehabilitation) and construction and rehabilitation of the 
deteriorated national hydrometric network along with rehabilitation of select learning and 
research facilities located in the outskirts of Luanda.  
 
The potential adverse environmental and social impacts related to this project were 
addressed during project preparation. At appraisal, it was determined that no large scale, 
significant or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. No 
major works are expected. The principal safeguard issue with respect to OP/BP 4.01 is 
construction site impacts that are relatively small in scale, time bound and manageable in 
terms of complying with Bank Safeguard Policies. The contribution to any potential 
Page  7
cumulative impacts associated with other water supply network investments in select 
cities are expected to be minimal.  
 
Specific adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during project 
implementation include:  
 
Purchase of bulk (annual) supplies of various water treatment plant chemicals  
 
-
Corrosion of building elements due to improper storage of chemicals  
 
-
Health risks associated with improper handling and disposal of chemicals  
 
Rehabilitation of the national hydrometric network  
 
-
Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure  
 
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction if station is located near a residential 
center (restricted site access and noise pollution)  
 
-
Erosion undermining access platform  
 
-
Concrete manufacture, anti-corrosive paint and metal work may result in localized soil 
and water pollution  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creates health risks and 
negative aesthetic impacts on local communities  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Improper disposal of construction materials creating localized pollution and health 
risks to the work force and local communities  
 
Water supply networks and domestic connections in urban and peri-urban areas  
 
-
Loss of vegetation or sensitive habitats due to location of infrastructure  
 
-
Loss of inhabited or productive land and damage to assets due to location of 
infrastructure  
 
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction especially with regards to access and 
noise  
 
-
Spillage around water stand posts providing breeding ground for water borne diseases  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste during construction activities creating health risks and 
negative aesthetics  
 
-
Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to increase in number of work force in local 
communities  
 
-
Breakage of network and domestic connections through improper use causing 
accidents among local residents and work force  
 
-
Water connection surroundings becoming littered with debris (e.g. plastic bags) 
resulting in impeded drainage and localized flooding  
 
Rehabilitation of the Onga Zanga Research Center  
 
-
Loss of natural vegetation or sensitive habitats due to improper location of temporary 
store yards, work areas, housing, etc.  
 
-
Loss of productive land and assets due to location of infrastructure and vehicle 
movement  
Page  8
-
Nuisance to local residents during construction (restricted access, noise, dust and 
vehicle movement)  
 
-
Pollution from improper storage and handling of diesel fuel and used engine oil  
 
-
Accumulation of solid waste due to construction activities creating health risks and 
negative aesthetics  
 
-
Potential spread of HIV/AIDs due to influx of work force in local communities  
 
Water Supply Projects in peri-urban areas as part of the Learning-by-Doing initiative  
 
-
Destruction of vegetation or sensitive habitats during alignment of the pipe to the 
water standpost  
 
-
Inadequate drainage for residual water from stand post site and localized erosion  
 
-
Sewage overflow due to poorly located stand post  
 
-
Debris, noise pollution and restricted site access in local communities during 
construction  
 
-
Increase in water borne diseases due to poor drainage at stand post site  
 
-
Soil pollution due to improper storage, handling and disposal of fuels  
 
-
Solid waste accumulation due to lack of proper and timely disposal  
 
-
Spread of HIV/AIDs by workers among local residents  
 
-
Flooding of depressions near the stand post  
 
-
Improper use of stand post by users may cause accidents among local residents  
 
Project activities that may require land acquisition or have an impact on assets include: 
construction of small buildings for water meters near hydrometric stations, rehabilitation 
or construction of access tracks to hydrometric stations, installation of buried pipes in 
peri-urban areas for water supply systems, small pilot projects such as installation of 
community water fountains and temporary worker camps, spoil dumps, and material lay-
down areas.  
 
To ensure project compliance with Bank safeguard policies and national laws, the 
Borrower prepared a detailed Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
The ESMF lists the potential impacts of the project and establishes clear procedures for 
environmental screening along with measures to mitigate and reduce the impact of each 
type of activity that may result in adverse environmental and social impacts during the 
planning, construction and operational phases of the project.  
 
The Environment and Social Unit (ESU) of the AMU will hold primary responsibility 
for implementing and monitoring the ESMF and RPF to ensure that project activities are 
in compliance with World Bank safeguard policies and national laws.  
 
Both Frameworks specify the roles and responsibilities of the ESU and AMU agents and 
outline necessary reporting procedures for managing and monitoring environmental and 
social impacts related to project investments. The ESMF specifies the training, capacity 
building and technical assistance needed to ensure that the ESU can successfully 
implement both Frameworks.   
Page  9
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the 
project are relatively small in scale and the potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts are expected to be minor and localized.  Indirect and long-term impacts are not 
expected at this time barring any major cumulative impacts caused by the larger water 
sector investments in select target cities that are being implemented in tandem with some 
of the activities of this project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower prepared the ESMF and RPF to ensure that the project remains in full 
compliance with Bank Safeguard Policies as well as national legislation throughout 
project implementation.  
 
Both the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and measures to mitigate any adverse 
environmental and social impacts of the project. The ESMF provides a screening process 
for establishing the level of environmental management required for each type of project 
activity.  
 
With respect to implementation of the two Frameworks, an Environmental Social Unit 
(ESU) will be created within the Technical Support area of AMU that will hold primary 
responsibility for all environmental and social issues of the project including 
implementation of the ESMF and RPF.  
 
However, at project appraisal, it was determined that the institutional and human 
capacity to effectively address and mitigate environmental and social impacts of the 
project was limited, particularly at the Provincial level.  Furthermore, the institutional 
capacity to implement measures outlined in the ESMF and RPF were considered to be 
weak.  
 
To address this gap, the ESMF identifies specific training and capacity building for:  
 
1. Hydrometric technicians from the Department of Water Resources  
 
2.
Technical staff of the ESU  
 
3.
Managers of water points and other community water supply projects  
 
4.
Construction personnel  
 
5.
Personnel dealing with chemicals for the water treatment plants  
 
Page  10
The project will finance all training and capacity building activities associated with 
ensuring that the borrower has sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF 
and RPF throughout project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key project stakeholders are the Ministry of Energy and Water, provincial 
governments and households in the nine target cities. Public consultations were held 
during project preparation to disseminate and review the objectives, scope and design of 
the Project as well as the purpose and content of the ESMF and RPF. Project 
beneficiaries were included in the project development consultation process and were 
consulted directly with respect to the ESMF and RPF.  The target audience for the public 
consultations was national and provincial governments, civil society and local 
communities in the nine cities where the bulk of the project activities will be 
implemented. In addition, workshops were held in Luanda during project preparation to 
engage and consult with members of national government, the private sector as well as 
civil society on project design.  
 
Provincial governments disclosed the Environment and Social Management Framework 
and Resettlement Policy Framework to households in the nine target cities and requested 
feedback on the measures and processes established to mitigate and reduce any adverse 
environmental and social impact of the project.  All project beneficiaries have access to 
the Portuguese version of the project safeguards documents in their city.  
 
English versions of the ESMF and RPF were disclosed prior to appraisal in the 
InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/21/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Page  11
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Cary Anne Cadman 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
 
Comments:   
