Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3025 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/30/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P101197 
Project Name: Argentina Results in Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Suhas D. Parandekar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 29, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (80%);Secondary education (10%);Pre-primary education 
(10%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project would lead to an increase in the number of children who receive and complete a 
quality primary education in a timely manner. A secondary objective is to strengthen the results 
orientation of the education sector as a whole, with a particular emphasis on the planning, 
supervision and management functions of provincial ministries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Project is based on the principle of the Bank as a partner in the implementation of 
national policy, a model that is now regarded as a standard for Bank support in Middle Income 
countries such as Argentina. The Project would mainly consist of a set of provincial sub-projects 
that would together address the project development objective. Such an arrangement allows for 
substantial provincial ownership to address the particular complexity of each province’s local 
context, while at the same time adhering to national quality standards. The Project thus suggests 
an alternative or a third approach to the existing model that includes (a) National projects, that 
are designed nationally (generally with provincial ideas incorporated), funded nationally, and are 
implemented by the provinces; (b) Provincial projects, designed and funded provincially, with 
Page  2
highly variable contribution to national educational goals. The Project would not bring additional 
financing to the education sector in Argentina, at national or provincial levels. Rather, the value 
added of the project would be to bring about a sharper focus on results, which we hope would be 
attained because the financing would be channeled under a mechanism that combines provincial 
ownership and national oversight for clearly defined results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Argentina   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank has financed various projects in the Education Sector in Argentina over the past two 
decades. These projects have been implemented at the national as well as at the provincial level. 
This experience has resulted in close knowledge of the Bank's safeguard policies. Besides, the 
country's own systems regarding the triggered safeguard policies are in active and effective use.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rosario Torres-Guevara (LCSHE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered because of possible inclusion in this project of minor civil works. 
Safeguards Advisory Team agrees at this time with proposal to classify project as Category C 
from an environmental perspective.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
In case any provincial sub-project would include indigenous communities an Indigenous 
People's Plan (IPP)would be prepared. This IPP, together with the social assessment process 
feeding into it would draw on work carried out in conjunction with the PROMER Rural 
Education Project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/18/2008 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Suhas D. Parandekar 
01/16/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
01/29/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
01/23/2008 
Comments:  In the next version we will need to describe the content of the components of the project 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
