Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3864 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P114008 
Project Name: AR-GEF Sustainable and Transport and Air Quality Project 
Task Team Leader: Veronica Ines Raffo 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (60%);Health (25%);Sub-national government 
administration (10%);General energy sector (5%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access 
to urban services and housing (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
3.99 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.88
7.88 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The higher-level objective of the STAQ Program is to reduce the rate of growth of GHG 
emissions from transport in Latin America through the promotion of less energy intensive and 
cleaner modes of transport.  
 
Regional project development objectives  will be: (i) to establish a sustainable network of local 
and national government stakeholders, international organization and private sector entities to 
promote policies and actions for more energy efficient and cleaner urban transport systems in 
Latin American cities; (ii) to analyze and disseminate the local and global environmental impacts 
of pilot investments in the 12 cities and disseminate lessons learned to the cities and 
governments in the LAC Region; (iii) to develop and disseminate modeling tools for decision 
makers and project developers to assess and compare transport policies and investments in terms 
of climate and air quality benefits   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The STAQ Program consists of a 4 year GEF umbrella grant, following the structure of a 
Horizontal Adaptable Program Loan (APL) financing: (i) a Regional Project which will deepen 
the knowledge base regarding climate change issues related to the transport sector, developing a 
framework of knowledge exchange, foster the multi-sectoral policy dialogue on climate change 
and transport related issues; and, analyze, compare and disseminate lessons learned from pilot 
investments in the 12 cities; and,  (ii) three Country Projects ? Argentina, Brazil and Mexico - 
comprised of 12 city sub-projects to promote sustainable urban transport and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions through investments in the following thematic windows: (i) Management of 
Freight Transport; (ii) Integration of Land Use, Transport and Environmental Planning; (iii) 
Modal Interconnection and improved effectiveness and efficiency of public transport; (iv) Non-
motorized Transport; and (v) Travel demand management.  
 
Project 1: Regional Project (USD2,903,000). The Regional Project aims at establishing a 
regional framework for sustainable transport, climate change and air quality that will have an 
impact beyond the individual projects and sub-projects. It will draw from practical experience 
and lessons learned from the implementation of activities in the different cities and countries. It 
will foster the development of a regional network of local and national government agencies, 
international organizations and private sector entities that will contribute to the implementation 
of mechanisms to carry out horizontal (across municipalities) and vertical (between municipal, 
national and regional levels) knowledge sharing on the preparation, appraisal, implementation, 
outcomes, and lessons of the individual projects. The project will also help develop better 
methodologies and tools to assess the greenhouse gas and air quality emission reduction benefits 
of different urban transport investments, including policy and technology options. The lessons 
learned will be disseminated widely and have an impact beyond the 12 cities and 3 countries. 
The project will help develop policy guidelines and initiate dialogues with key decision makers 
to address financial, institutional and regulatory barriers and create long-term strategies and 
incentives for sustainable transport in cities and countries in Latin America. It will be 
implemented in coordination with other implementing agencies, like UNEP, and involve 
participation of key players in the region in the area of sustainable transport, such as GTZ, 
WRI/EMBARQ, ITDP, Hewlett Foundation, and the Clean Air Initiative  The expected outputs 
are a regional network, studies, tools and website. Annex  4 provides a more detailed description 
of the STAQ Program.  
 
Project 2: Country Projects (USD 17,897,000).  The Country Projects consist of 4 city sub-
projects, which are not identical in design and to allow for local institutional realities, priorities 
and conditions. However, the city sub-projects will seek to achieve common objectives and will 
have to meet eligibility criteria (see PAD).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The program will be carried out in 12 cities in 3 different countries in Latin America. All cities 
selected have population equal or higher than 300,000 inhabitants, while many are located in 
highly urbanized areas with more than one million inhabitants. Minor physical investments ? 
bikeways and segregated bus-ways ? will take place in developed and consolidated areas, with 
mostly temporary and minor impacts.   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Regional Project will not involve any environmental or social safeguards issue. The CAI 
Initiative staff and partners are well qualified to address long term impacts related to emission 
growth from the transport sector. Each country specific project will rely on executing agencies or 
cities with experience implementing safeguard aspects related to Bank loans. The respective 
capacities will be described in detail in each project related PAD and ISDS.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Paul Procee (LCSEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The Regional Project only involves coordination, studies, technical assistance, training, 
workshops and monitoring activities. None of which will trigger any environmental or social 
safeguard policy.  
 
The country specific project and related investments in cities are expected to have positive 
environmental impact in the long-run, since they aim at improving the quality of public transport 
and non-motorized transport systems and improve traffic safety.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard related documents will be prepared under the regional project. Specific 
documentation will be prepared and submitted for each country project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Veronica Ines Raffo 
08/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
08/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
08/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
